Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi begins speaking/talking (This translation is an attempt at capturing a more general meaning of "commencing speech" in older dialects
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	So, children, you have completed this book which is on the edge of medical science due to my contribution in it as well through explanations, illustrations, and declarations; thus I see that you understand thoroughly how we divide this subject matter into surgical operations/procedures (Here 'operacions' or 'procèdures chirurgicals', which refers specifically to the realm of surgeries).
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	When the operation is proposed in our region and at this time of total privacy, I am left alone with my science, whereupon you see me; but only a few descriptions remain from ancient texts freely available to us all, which I will modify herein for correction and clarification. These are now closed off as the intentions behind them and their elongated force/artistry become clear (translation of source sentence:
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May be the reason why no skilled artisan leaves his tool at their own hand in this time of ours, for medicine is an old science and it demands that its practitioner exercise within the field of anatomy—which Gaius understands well as he knows the movements and forms of these parts; including joint connections and separations, bone structure, nerves, and ligaments. Furthermore, this includes knowledge about pulsating veins and resting blood vessels, along with sites for bleeding cessation in those areas.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through the water of Hippocrates who says that it moves for its name and mainly in the work or craft of the hand,
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We may already have told you about that in the entrance to this free space; who does not know what we've told them regarding anatomy, will find themselves making errors for which death awaits men like those they witnessed, as these are formed by understanding and practicing from this science.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	Here comes another doctor who orders that the patient swallows a stone from their stomach which had already been processed in its state; this stone was large and came out of it, and he draws that stone out using a tool from the bladder, so that that home dies on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for it to be removed there from, and because of the greatness of the stone and due to its location within the womb that leads to death.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another doctor takes his salary from our land'dictor, and brings with him a black instrument which is supposedly fractured in the patient's thigh; preparing himself without knowledge of this broken bone on soft ground (such as pillows or footstools), where he does not allow breath.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here is the line-by extralanguage translation:
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have called upon it (possibly referring to the healer or remedy previously mentioned), and equipped with tools for loosening the ligament, thus achthy obtained relief from their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even if there is confirmation of decay in the limb, it cannot be restrained from moving and spreading within while under the influence of the malady (illness).
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And here comes another doctor who pierced an abscess, and it was ulcerating daily until its evil genius reached the Lord of that person.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the head is tormented by melancholalgy humors, and it does not come to him from everywhere but rather in which his body has suffered overall.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this purpose, boys, it is necessary that the operation be planned in two ways: one associated with health and another where there are major risks involved.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	So take up your arms for solicitation and protection from God, and let your illness be strengthened and kept firm.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	When lost through the worse way due to God's grace we seek salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay down our heavy illnesses of difficult cure, holding in your hands weapons that cause fear within you so that intervention occurs at faith and under name without evasion: perhaps some remain with you as glory, put them also into the monastery or next to it on their sanctified bodies.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	There are no illnesses caused by evil humors, for such conditions doctors cannot name.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already read this book for the second time three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins with the division of free will, starting from the first partitioned portion.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the body weight, in the forms of instruments and iron tools for cautery, what is needed therein for intervention.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The Second Chapter on Surgery and Puncture, And by Use of Vials, Drops, Boils, and Extraction of Herbs and Similars for those Purposes; All is Ordered in Their Forms According to the Instruments' Shapes.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the pure portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third pillar of restoration and displacement, as well as the treatment for twisting injuries and dislocations to these parts; it is ordered from within the head downwards through the body weight, with regard to forms established by instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery fire and acute medicine and memory of opposition.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all parts free within it.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When you examine the quality of that cauterization and its non-applicability in any part of him/her,  
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore say that the speech of cautery and its obscurity is long and elaborate due to science, yet frequently they quarrel about it, and for me enough has been heard from them regarding these matters; I am weary of prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And it is said that the pointed cautery comforts all of the body universally, except for two types of materials from its own matter, namely tail-like substances.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex tail and dry matter; where some say that needles will be beneficial to that area, while others disagree with it because in such illnesses caused by dampness and dryness—where nature of fever is both moisture and dryness—it's appropriate treatment involves soaking up the water which has accumulated therein.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Through that speech of his, I have already discovered some waters for myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Mays before one cures what has already been exposed and subjected to the art of cutters for today's exercise, understanding is gained regarding the complexity of human composition and how illnesses are positioned within them, as well as their causes and accidents, along with the duration.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May also occur in other complexities, not out of fear but due to frozen and moist humors, which is why all doctors agree on treating these conditions with caution during such procedures.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Indeed, physicians who understand the secret of curative use for focus and about the patient themselves are skilled in medicine' extricators; they perform their work with such tools as cauterizers (used to burn or sear), which only affects the part where it is applied and not any other parts of the body, causing little harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine'se fire reach that in his limbs where it has lain hidden and strong forces cause its appearance there as well as difficulty in recovery, making healing hard for him.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire (likely referring to a treatment method), through its sublimation and beneficial substance, does not overdo it; we have come upon you by experiment and long service in learning this art concerning the truth of causes. Thus, because of our lengthy discourse, you are excused from here today during this break (likely referring to a rest or pause between lessons). While at liberty nowhere but within this interval, I must secretly address issues related to the focus; thus demonstrated through logical speech in philosophy, which will sharpen your minds and clarify thoughts regarding these health concerns.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And if it is wise for men and women when the best time of year to perform cauterizations and pauses, arriveth.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu dic that cauterization is convenient at all times, for so that harm caused by water (a humor considered in medieval medicine) accumulated on a caustic will be drawn away from it and mainly if the caustic is used for pains or necessary bandages, which do not delay because of malice of those healing them; greater damage entering than small.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	So you do not sit in your knees or on the ground with those who poorly estimate people and physicians, thus that healing through cauterization is not completely stopped, and breaks this consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Even though chirurgical tools may be considered excessive in medicine due to their inherent vitality and the greatness of one'thy lordship, they are sometimes necessary for effective treatment according to this medical treatise:
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some time in their life according to the complexity of the humors and location within them; depending on what has been prepared for removal from the feet (superfluous substances) during acquisition through meals and like things as causes, if cautery was administered internally or a subtle illness affecting small excesses and moisture in body parts is treated with tooth pliers addressing pain and semblance-like symptoms; it may be that such an internal treatment will prevent the return of this type of pain, but if not then possibly discomfort might arise here.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Even the common speech may be considered as medicine' extrinsic to our medical knowledge and beyond what we understand through it; they believe that I cannot proficiently treat with this or any other instrument, nor can I address further causes related thereto within the realm of medicine.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is contrary to water; and I understand that the remedies of medicine are only when they administer medicines for certain illnesses, and these treatments do not confer benefits without intervention on the day of the cause itself by applying the cauterizations themselves.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And now that the caustic is needed for the last remedy of medicine, according to what I understand as common and often used by physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And those made of gold are better than those made of iron for caulces (cautery instruments), and they were not used except by reason of their equality with gold and refinement of substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through this water, points are made with iron force and placed properly within the operation field.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And in the instruments of cautery as ordered hereinabove, they have arranged them within the feet for that one asking may obtain what is needed from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of pointed cautery for headache due to coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter (or Initial part).
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the humor to be expelled through medical leeching for three or four nights, according to what exudes from the humor and the patient' extraterritory age and habitus.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E propõe o senhor quem seu capac é raio, e aponta esse segmento entre as suas mãos em uma banqueta colocada para parar essas mãos sobre a barriga dele.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place your hand on top of your palm, placing it above your nose between the nostrthy holes thereof:
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the touch of heat arrives from that place where it was felt before, this spot attempts and warms up with the form of those very same ole caldrons.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place that over there which contracts by nature (the uterus), little by little tightening itself within its position and you turn it around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Return an ointment of salt and dissolve that on the location, leaving it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand over the area where it was cut, and place that there above which the wound has been cleaned up.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the location where there is thread-like phlegm inside that heals within while it'sin treatment.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when a child is suckled (breastfed), they take the breast with their hands so much that it may be better and more beneficial for them.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And they will have their navel seared within the body, and place the cauterizers inside until some portion of the dissected bone has healed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And if it is necessary for its moisture (or fluid) within the bone that has become dry or depleted of humors, then take care of both restoration and treatment.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	E from that place exhale the breaths of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If there has been an abscess present for a long time, then treat it until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see all these remedies of cautery for everyone, but only in noble homes according to fear; and this one, will be better for my health if you show it to me when the head is developed by reason of continuity as we have witnessed in other members, especially when the head of the groin grows naturally.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And if this is my primary tool for caustic, it may save and be better than musts—and from that vinegar I draw salvation.
Capitol segon.	Capitol second (or Second Part/Section)
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the pointed instrument of the head (or "cauter" in this context
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the headache is chronic and long-lasting, and it extends into the abdomen for a prolonged period of time; using knives, scalpels, scissors (which could be understood as tools used herein in some form related to surgical procedures), cauterizing instruments that have already been applied thereon without thoroughly investigating any causes among them—particularly if the headache originates from a strong calcification within its nature; it is not merely an act of brutality, but rather when this previously used caustic instrument has become blunt or ineffective. At such times, another cauterizing tool must be employed immediately for that purpose (implying immediate action to address the headache with a new sharp and effective instrument).
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that over his head for cauterization until the spine is cut apart.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the ribcage and reveal the bone quantity that we have noted and seal it with a cauterizing tool in the back part of the head wherein lies the location to which they refer, namely the windpipe'dicto by suction (the area for suction).
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And press your hand strongly on it, and do not discover the thighbone for grievous pain different from pains treated by other caustics of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Here you apply the cautery in its place, wherein that same piece of cautery will be applied to both the head' extrication and neck pains - these are precisely addressed by this method hereof.
Capitol ters.	Capital pain or discomfort is felt (or experienced). Here
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	And for treating haemorrhage, ancient non-antidotal methods are used. Please note that the provided translations attempt to convey meaning from a text with
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When deep joint pain occurs in the head or when there is internal bleeding inside it (the body), medical measures must be taken to address these serious conditions; and they are described within the pages of medicine as diseases that require treatment—either immediate combustion-based cauterization, which involves using heat with a heated instrument like bronze needle or iron knife. Thus far I have not proficiently discussed this subject in detail – it is necessary to mention here briefly (in two ways) the application of medical intervention: one way being immediate combustion-based cauterization, and another involving metal instruments such as a heated needle or iron knife.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May cauteries of medicine burn and you grasp a lancet made of silver, extracting the limbs on both sides from these things.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply pressure on the location of pain at one place with a sharp lance inside where it is hidden by bone, within that spot for joint pain relief:
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Return strength to him who has been stopped by descent due to excessive contraction, and apply that for three hours; then lift the legs above ground level where they were forced downward within a confined space.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is within it so that it may heal.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you come, take some of the burning remedies that you have written down in your treatment book on burns.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery using iron, according to this method: fire for cauteries.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clasped-claw condition because the head of the patient' extruding outward resembles a small bell (clave), and in that place there appears to be an inflamed spot, little as may seem but notable for its size or prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Return the pause (rest) over the location of pain, and hold your hand there—so that it is not seized by the sudden urge to move just now—and slowly roll back the small iron tool bit by bit according to its speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that has been extracted through puncturing the navel is as much as what your hand holds it ensures that an artery will not be drained completely, thus preventing bleeding out (of bile).
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you go, then perform the cautery on the extremity of the chisel according to the cauterization, and ensure that there is no incision into this flowing vessel immediately.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter. (This line does not provide enough
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Cauterization of ancient migraine treatment.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the fluid that has been discussed in previous curing methods, and what has been said about diseases divisions, do not neglect this treatment; if there is a disease for which it does not suffice to use the first or second types of cautery mentioned in medicine, then pour out this fluid into where lies its suffering point along the long line that signifies its location (or course), and restrain your hand with careful attention within these interstices by using the arsillery.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuous movement of the jaw that grinds teeth (bruxism), and ensure that there's no tightness or issues with the nerves affected by this condition, so as not to provoke spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of blood flow from the artery that bursts, therein lies fear in him who ignores what flows out and does not study or probe; then perform the operation on him with care.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When you come back for memory of the flow regimen of a sanction from the archer according to their customary way in this free place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If it swells from this illness that does not provide for the need of our caustic and if you feel unbearable pain in the affected area of the malady (body), then apply the cauterizing tool at the head'thy place where we have previously described, while taking care to heal what is inside.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you wish, administer the one we have mentioned in the chapter of caution for applying two blades as a cautery; this will be better and may provide additional benefit.
Capitol .v.	Capital (assuming 'Capitol' is either an abbre
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	The phrase "caucerizacio delle dolores d'auricella" translates to English as the cauterization of arthritis pains
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the arthritis there is pain caused by cold and other factors that create lesions (lescaves), which are treated to remove their causes, without any reduction of this pain; only through these cauterizing procedures, namely puncture therapy as described hereinabove—this being its form.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place points on the inflammation with fire or apply it throughout all of arterial circulation if pain occurs in any part; using a spinning wheel for this purpose is also an option, as well as when applied to specific areas where there is discomfort.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long enough are your instruments of caution, barely held by the hands that dare attempt this place.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points made with hot needles throughout the entire body are applied carefully and within healthy areas that have been cleansed, take care of those locations to maintain their healing state.
Capitol .vi.	In this translation of "Capitol .vi.", it appears that
De cauterizacio de turtura.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de turtura" translates to "for cauterization using
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The translated sentence is: "for cauterization using spices that come through the veins, as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases." This line suggests a medieval medical context where specific remedies or treatments involving heat (cauterization) are applied to certain areas for their therapeutic effects. Spices were often used not just for flavor but also for medicinal purposes due to their believed healing properties, and the mention of "veins
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	The translated sentence is: "avoiding cauterization with dryness or due to nervous cramps." This statement indicates a caution against using heat treatments, such as those involving burning hot substances (potentially including some of the spices previously mentioned), when they
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	The translated sentence is as follows: "When you cure the spice of Turtura and bloodletting and cupping therapy, which does not alleviate your treatment, then caution three times with a golden hairpin for the humors in the abdomen; secondly, use small templets to induce sweating; thirdly, apply pressure using two lips." Here, it appears that specific tools (like gold items and temples) are recommended for particular methods of treatment associated with balancing bodily fluids or 'humors.' This reflects the humoral theory prevalent in medieval medicine.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	The translated sentence reads: "Pause the treatment with heat for contradictions in a diseased portion; only here it soothes not." This suggests that when treating areas believed to be contrary or out of balance due to illness, using cauterization (the application of localized heat) may actually exacerbate issues rather than provide relief. The emphasis seems to lie
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how the cautery is formed, and it belongs to barber surgeons; this form I present before you now.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May there be subtly put that which is lacking in him, and cover with excessive surplus a little of it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	When care is applied at this water that it currently flows through as part of the healing process,
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The seventh chapter of this particular section
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Translation for "Caute irure contra medicina antica della embolia": When treating ancient hemorrhage with old medical practices
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	Translation for the medieval medical text provided line by line in English:  
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The action of the cautery is considered according to what has been previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and now may be healed with water that flows through you as part of treatment.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The translation is unclear due to potential trans
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	When referring to "Cautioneración del olvido dolor por frío," the text appears to discuss a medical practice related to treating joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrating
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The provided excerpt discusses a treatment related to the condition described as pain from cold humors entering through an opening (possibly referring to 'cove,' which could be interpreted contextually within medieval medical texts). The suggested remedy includes large and pills that serve a cleansing or purifying function ('mondificantz
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	This line indicates that the treatment involves applying pressure or manipulating the patient's head (possibly referring to different parts of the body if interpreted broadly), possibly as a form of massage ('coguot'), which is supported by staff typically associated with physicians, likely made from materials like wood. The term 'emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres' suggests
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	This part of the text describes a pause in treatment that allows for some rest or recovery ('veguadas'), before proceeding with another form of therapy involving caulters (which refers to medical tools used by physicians). The specifics, such as
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Here the text implies that after discussing some aspect ('quand il y ait'), which was previously mentioned (referencing earlier in this conversation), further treatment will follow based on certain conditions outlined by the
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	The text outlines the course of action based on whether certain health conditions are present ('si per aquelles sanat'). If they aren't, three cauterizing tools (likely instruments for applying heat or pressure to alleviate pain) will be used in specific parts: atopical part above where hair grows and below the collarbone. This section appears as a guideline suggesting that treatment may include direct interventions on these body areas if deemed necessary by medical practice standards of the time (likely implying some form of cauterization). The reference to 'topical' suggests
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And there is space between each of these cauterizations, and care must be taken with the liquid that comes forth from them.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	May you apply and the thigh is tolerating cold application, then do so at the site of pain; if it worsens with greater pressure, then perform cautery on both toes affected.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for that which has been healed; and use the olive-leaf salve as it is provided by the doctor.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any specific context
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	For the treatment of worms and for soothing all parts of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the mindfulness of your head and what we have discussed; take care of the back of the skull with caution, applying that very same pointed instrument used for cauterization at this spot on the skull where pains occur (headaches), as well as over all parts of the head, including the neck'dictions, performing three cauterizations on each vertebra in the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the sickness of softening the leg for excessive joints and if the illness itself is strong, then apply four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and insert them within so that they are comforted by the sound of their own voice, lifting up the swelling there.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which needs healing inside, and this is for cauterization with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Captain (This translation is speculative as "Capitol
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cautery for seizures (The phrase translates to the idea of using a form of heat or instrument, likely
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not being cauterized for seizures; instead, this particular type of convulsion comes from phlegm (Phlegm here likely refers to the concept in medieval medicine where excess 'phlegm' or cold humors were thought to cause
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	So that we can clarify the patient's mind through conversation and other care as directed in our division when ailment is great, excessive or beyond medical measures (Here "excess" likely refers back to an overabundance of humors believed by medieval physicians to cause disease. The phrase suggests practical advice on how they would proceed with treatment under such circumstances.)
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If it is an infant who does not suffer from medicines, then apply poultices and massages to them daily through motion, with the benefit of food digestion intacts in their bodies.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Here the head of the thigh is anointed with a caustic as per previous direction in the region of the neck; and another burn wound therein according to that same manner at each point on the crown, which holds its hands.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the humors are strong and tolerant, then heat those areas with caustics where I have written about it, which leads to paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and backbone.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is necessary for the olive-shaped pointed cautery (second as per previous mention), then do so accordingly.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	May it be that if the patient is affected by melancholy (malady), then small cautions should be applied according to this methodology.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The specific content of this line is
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	From Latin, "Captio" typically refers to a summons or accusation in legal terms; however, when paired with
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and sluggish humors infiltrating our body's systems, it is time to apply those very same caustics that we use for treatment when dealing with spasms or paralysis. (This translation attempts to convey a notion from medieval medical practice where applying the cauterizing agents used for muscular and neurological conditions would also be considered effective in addressing melancholy by draining impure humors.)
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excessively declining and the brain (corps du malade) becomes moist, then drink what purifies your mind according to what was drunk before division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	1. Return their head on the patient's waist and press it downward firmly over the area of pain at the top of the head; secure that position to alleviate discomfort in this region.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The thigh is sixty pounds in weight, and has been cut entirely.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Return rest or pause; it is worthy of an ox'dictum boundary.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	When it is heated over the focus with warmth measured for its suffering when in place, thus relieving pain at that time and location.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	When it is necessary for them to be placed at the head of their bed in the circle and made warm inside so that they are chilled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	E throughout the week a remedy is applied to the malady in its entirety, or until such time that it enters another regimen; if you wish, then anoint small points on the affected area as directed by this treatment, which type of cautery moistens the brain when used equally. 
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Return that throb back into its border or in linseed oil.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii. (The reference appears to be an index or
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Cauterization of downward water in the body." This line seems like a medieval medical text referring to some form of treatment involving 'cauterizing' (burning
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you declared the water consumption in the body through sinuses which they say during division, it begins and gives rise to bile from where the head of liver expels waste; keeping all moisture out." This translation suggests a medieval understanding that when someone speaks about 'water' (aygua) within their system as divided into areas or cavities ('senhals'), this leads to an internal process involving production and excretion by bile, which is associated with the liver. The treatment seems aimed at removing moisture from these processes, possibly referring to a therapeutic approach of drying out what they believe are excess fluids causing illness within the body' extramundane infiltration
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Allow that substance to be cleansed with water for several days." Here, 'aquel suzar' likely refers back to the previously mentioned excess moisture or fluids in need of removal
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Command that the head's crown be raised and cauterized at its location on top; also cauterize there two times for water consumption in both legs or from a bladder if it is consumed within one leg." In this line, an action directed by someone (possibly a healer) involves elevating the head's crown—which may symbolically refer to enhancing blood circulation around that area. The instruction then specifies applying cauterization at these points for specific conditions involving water in different parts of the body: twice if there is consumption ('comensament') by two legs and once from a bladder (if it refers specifically 'ysegmen' or an element related to fluid intake). This aligns with medieval belief systems around bodily humors, their circulation, absorption in various organs like the kidneys associated with urine ('aygua'), and
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Here begins the line translation into English:
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Guard your wound from the flow of blood when it is being cauterized; if you see blood coming from it, apply some medicine at once – this is within your power to do so.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	When one arrives with knowledge of what is taken out and the absence thereof, caution concerning fluid flows must be exercised.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases, they are cauterized at the joints between two bones with instruments made by their hands.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: This appears to be an index or reference number
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Cauterization of ancient tears (or possibly referring more broadly, perhaps puncturing old blisters):  
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of old humors accumulate excessively in the vessels and arteries where they are visible at the back of the head without intervention from our water-cleansing treatments, take action with a cautery for that which we have recorded herein as treatment involving water cleansing within the humors, apply it to the mind vessel spot on top of the head and two cauterizations in both temple locations at the joints between skull bone and cheekbone; also perform two cauterizations where jawbones meet.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If it is digestion by addition (possibly referring to the ingestion of certain substances that affect digestion), then burn that in all parts of the belly over the abdomen'thy small cauterization point.
Capitol .xiiii.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .xiiii.", I
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	The phrase "Cauterizacio de fetor de nas" translates into English as follows:
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that patient who has told us about their condition in the division and do not properly apply your medicine, then open up and pour wine into the wounds three times a night; and rub on the head with those cauldrons used for cauterization of flesh or olives.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	When they apply caustic substances as two needle points on the top of each other' extrinsic to their hair, which contains these agents for treatment:
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Guard your tool of charcoal so as not to injure that which you are examining.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	From this instrument of pointy caution,
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV. (This appears to be an indication of section or
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the instruments for softening eyelids in patients. (Here is a translation that interprets "cauter" as using heat, which was sometimes done with tools like
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the patient's eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, apply heat therapy therein with a luna-like instrument—this constitutes its method. (In this translation "cauterize" has been interpreted as applying some form of localized treatment which could be understood in the context of medieval medicine as using warmth - perhaps through heated stones or similar devices used to apply heat, while “lunar” might refer either metaplausibly to a lunate shape that was sometimes made from moonstone gemstones believed by ancient cultures
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you choose to apply heat thereon over the forehead with two instruments at once throughout all parts involved—they are extensions of their nostrthy (mouth). Here "to cauterize" is taken as applying localized treatment, which could refer metaphorically in medieval contexts to relieving pain or reducing inflammation. The notion that such heat application would elongate the patient's nose suggests a remedy aimed at
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And so with each instrument, as per its quantity upon top of the forehead—this being indicative that more heat is applied where there's a greater amount on the patient’s brow (forehead). This
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press your hand upon the instruments—may as per its quantity according to how much of that softened portion on eyelid is sticky (adherent). Here, "press" could imply physically touching with a cauterizing tool and considering where there's more moisture or inflammation present; therefore less pressure would be used. In the medieval medical context
Capitol .xvi.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discuss
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the hairs of the head turn into particles and fingers pick up (possibly refer to examining or extracting) these tiny elements from the scalp, it can be described using this phrase: "And when the fine strands become detached pieces during a scalp exfoliation." In more contemporary English translation for
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the head are converted into particles and fingers pick them up (possibly referring to examining or extracting), then there are two methods for dealing with this: either use a tool, such as forceps ('cauterize' in more modern medical terminology refers often not only to cutting but also can involve using heat/cold stimulation for treatment purposes) and another method involves applying medicine (potentially referring here to topical treatments).
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you have a cautery of fire with it (the iron tool), command the humors to exit from their feet as they enter these, ensuring that elongation and congestion occur; if your finger presses upon them for denial, tighten one bandage around each hand so none may intrude into between.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when women give birth and rub their eyes, the head of the uterus descends to the neck, where they place a hand over the eye lid(s), using such as signifier (likely an amulet or symbolic object for protection) in line with its figure on Mars' shield, which is also part of the chosen attire.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Return your hand pressure above in an album of humors or poultice of crushed pillows on the abdomen, where you should apply it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return the burning cautery with which this is done.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The translation of the given medieval medical treatise line by line into English would be as follows:
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and lay it there for three days until the shield is erected within its border.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside has entered within it where it will heal.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If any reason causes them to return their hair and soften the eye lid, then they shall apply other points on that very same area as when first applied.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eye lids (perhaps a reference to blepharitis), then treat that which is raised and within its natural place, so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery (medicine) burn this out so that the malady commands it to pull its hairs inside where they are prolonged and entangled, and assign a fate for the woolly form of fur.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E pause le dit sobre le medicine and apply that small one without letting it enter where the humors are located; for such a needle is used with great force, like those in focus (surgery).
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	So when the patient perceives that the bloodletting instrument is being used, let medicine apply it as directed; then, once the bleeding stops with the help of medicine applied to the wound by water or incision (if already lifted eyelids during washing), consider if times have passed since these interventions. If there has been no movement back into that cavity where medicine had not entered and where your operation is performed, tighten control over this situation regarding both medical treatment of the wound and containment of any bleeding (fluid).
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Return your hand over the area where the tailbone is within that which has been purged of obstruction (implying cleansing or treatment), and take care to hold either waxen pomade or another remedy inside, ensuring it stays on them.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to exercise vigilant diligency so that no disease of medicine falls upon the patient, and if your eye's membrane becomes softened over days or any cause affecting the hair punctures appear in it, then perform your treatment on this area whereby the irritation has been alleviated. Furthermore, ensure that nothing enters therein so as to restore health.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one uses mint leaves as a remedy or treatment method in our practice of medicine.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	E observe that men' extraneous humors are varied according to size and smallness (or vice versa), therefore your contraction will be accordingly influenced by these imbalances of fluids within the body.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If there is a blockage in the passage of removal towards that person whom you study here,
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii.: This line appears to be referencing an article or section
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Caulterizare of the tear duct fistula in its location: This translation suggests that we are discussing a medical procedure to treat an opening (fistula) within the tear drainage system, commonly
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you care for the fistula that we have discussed in the divisions of diseases and do not apply your treatment, then it's likely as per this manner: order the malady to cease its movement within itself (halt progression), and ensure a servant maintains contact between their teeth without causing discomgy or agitation atop them during such method.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your hand's pressure over the patient’dict body, using linen or wool padding underneath them.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the cautery of which this is the form.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which has been secured with a form similar to that of the staff or sword handle at which wields it and where applies the cautery tool:
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you come inwardly into the other limb,
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to go out with temptation.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	May it be better for you in your healing work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	When an opening (fistula) has burst open and becomes diseased with pus, then cleanse that area thoroughly from it outwards.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not uncovered, then work at that place and extract the poultice from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Return your hand over the instrument that is lit and hold it here; this prevents you from being disturbed by the patient's blood or nose at the place where the lance meets the nasal passage, causing these to burst there into pieces.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the caustic entered into the mouth, be; and otherwise, repeat the application of the caustic once or twice a week as necessary according to profession, leave it there for three days, then take pause over that spot at the border and send out enclosed moist excisions while that is healing.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been days and is not healed yet, then rest on this sharp acute medicine until the bone becomes apparent and according to what needs to be done in one'thy chamber (ward).
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have obtained from cautery and treatment, then it is well; otherwise, you must administer medicines through the nose and reduce the fistula in its proper place as soon as it comes up there.
Capitol .xviii.	The provided text is already written in English with some archaic word choices that give it
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	This line appears as if it's a mix of Latin and old medical terminology, possibly referencing the treatment (cauterization) for an orifice in
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motosvegadas accidessen fugures inclitaes ad labiorum, et maioriter en labii filius." This sentence translates to: "Fractures will frequently occur in the lips and mostly in children's lips." The text appears as if it is discussing dent
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cracks that we mentioned in the divisions and do not properly apply your treatment, then use a small heated lancet according to this form as it is being presented. In modern medical terms, what might be implied here could refer to using localized heat (like warmth from a heating pad or similar) applied with precision for wound care in pediatric dentistry:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And according to its subtlety of the cushion, so it shall be positioned again (or returned) as per their delicate condition or requirement for comfort and support in accordance with
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And place your hand over that initial thrust carefully within those cracks where the pointed instrument reaches the crack itself to ensure proper handling and prevent further injury or damage during treatment. This sentence indicates a careful approach in medical practice, emphasizing control and precision with cauterization tools when working near sensitive areas such as joints affected by gout-related pain due to cold humors overflowing from within ("ent
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is cauterized inside, ensuring its healing process continues as intended without complications or recurrence of the condition being treated—here referring
Capitol .xix.	In Capital XIX (assuming 'Capitol' refers to a specific volume
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	And perform the caustic treatment of an oral fistula—a condition where there is an abnormal passage, often associated with infection and infl
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the cause of inflammation is infection and old/bad habits, leading to an oral fistula—an abnormal passage often found at the back of the tongue (uvula) or on the palate, which are cracked open for treatment with caustic tools as required by its size within the cleft. Do not overuse this curative process and do so according to what has been prescribed; apply that amount of fire necessary where it must reach into the fistula's opening (palatal or lingual), ensuring direct contact between the flame tool applied therein, and your hand supporting from within—to facilitate healing. Care for this application as directed until complete recovery is achieved following our prescribed treatment methodology involving caustic intervention at the site of infection/inflammation with controlled use of heat-applying instruments inside the mouth to promote resolution of the oral fistula condition, taking into account patient safety and adherence to medical advice for effective healing.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore if the illness is removed and health returns, be content; but if not, it's necessary to discover where the disease resides and hold back its decaying bone as it appears.
Capitol .xx.	Capital xx. (This line simply indicates a Roman numeral 
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Regarding the cauterization of the teeth and calming of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth become enlarged; these cures with medicine, without which you delay until your head at the waist of the thigh reaches there (likely indicating a specific area), then apply fire to that very tool used for curing them. So keep pressure on this spot between the teeth using said heated instrument and enclose it within one's mouth wherein the humid heat from the flame pervades at the gum of the affected tooth, facilitating recovery.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Return your hand (and) apply/use the pointed cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: (The original text does not provide additional context
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Cauterizaio del dolore di dente": This translates to "catharsis of the
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to inflammation or infection, or the treatment does not comfort at medicine's hands; there are two types of catharsis for that pain: either a caustic applied on cattle hide borders, or a heated lancet."  
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Cauteri am bord es che tu prendi bordo di vacche e bombolle in fornace da ferro, e apponi coperta ed envolpi le sopra la punta della spada, avendo a portata il bordo bruciato, posizionandolo dove si soffoca.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Whenever that heat from the focus reaches the heart's seat, then do so for several times until there is no longer any change in its condition.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish to submerge wool or a cushion below the area mentioned above, place it over the sore tooth and pause there until the heated iron within reaches the cavity of the affected tooth'setupence: Here comes the translation line by line into English.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Must the cauterization be done at the focus (site of inflammation or redness), and if there is any swelling in the chest, ensure that the heat from the cauterization does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Return the cautery to its shape, and place it on your teeth so that the cautery is ignited; then apply some drops as needed when the pain persists or intensifies in that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When that instrument, through its use by the patient'thy mouth and tongue it causes inflammation for an hour (and this is how the tool functions).
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Once you have performed what is within your capabilities with caustic treatment according to my directions.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the dart (cannula) looks like:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.: This line appears as an identifier or title rather
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	The text you've provided is in a language that incorporates elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French—
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external wounds are caused by the discharge of effluvia and humors which do not submit to digestion through medicine, you must perform this operation with these cauterizers that target such conditions; they have two handles for igniting them as needed – one for each extremity. You light a cigarette from it (the handle), aiming at the wound's area and maintain steady flame therein to prevent further inflammation, then you insert another into what remains of that part until healing begins in its place.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the apoplectic (which here likely refers to some form of stroke or seizure, as "apostema" in this context does not mean an infectious rash) is slight, then pause with the cautery according to the amount of the apoplectic, and apply pressure for three days until such time that heat from the fire has dissipated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Return care for it with wax and threads and linens within wherein shall be healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the cannula or pointed cautery for such is like this healer/surgeon.
Capitol .xxiii.	The provided text seems like an extract from a medieval medical treatise using archa
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	This line translates to: "For the cauterization of joint inflammation and for constraining blood." In this context, it suggests an ancient medical practice where physicians would apply heat (cauterize) or some
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Translation: "When humidity enters the lungs and mostly when there is inflammation of complexion, one should evacuate phlegm to medicines with expectorants, while cauterizing that rheumatic joint at its depreciated location." Here, it appears a physician discusses treatment for lung issues caused by excess humidity and associated chest congestion. They recommend the use of remedies aiming to clear mucus from the lungs (expectorants) while also applying heat or cauterization specifically targeted at relieving rheumatic joint pain, likely due to inflammation in a weakened state ("depremiated").
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And only use a few for both lance and cauldron, not exceeding the amount needed by you all at once.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And heat that other than this particular cautery is applied must be directed at the joint of the spine in the lower part of them, for you are addressing a specific area requiring targeted treatment with warmth or fire to alleviate pain and restore balance according to medieval medical practice.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	This particular cautery is sharpened in the manner previously described, maintaining consistency with traditional techniques used for treatment as per old-world medicine guidelthyelds by contemporary healers
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Carefully handle that water which has previously entered, ensuring it is cleansed and suitable for treatment before applying the warmth or fire necessary to facilitate healing as per old-world medical protocol
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol XXIIIII (with Roman numerals spelled out in capitals,
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	About the cautery of disease and whooping cough, a common respiratory illness during medieval times characterized by severe bouts of coughing that might require medical
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When whooping cough and pulmonary disease are due to damp humors that do not cause fever or inflammation, as these were conditions considered ancient by standards of the time, then apply those two specific cautions at this chest bone's joint points in between shoulder blades (scapulae) and below clavicle; also provide another cautery on breastbone area between breasts. And so, sharpen these three types of instruments according to previously established methods for effective treatment as per traditional medical approaches during that period.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish to address the pain of sore elbows with these cautions, then follow that particular form used for needle-like cautery applied previously at points where such discomfort is felt; this aligns with established practices from before as referenced in earlier texts. This indicates an understanding and application of specific tools designed to provide localized treatment which was a common practice aimed at alleviating targeted pain using sharp instruments, resonant with techniques that were passed down through the annals of medieval medicine
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	When points are entered into those places, and care is given for that which has been put in there to heal it.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now, for that three types of cautery are provided hereby to treat it: one as a poultice (healing ointment), and the other two can be applied in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv. (Note: This line does not provide enough
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de titillic" appears to be a translation or interpretation of medieval medical terminology into modern language, which may contain errors due to the archaic
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the aid of your head (implying guidance or leadership) is misaligned due to moisture-laden fluids and does not return as expected during its time back homeward; after you have reduced such displacement, thereby causing a shift similar to what we've observed—after correcting this dislocation with initial measures taken by yourself (or assisted), your head should be repositioned over the shoulders or hips if necessary. Also lift the collarbone that is located in the lower part of its respective division where those parts are situated below, provided such a displacement has occurred towards these divisions as directed from your left side shoulder; and position it accordingly back into place (implying alignment with other body structures).
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the cautery has two heads; this is how it looks like.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And apply cautery within where that other enters, and there will appear the figure of cauterization for those caustic cups;
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus he follows according to the quantity of effort; this is how it should be done:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	E sometimes adjustments are made according to this count and for these reasons, there are eight lashings (cauterizations).
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at the parts above and pain comes herein, then apply caustic points on the muscle with a needle for cauterization or one of the pointed cautery instruments, whereby the joint is confirmed and humidity is purged and the malady (condition) heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript with archaic language
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Based on your input, it seems you are referring to a line involving the treatment of ulcers or perhaps wounds
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	The provided line discusses the treatment for ulcers or wounds within the stomach where excess moisture is present and multiplication of lesions occurs, involving continuous care measures to prevent perforation upon sitting up (presumably postural adjustment from lying down). The speaker indicates that three types of cauterization are required:
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery equals the quantity of both sides of the patient' extradural disc,
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Here comes another source sentence to translate line by line into English as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if that which was caustified by this instrument scares you, then handle it according to how much you wish to try with these points; and further cauterize what has already been treated with such instruments until healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	The given text appears to be from an old medical manuscript with elements of archaic Latin
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	From this line in the medieval context, we can infer that it pertains to some form of treatment or procedure for a foot wound
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When a wound in the foot is caused by dryness or moisture and has come out of its normal course due to excessive discharge; it's treated with water we have at hand that should not further disturb, while keeping pressure on the navel so as nothing exacerbates. Three cauterisms are applied according to this method following their appropriate quantity by physicians under home care:
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Wherever there are spaces between each instrument according to their size, and where the instruments follow the length of the body for four times.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not purchase your lamb with the caustic tools.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of fluid that is retained exceeds the capacity of the bladder established by its size, and it does not fit; if the uterus remains on the feet of the patient, then they will become restless as their limbs are already extended, raising their shoulders.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And when it is possible for you to perform this delicate and careful art of using these cauters on the skin surface, here we are referring... (Translation with minor adjustments)
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	E guarda that you do not continue the cauterization, and ensure that all of the cord is seared so that it heals entirely in the tubes (or hernias), where the cord here appears thin; understand this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating Middle English or Old French from a medieval
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	This line is likely in Middle English, which may incorporate elements of Latin (particularthy), Old French, and other regional languages due to the historical context where these tongues
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the wound on a limb arises and you wish to know if that ulcer is in the flesh of the body or under clothing, when it'dictly lies within the skin (the hide), hardening due to malady brings about an increase in pain intensity.  
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the breeches (pants) of a man and the pain intensifies more than even doctors have tried to cure him,
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So that the malady is positioned over the chest region; and apply heat to the site of the ulceration, using the form previously described on another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply a caustic there and within where it touches the chest, until it reaches full burn, that is when ill-health occurs (illness).
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Return that for its own cure with care as it heals within other appliances inserted in place of natural body structures or organs, and thus prevent the artificial parts from slipping out due to movement
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Only use that which has been studied in the art of medicine for a prolonged period and is known to treat diseases; however, try this cauterization method with caution as you have experimented with it before (though only slightly), but ultimately obey these instructions and do not hesitate.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (Note: The original text does not provide
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From "cauterize sores," the translation into English can be rendered as follows line by line, with some context
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	(To cauterize sores according to this manner is how doctors make use of the dry scalp rags from philosophy's anatomy for a drawn-out rash that you find therein and which belongs, in truth, to its substance.) (Translation note: The sentence suggests using dry cloth remnants or "scalps" taken directly from philosophical texts on anatomy as cauterizing agents. These are employed when dealing with a persistent skin condition ("drawn-out rash"), emphasizing the true nature of such lesions is their inherent substance.)
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here is the translation line by line:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	When you have prepared your hand for applying the pointed instrument, it appears in the act of treating the spine at work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And those ancient remedies that seem like iron and fire are applied to the place where they find between the ribs of men who use cautery similar in appearance, placing it there until they reach this spot for the ulceration, as we have described in a wound.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May there be no fear in this puncture because it will quickly heal the ulcerated wound where recovery has not yet occurred.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" is not part of a coh
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	From lithotripsy (the breaking down of stones, often referring to kidney stones). In English: From the stone cr
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you care for the stone's illness (referring to kidney stones), if you do not provide the treatment we have discussed about division and don’thy own intervention, then perform cauterization in three ways; all of which are rightly done, according to the figures shown on the instruments used by a surgeon as preceded. In English: When treating kidney stones without proper care or your attempt at treatment based on our previous discussion about management and removal, you must resort to performing cauterization in three correct ways; all of which align with traditional surgical techniques demonstrated through specific instrument figures—figures that a surgeon would follow.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Between each lancet or small tool used in foot treatment is the large one we have, and its handling skillfully corresponds to what we perform within the lancing itself of the foot.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not put your hand in the caulcer with the instrument, and gout is above on its two places (i.e., it affects both sides or areas).
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	When your raising is according to the length of the body part so that there are lancets in accordance with the course of the Cosmos,
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	When bringing together the two garments and iron (likely referring to some form of binding or compression using metal), in that place where they enter into each other'thy thighs, holding hands firmly within their crotch area:
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return the cautery (or instruments); therefore it will require four cautions.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you come, then apply three kinds of caustic treatments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And return the points made with the cautery that you placed on the groin for three days or more; it may be relevant to consider other preceding causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Given that "Capitol" is not an English word or phrase in
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	The provided Latin-like text seems to refer to a medical procedure, likely using archaic language which can be challeng
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 The translated line suggests that the purpose of applying force or treatment is specifically directed at treating gout in joints (yldecizi), not on flesh (alcinte) as might be
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When treating gout in joints (ydropici), you must not confine the curative measures prescribed for this condition to just flesh treatment but instead apply proper care directly as follows: a caustic is used within the course of embellishment and also applied externally on the stomach, chest, jaw area—where molar teeth are located (melsa), along with cauterization in between vertebrae in the lower back region; additionally, there's a caustic placed directly inside one tooth for its affected state and another over the abdominal cavity.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is determined by the state of the belly button (navel).
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And apply the points of the caustic that have been used for long durations, in order that they may be bound with bandages or cloths (le goutte).
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And remove the malady from the body using those waters that have been poured for it so they can be added to its intentions of healing and with aid provided by someone who is healthy.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what it burns into which has already been used before for curing (the abdomen), and that very same one will be employed once more to treat both sides as its previous form was preceding, meaning now again after a new shaping.
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or text for
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Based on the fragment provided, it seems like you are referring to a procedure involving the treatment of joints and thigh muscles ("pes" likely refers to feet
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are soaked in water and filled with that liquid (presumably some form of medicinal bathwater), cauterize both heels at once under a stream of water between your earlobe and ring finger; raise this hand holding the lancet, without twisting it. Then elevate this raised hand but do not return to its original position until all the liquid has been drained away because the medicinal fluid is resistant (seems like an attempt at describing a cauterization technique for joints possibly due to gout or similar conditions).
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "As for the application of the caustics according to the length of the thighs: apply one along and below the area of the thigh, and another above it; on each thigh two caustics.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lay aside for a long time its cure-taking, so that no water returns from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes that have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Based on my understanding of medieval Latin-influenced languages like Italian,
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	From this fragment "Capitol .xxxiii.", it's not clear what the complete context or meaning is without additional text
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Translation of the provided line by line text into English:  
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see excessive humidity and the abdomen holding it downwards, then apply a caustic upon the belly and over the hernias; firmly adjusting the cauterizations on the stomach and above the thighs is healing for health that one does not err in.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The given text appears to be discussing medical procedures or observations related to joint pain
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	When translating the phrase "Capitol .xxxiv.," it seems that you are referencing a specific section in an ancient text, perhaps relating to historical medical
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When certain ancient hernias or abscesses (possibly caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture) occur in the body, they are treated with water as indicated in section xiv., and this treatment does not relate to an outdated cauterization method. Instead, three types of lancets/catheters will be inserted into the pus located at the back part of the two small hernias (possibly indicating a greater or more complex form) as well as in the tiny triangular spaces between those smaller structures and their corresponding larger counterparts – possibly referring to anatomical areas around these sites. Two instruments are then used underneallows, potentially along with some other treatment method involving servants of this period might have been mentioned for further assistance or procedure detailing (it's unclear without additional context).
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food has not been digested properly, and if they are constipated again, then you will perform that on their large intestine as per what preceded; and a cauterization over the belly in one gochan (catheter), another at the mouth of the stomach with clay caustic for further cautionary treatment. Apply these treatments by any means necessary, ensuring that the patient re-enters normalcy afterward.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual textual excer
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	This line in Latin appears to refer to the use of caustic treatment for anal fissures:  
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you withdraw the thighs, then heat is applied to the instruments that were assembled by fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Apply that fire inside the artery so as to reach where the instruments (cauterizing tools) can enter, and ensure it stays until they do arrive at the entrance of the vessel from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you perform a large cautery above all else, it may restore health more quickly.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The text provided appears as if it is written in an archaic form of
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	When abscesses, which are naturally formed wounds (fistulas), occur on the parts of life ("partida" in a medical context likely refers to an organ or body region). It implies that these need cauterization as their natural treatment within those specific areas of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not heal the work (operation or treatment) that we have recommended at their location and this causes fear in the patient due to pain, then they will be treated with cauterization for relief of suffering. Here "naturale" refers to natural processes within the body which are expected to manage conditions on their own; however, when these fail (not heal as expected), medical intervention through methods like surgery or in this case, likely referring
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When anyone finds an abscess (fistula) in nature that is old and rotten due to moisture causing decay or corruption of the body, it makes sense for a physician skilled at handling such matters carefully as required, paying close attention not just to its surface extent but also considering how deep within those dimensions their intervention may be necessary. The sentence suggests that timely and careful medical action is needed when faced with an advanced stage abscess possibly demanding more extensive procedures than simple cauterization for proper treatment due to the deteriorated state of health induced by excess moisture in these cases. Here, 'ad alcun ve' refers generally to any individual affected, suggesting that this type of care is not limited to a specific case but rather could be applied broadly when dealing with such conditions within medical practice at the time or era being
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Apply heat therapy (cauterization) that seems like light, suggesting gentle and non-invasive heating as treatment—akin to using warmth for th
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Return that hot cautery there and adjust according to how deeply it enters the abscess.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Iterate within those moments when the cautery is needed for these limbs that have just been crushed by hunger or two or three days of fasting, according to your requirement amount.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the place within where it has been healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the location is sealed and materials are removed from it, for a long time this patient has been cured in its entirety.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not already exposed (likely referring to a surgical site or area of concern), then understand that they have been perverted in the foreground, or corrupted by these causes which will later be remembered at this place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or content related directly in English
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Based on your provided text, which discusses medieval medical practices with a blend of languages reminiscent of
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the nostrgy is caused by a draft or heavy breathing, and as such tightens the chest muscles of the patient, it's crucial to perform caulking on those spots that have been treated with cauterization for remembrance purposes. The text suggests applying additional treatment using heat (cauterizing) if there is a need due to discomfort possibly caused by movement or breathing affecting previously healed areas of the nostrgy, which are significant in maintaining personal health during medieval times as described herein.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And for a second time (quickly), to ensure that three bandages are provided in due course, which could then serve as refreshments or additional protective measures following the initial treatment of nostrgy pain through cauterization with heat—as per these ancient medical practices described. Here we see an emphasis on not just addressing immediate discomfort but also taking preventative and restorative actions to manage respiratory issues linked by sympt
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitulum signifies the continuation of discussion, likely detailing further aspects or success
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Regarding caulking (cauterization) applied to the bladder—a common practice in medieval medicine for
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When inflammation and moisture in the bladder due to breath (freg) or discharge of urine by malaute cause retention, it is necessary then to caulk that part where pus may form on top of the bladder; this involves applying heat with a cauterizing tool directly onto said section. Additionally, woolen fleece from their robes (pentennial cloth) and possibly more bandages or similar material are used for comfort—applied to both sides: one side over three days' usage on the bladder’s region where discomfort is felt due to retained urine output. These procedures reflect an attempt at palliation using available materials, indicating a comprehensive approach in medieval urological care within this treatise as outlined herein.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	When it is necessary for the pointed cautery (second that has passed through), then do so with a sharp point instrument as needed by physicians in their
Capitol .xxxix.	It seems there might have been some confusion or miscommunication, as "Cap
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	From the fragment provided:
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When mucus and moisture come in the belly, it is prohibited to enforce intercourse therein; their menstrual periods are corrupted, delaying its occurrence, causing them pain when they have not yet occurred—when this happens, three cauterisms (or other treatments) should be performed within the abdominal circuit of the navel, as done with instruments in the caulcerations (wounds), and at two or four such points/cauterizations, using pointed forceps for treatment.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears incomplete or unclear as
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	The provided Latin-influenced medieval medical text discusses treatments for certain ailments, using language that bears similarities to Old French and other Romance languages of the time
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture bubbles are outpoured from the part of the anus and these cause humors within their locality; they call this a protruded thigh, when compared to one another.  
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is being stretched here (or perhaps it's supposed to be "here" in reference to where they are applying pressure or treatment). Here, let me provide a more precise
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	So when you cauterize the swelling over the area of injury with a lancet that looks similar to a searing instrument (implying they use some form of heated tool), apply pressure there where the injured part is being jerked around, thus ensuring it cools down or settles at this warm location within its circuit.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if it is related to what came before in terms of applying a cautery for stomach treatment, then...
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not with you now, then apply three such large cauldrons of oil as for the cauterization device itself.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply the points according to the amount of pain in the entire spine, and take care that whatever enters therein be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Given that "Capitol" is not an English word nor does it
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de la vena sciatica," when translated into English, refers to the procedure of caut
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the thigh and it is due to cold moisture, causing an imbalance of bodily fluids (humors), which are either naturally accumulated or mimicked by artificial stones/pillules; thus a cauterization procedure must be applied there. Here 'cauterize' refers not just metaphorically but possibly as a literal medical technique for treating the area affected, likely following medieval understandings of medicine and health remedies.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The action of the cautery in that place is either twofold: it serves as a medicine fire or focus (medicine flame).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And as for the spaces where each applied instrument is present, consider its quantity and whether it's a small or large implement like tweezers or forceps.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May sometimes be applied some points of cautery on the head where it joins with the neck, so that there are four such applications.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize at the place where form was previously performed in the circumcision of the anus, and so that it becomes a closed circle encompasse all of the colon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how it occurs when pain adheres to the joint and does not extend into the groin area, using caustic methods on the cartilage.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May you extend within the thigh, then apply those two caulters on the thigh where you have directed your malady that is causing pain; and with one cauldron over four days will take away from the portion of their body' extraneous or surplus flesh.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the pointed cautery is used and its depth follows according to the length of the bone'dictum.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the melancholy penetrates to where pain is located in the feet, then here you will apply cautery for three points or four, as needed from that place.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If inflammation of the bladder causes pain down into the groin area, then apply this here as well for drainage with a cupping glass (cauterization).
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And as for you in the entire process of caustic treatment, do not complete it until no longer with cauterization involving nervous or large veins, and above all over the abdomen where there is an unsightly bump without any noticeable inflammation.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	Even have seen another of those whom they have burned on the bone and lastly in the burning process, and their bed has been raised to where the swelling occurred (on the foot), with a flame that pierced through it and corrupted all of its parts.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When an accident occurs due to strong abdominal pain, and thus brings death (or refers to severe consequences that could lead to fatality), it is customarily called 'apoptosis' or cellular self-destruction
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain occurs in two parts of an ensemble, then it is customarily treated according to this method (implying a specific treatment approach for joint or muscle issues). The text suggests that when experienstranslated into modern medical terminology and practices may referto localized
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	They apply the acid treatments to anguish cauterization as per this procedure: it seems like a circle of iron from which is bound by its cap (possibly referring to how they use metals in treatment), and you must shape your orifice according to the thickness, similar to that of a bone marrow fragment or small piece. Here 'anguish' likely means inflammation or pain due to excessive humors as understood from medieval medical texts; these treatments were often quite rudimentary by today’s standards and involved using natural substances like acid (potentially vinegar) for medicinal purposes, shaped into tools that would be applied directly onto the afflicted area. This approach could align with poultices or similar topical applications used to draw out excess humor from inflamed parts of the body as per
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	They form another third circle (perhaps a different area to be treated or observed); and within these spaces is the amount of notes needed for the footnotes, with two circles intertwined – implying perhaps treatment areas that are adjacent yet distinct; in those circumferences they measure out one note per space—or possibly longer lengths depending on specific needs —and dress them accordingly: this constitutes their method. Here 'circles' likely refers to designated regions for acute medical observation or therapy, and the usage of ‘notes’ might denote precise measurements (perhaps in a metaphorical sense), indicating how much medication should be applied within these circles; it also alludes to tailoring ('dress') treatments according to established procedures. In medieval medicine, this would suggest an organized approach with specific ratios or quantities for application of remedies which could involve salves (perhaps made from local herbs and materials) that are meticulously prepared in accord
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Return it is lit within the fire contained inside where sparks are glowing and placed upon the division of the belly, with honey poured over its chest covering that area.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Therefore burn that area with three cautions in one day.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here the treatment continues for three days: apply this bandage and keep it in place until healed within, applying care to ensure its healing inside.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh children, of this particular kind of cautery we seldom use for the examination of him/her (the patient), and so only occasionally come across them here.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who suffer from it have our caulters here with them and cause harm where they are located.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries be attached to medicines that you make with a perforated needle inserted into the hole of their door, and such treatment makes the length of one'thy legs like two nuts or bridges those belongings in their navigation.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between them is as much as the size of their body, and are open downwards and upwards, they contain themselves in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E propósito sobre a parteção da anca do malaujo sa, e compre o teu ma sobre aquela; e apõe prenha de água cauda e fa la entre dois círculos, e qualidade dessa é o pequeno fogo — quanto tempo essa coisa torna-se mordida.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Return your hand and use it for wiping off all the water down, from head to toe with moisture-laden waters (likely referring to bathwater).
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside so it may heal.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends within the coccyx or the inguinal region (thighs), place it in water where it was felt at the anal opening, as directed by examination.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how gout manifests itself, and I have already written about it in the treatise on medical correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and caustic that extingsup both sides a divided one at once, pierce through the new wave wherein division just occurred by means as little tricks according to what enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here is the line-bydependent translation of each sentence:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E so de las medicinas alcunas am les quals es cauterizat anch'a, assi com tezic e mel anacrat e cause in ayso che ssan maschile.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Gualia recounts of an old home the operation and cure at which it is healed from joint pain in the knee and sciatic nerve ache, splendid to be treated by that very place itself without need for other treatment; provided they rest there according to recommendation, quickly find relief through bathing and application of dressings made with said ingredient.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is held that there are stones of certain bitternthy remedies; if they do not throw out green (vitriolic), then a fresh stone has been picked up; and when milked by three or four persons in turns, the milk should be poured into where pain occurs—in the thigh, groin, or cushion.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When it is laid on for three hours or as long as the humor releases half of the accumulation, that is its quantity.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Return that item into bath and when the patient'se leg is washed over there it will be immersed in water; as soon as it comes into contact with the ground its pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Be aware that you do not cover with cautery these medicines, but facilitate the expulsion from the body (evacuation).
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Socrates say that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it heals itself; and these are his treatments: wool for application here, and ointment with antidote oil there, applied between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return and do not cease adding water until the venom from the needle reaches the spleen, at which point you pause to relieve the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this act of using a pointed instrument is called "cauterization" (or burning).
Capitol .xlii.	The given Latin-influenced text seems to refer to an old medical practice related to
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	When translated, this line from a medieval or ancient context means: "For the cauterization of two pains
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	The translation of the given line reads: "Sometimes pain is in both places due to causes such as drainage or excessive evacuation and similar reasons; for these issues, cauterization using moist exudate materials." This statement suggests that there are various origins (drainage/excessively purging the body) leading to bilateral pain. The use of "cauterize" here refers back to an old medical technique where heat or a caustic substance is applied to damaged tissue in order to remove it, kill pathogens and halt bleeding - all with hopes
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Translated into English: "And the purpose of this specific kind of flesh that suffers because of fluid exudation." Here, it discusses a type or condition (possibly edema-related pain) wherein cauterization would be applied specifically due to effusion – excessive accumulation and leakage of flu
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	The translation for this segment reads: "Therefore evacuation of the swelling must be through pillows and with likeness thereof (implying pressure or immobilization), which are pains over three lines according to its length, place hands in any one line where cauterism may occur as appropriate based on how much tolerance exists from the patient's body and disposition." Here it describes a therapedict approach involving elevation of swelling (perhaps after injury or surgery) using pillows. The text also suggests that manual therapy, including gentle handling with hands in specific cauterization lines as required based on individual tolerance levels—is an appropriate form of treatment to alleviate pain according to the patient's condition and disposition towards such interventions. This approach seems reminiscent of historical practices where immobilization or manual therapy were used alongside other methods like cauterization for healing purposes in medieval medicine context, taking into account personal tolerance levels which are crucial when
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	It is necessary for burning (cauterization) with a pointed instrument at points.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, then three or four times apply a pointed cautery on this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (This line appears nonsensical without additional
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The phrase "de cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat" seems to be a translation or description from Latin-influenced medieval medical
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	The provided line translates to: "Motions made habitually in this illness among children; and the seat of inflammation within them causes discomfort when they are lifted up during movements." Here's a translation with context from medieval medical perspective into modern English while considering possible dialectical influences between Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	When it weakens in the lower back and shoulders that have already begun to overtake the others,
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you press and intend to prevent from spreading, then apply that pointed instrument used for cautery in this circular manner.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that bleeds out the points of the vertebra entirely through the backbone.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cauterization along the course of the vertebrae with two or three lines of points on it.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are their points prepared for use.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for the location within that has been healed by the water we have mentioned.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May you ensure that the cautery is not applied in a blistered or inflamed state due to nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv. (The original text does not provide enough context
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	From the provided fragments, it seems that we're discussing medical treatments related to gout and joint pain in a medieval or early modern language with influences from Latin, Italian,
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold bodily humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout according to doctors' practice. (Translation)
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And when gout of excess is cured by treatment and not reinjury occurs, the pains are removed with poultices.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And when you are cauterizing that particular elimination in the channel of the joint between the foot and the thigh, it is with various cauters as needed for this purpose.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	That is the form of this instrument:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary for a point to be made on the surface of the foot, then use pointed cautery accordingly.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If pains penetrate the joints or other connections and movements cause them to move inward, then it is necessary to perform cauterization on any swelling present at those points using three or four of these instruments for this purpose here within (the scope).
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you need the appropriate amount of caustics for these lancets (medical instruments), do not press your hand too much on them beforehand; send only what is necessary to cleanse the instrument'dictum, which means "the ridge" or groove referring likely to a specific part where cleansing takes place.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters into both sides of the body, then administer (the) treatment we have just mentioned in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is limited to the feet only and it is called soreness (suggesting a condition), then piercing should be done along the circuits of these same pains in both lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there are remains of pain in the eyes (possibly meaning remaining discomfort or symptoms), then a point is made on the circumference of each pupil and over the nipple, where their fingers rest.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If joint or muscle pain occurs during the days at the hips or thighs, then they will perform cautery on all parts of their helpers (i.dict: patients).
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if the bowels are not expelled properly through good diet and medicine intake, even then they will be cleansed by this cauterization process; God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv. (The specific meaning of this reference cannot be
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	When it comes to sealing fractures or breaks in the body, historically and medically referred to as 
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When it comes to sealing breaks in the joints (which could refer broadly here, as "angonars" can be understood contextually with bones and muscles), we apply bandages on or near the affected area using a pad kept at bay by our hand's pressure. It is upon your command that these actions are taken to ensure healing within one’thy abdomen so no fracture (or break) extends from inside, preventing further damage and promoting recovery through restrained causes of leanness for the body part involved in question ("budel").
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Return the intestine or hernia between your thighs and over its cavity, commanding it to enter through an opening created by the atelus (or bellows) or protrude outward if necessary.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Return that which is to the thighs and strengthens attempts at closure on the bones of each limb, where their appearance resembles the dome of a circle located in the lower parts (the knees) divided by the body'seal (thigh).
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the flame of this instrument (the form of it), hereby implying that the correct use or handling of the pointed heated tool, likely used for medical procedures like bloodletting in medieval times
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Enter where there is reason and place tiny sparks (likely referring to precise locations within a body or procedure site). The translation captures the intent of using specific, careful
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return (or bring back) the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over that area thus ensuring that the intestine does not protrude outwards further, indicating a cautious approach by doctors in treating such conditions without causing additional harm.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between your thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant is on each leg now as well as one being held onto their chest—these actions show meticulous care in positioning patients or applying supportive measures, which were common practices for patient comfort and safety during treatments. This line of translation undersc0unds the attentiveness medieval doctors had to a patient's physical condition while providing direct aid with cushions and supports as needed throughout their treatment process.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Pause the cautery over that mark on your hand (which is where you have applied caution, using precise location for treatment), and now enter into those spaces of which I speak to continue with operations involving phlegm within the lungs—this may refer to a specific medical technique or practice targeting lung fluids. Repeat this action until it has been accomplished in your first attempt; proceed then if not already done, indicating that consistent efforts are required for effective treatment and there's no room for error as per medieval practices of repetition till the desired outcome is achieved within one try to ensure efficacy or correctness during a medical procedure. The translation here reflects precision medicine with an iterative approach toward achgy relief in line with traditional methods, emphasizing careful monitoring by practitioners even after initial treatments are performed on patients' phlegm-filled spaces of the lungs—a common
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the state of the intestine during your cautery procedure to ensure that it does not leak into the groin area and cause severe illness or great malevolence (wicked influence).
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you understand that when using the cautery you do not hold your hand (referring back), it will interflaush with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	E when it is necessary for the pointed cautery of children to be subtle according to their greatness and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the area of the pointed cautery within three days or until the swelling around the focus (area with infection) subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that healing agent there for it will restore health.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joint pain is said over the patient'thy thighs for forty days until the place and swelling are sealed off.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When the nourishment of him/her is regulated according to the length of time necessary for his healing process and ensuring that the intestine does not protrude out, take care of it immediately as part of recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When applied for up to forty days, apply the elastic bandage tightly and hold it there for another fourteen days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	If it is excess of labor and repentance for food and drink, and if they use these remedies vigorously, then when this entire healing regimen is used by them, health will be restored:
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And here come those who have healed it with the trilateral form of this instrument first and applied pressure to stop bleeding.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	e is the line that exits through the crack in the press under pressure of rupture, and another above; place your hand on a heated lancet with forceps, if you have already applied one earlier - which would be better for relieving pain or treating inflammation.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (This appears to be an annotation or reference
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Cauterization of hernia." This translates from Latin, with "cauterize
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in the upper limbs persists due to caressing or impact and does not alleviate despite medical care; here those who perform cauterizations for points."  
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	As for all points on their body according to its magnitude and smallness, as well as twisting and the pain they experience therein, location of convulsions or torture is observed.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it heals with the first application of caustics, be; but if not, repeatedly apply them to that member which brings proximity (or closeness) to the affected organ so that those who have applied the caustics can continue until the malady within is cured. (According to custom for these pains where they are points on a limb bringing nearness to the concerned organ, such treatment continues by those applying it, till healing of the inside disease.)
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The original text does not provide context for this
De cauterizacio de lepra.	From "cauterize the leprosy." This line suggests a treatment method where heat or chemical application is used
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some bleeds need to be treated with a more significant amount of caution for scabies caused by decay and melancholy. This translates the original text into English, conveying that in cases where leprosy (a historical term sometimes used interchangeably with Hansen's disease or syphilis) is thought to be due to rot from dampness ("flacma") combined with a sense of depression ("melencolia"), the treatment must take these factors into account. It implies that
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	So when you intend to caustically treat that (referring back to the subject of treating scabies or other skin lesions), consider if leprosy is involved and use only what we have mentioned in this division; do not let it enter, nor become worse. Be mindful over any malaise affecting all parts of your body — cauterize that on the head using one of our previously discussed treatments: apply to the forehead near hairline during daytime breezes (implying a time when conditions may be better for treatment), and afterwards, place it atop or below the second pillow; likewise, both over two knots. And behind you lies another area that requires attention — on the nape of your neck ("servitz") in case there's an underlying condition affecting this region as well (likely referring to leprosy). This translation attempts to convey complex instructions from a medieval medical text regarding how and where certain treatments, possibly for skin conditions or lesions related to perceived malaise that could indicate forms of Hansen’sinque like scabies infected by decayed body humors (rot), should be applied. The treatment seems not only topical but also requires consideration based on the condition's stage and potential spread within different parts ("corns" or calluses, knots) of a patient's anatomy — emphasizing thoroughness in addressing all affected areas to prevent further complications like leprosy.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And now place your finger in a small incision within the bone, and move them slightly so that the outflow of thick vapors is expelled from it; then cauterize over the molar as previously requested.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and shows signs of manifestation, then you must cauterize that part with these same cautery tools used in your head; on the extremity of the nose, two cauteries are placed here as well: one for each set of testicles (the scrotum), another over any spondylitis present at the neck and between vertebrae. Two cautions are also applied to both kneecaps (knees) with a large tool; on either shoulder blade, two tools used there too as well: one for each anatomical joint of these shoulders' bones (shoulder sockets), another over any spondylitis present at the second and third vertebrae. Two cautions are also applied to both elbies with a tool; on either hip socket or acetabulum, two tools used there too as well: one for each anatomical joint of these hips' bones (hip sockets), another over any spondylitis present at the fifth and sixth vertebrae. Two cautions are applied to both wrists with a tool; on either hand knuckle, two tools used there too as well: one for each anatomical joint of these hands' small bones (carpals), another over any spondylitis present at the seventh and eighth vertebrae. Two cautions are also applied to both elbows with a tool; on either upper arm, two tools used there too as well: one for each anatomical joint of these arms' bones (upper arms), another over any spondylitis between the third cervical and seventh thoracic vertebrae. Two cautions are also applied to both fingers with a tool; on either finger knuckle, two tools used there too as well: one for each anatomical joint of these hands' small bones (phalanges), another over any spondylitis present at the ninth and tenth vertebrae. Two cautions are also applied to both big toes with a tool; on either toe knuckle, two tools used there too as well: one for each anatomical joint of these feet's small bones (phalanges), another over any spondylitis present at the eleventh and twelfdon vertebra
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Guard your nerves that do not burn upon the sole of the foot; this is a precautionary measure taken by those who care for it, to protect these sensitive structures from harm or damage when exposed to heat sources
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Here are a few precautions taken by those who care for it: they use hot iron (cauterization) on the patient's ribcage and another over their mouth to prevent ulcers in the stomach area or abdomen, as well as some applied directly onto the foot. This suggests that historical treatments included cauterizing methods using heated instruments for various ailments such as gastrointestthy issues (
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	You understand that the more you adjust (or use) hot irons for treatment, as much will be beneficial and helpful; likewise, you know that humors do not inflict pain in those who have them placed there by healers—indeed these patients become numb to it. This implies an acknowledgement of the therapeutic effectiveness while minimizing discomfort through expert application – reflecting a principle observed across various historical medical practices for effective and patient-friendly treatments using cauterization methods with hot irons on wounds, often inducing localized numbness.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	Consider that the hot irons used for treatment are large or small, depending on which body part and joints it concerns—this was as prescribed by healers based on specific guidelines of their instruments to cater treatments effectively while ensuring patient comfort during application. This statement underscores a personalized approach in historical medicine where the size and possibly shape (large or small) of tools like
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Carefully place hot irons made from eggshells and another form of care within, to aid in the healing process—this indicates an early practice where materials like shells were possibly used for their purported medicinal properties as part of first-aid or therapeutic measures. It showcases how ancient medicine combined
Capitol .xlviii.	The provided text appears to be from an ancient or historical medical context with specific terms related to
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Based on your reference "Cauterization of stupefaction," it seems you are referring
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or put to sleep and medicine does not heal it, then you must perform the cauterization on that affected part according to its magnitude or smallness; this refers to treating a patient whose injury has not responded well to medical treatment by applying heat (cauterizing) with appropriate measures.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When the pointed cautery enters into the hollow of the neck with a few (or not many).
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within it (the wound or condition) with care for healing purposes.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And in some cases the dullness is cauterized here and there on the body and back of the feet, along with spondylosis affecting those vertebrae which nerves supply that member; this condition then gets ridicuthy or healed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not press upon it, but rather that one who is skilled in the dissection of members and nerve exits throughout the body should do so.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlix. (This line appears nonsensical as it
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	The translation of "Cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea" into English, based on the context provided and understanding that we are dealing with
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When albaras (aloe or similar plant) are ancient and do not conform to the liniments of medicine as expected, then one must cauterize over that which is already preheated by fire beforehand; thus ensuring both white pulp inside it remains unharmed while also changing its color.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .l.	The provided text is already understandable due to its similarity with Latin,
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Certainly! The line "Capitol .l." appears incomplete and lacks context for a full translation.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When they suffer from the stomach or intestine and it causes them distress while urinating (presumably referring to a medical issue related to defecation), then that area is cauterized with a circular instrument as you rotate during an enema session.  
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "They apply heat with one of their cauterizers on this night'thy location; perhaps I have not seen water here before today, yet fear it may be ulcerated and already some traces are visible.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is a pointed instrument that has been cauterized in the patient'supremacy or on their circumference as we have mentioned before.
Capitol .li.	Capital (This implies it is time or an appropriate moment for something
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	The translation of "Cauteza di abudiali" into English, considering the context provided by your previous sentences and taking insp
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any humoral imbalance delays the ripening, and thus excesses within that state which leads to frailty or weakness of health due to scant blood supply, or simply because time has progressed – you wish for it now at this moment; then in order to prepare those little points (referring potentially to cauterization), place them where they will act as a spur during the healing process. Afterwards apply some dressing on that part which desires ripening, and it shall satisfy its maturation needs thereafter through induced inflammation or necessary evaporation of excess fluids (implied by 'fastinara').
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the operation of this instrument, then heat it and use that for heating the cautery itself; keep it in the place where nourishment enters during its application.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If points are placed in that spot where they were put before, to ensure the leg is relaxed and healed there: and take care of what has entered into it so far, for its restoration.
Capitol .lii.	The provided text seems like an interpretation of medical practices from medieval times using terms that
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	In reference to "cauterization," the phrase likely pertains to a traditional or historical method used by doctors
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	When referring specifically to "corrosion" in the context of cauterization: The decay is mobile within the limb and acts like dry sawdust or ash rubbing against an open flame, implying that during ancient medical practices involving cautery (a method used for stopping bleeding by burning a wound), corrosive materials might have been applied
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if the decay (presumably a localized area of infection or inflammation) where you have applied cauterization with flint-tipped tools is present: Ignite small pieces of coal for further cautery as required at that particular location where corrosion has occurred. In this translation from medieval medical terminology to modern English, the practice described involves using a heat source—coal in this case—to perform additional thermal treatment or cauterization on an area affected by decay after initial procedures with flint tools have been performed as needed for healing purposes.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Therefore, thoroughly perform the full range of treatment at that location for complete removal of decay and without leaving any trace or cause thereof (meaning they would aim not just to treat but also eliminate all signs of infection). This line further describes an ideal healing process whereby a physician meticulously addresses both visible decay, perhaps referring to pus formation or infl
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Therefore apply pressure there for three days continuously and pause only over the areas that have been cauterized until all scars are completely removed, leaving no trace of decay or impairment (emphasizing a regimen in which consistent application followed by rest is crucial to achieve total scar eradication). This line undersc0rs an aspect of medieval treatment involving sustained pressure and monitoring over time with intermittent checks on the cauterized areas, aiming for complete recovery without physical scars or residual damage from decay. It reflects a patient-cent
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Return that healing balm applied within the flesh causing it; take care of its use therein for fear that the intestine may escape through those spaces which have been opened, and
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Return that healing balm applied within the flesh where there is no decay for three times a day as long as health persists; but if at any time, you must break it because of deterioration in those places which have been opened, then apply cautery again to them.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	When acute medicine is applied with forceps in this location for cautery,  
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	May we use a focused fire of purulent heat for treatment with these caulters (cauterizing instruments).
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	When you already have given him/her acute medical care as needed at this division, take it up immediately when he/she shows signs of onset.
Capitol .liii.	The provided medieval medical treatise excerpts seem incomplete or lacking context for
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This phrase translates from Latin-influenced Medieval language into English as: "For the cauterization of joints and others." Here's a
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Translated into English: "For the treatment of joints and others that cry out in pain (the claw), which causes a fall due to its heavy invasion; here two types of application are required for cauterization—one on the focus [forehead or temple] area, and another at the base of the tail.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the focused applied points of cautery resemble pain and are forged like iron according to the quantity that contains the keyhole of entire division, and they are made with subtle gaps.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Here the flame is placed on the key (likely referring to an acupuncture point), and your hand rotates around the needle, keeping it within the loop of the key until the needle reaches the depth of the key'dictation goes as follows:
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Lay that in for three days until chewing gum arrives.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here comes the text to translate:  
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the location where flesh has been generated within until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If you do not convert the humors and continue to feel discomfort on the surface of the body, mainly in the thighs and feet, then with those cauteries filled with water or iron (or a small amount of bellows), place your hand over that spot; and tighten it until compression is applied all around. Then hold this constriction for an hour while watching out so as not to spill any remaining fluid from the nozzle into the hole in front, where previously you had inserted something (likely a tool or instrument). After letting go of one such application once humors have stopped flowing due to mordentation with water-bellows needles for about an hour. Then return it as necessary if already distorted by correction measures applied thus far on this patient's knees and chest, holding their hands throughout the procedure (which could imply some form of treatment or manipulation).
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if it is necessary for them also inside that they should enter, then with their other entrance lead all of these things into the body'supreme part'.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Return care for those pus that are removed from their swelling by the liniments which the flesh takes in.
Capitol .liiii.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual line of text with
De cauterizacio de tremor.	The provided Latin phrase, when translated into English regarding the topic at hand (medical treatment), seems to be
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs in the nerves or due to feverish conditions, caused by chills as it seems herein suggesting—you must cut that spot with four cauteries; and apply them on his back where each vertebra is touched by a single cauterization. Apply these same applications also over their heart (which could be interpreted metap orically), under the ribcage, cutting or applying heat as needed to treat such conditions according to medieval medical practices described in this extract:
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the patient's shaking stops and hastens healing of the afflicted illness,
Capitol .lv.	In translating this medieval medical treatise line by line into English,
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	And for wound cauterization on the body'thy part (correction: "cors" should be translated to "body,
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When blood is expelled from the body (correction: "le cors" should be translated to "body"), there appear fistulas made of corrupt thick substances; thus, cover it with a material similar to mint leaves for wound cauterization at its source. Place this directly over where pus comes out or place in the focus area (correction: "foc" should be translated as "focus"), if necessary along bone structures that are long-standing; otherwise, use delicate caustic materials suitable for treating joints and spinal regions at their respective locations.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Mayhap when this fluid is expelled through phlebotomy, it will be purged away by the process of elimination.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of bleeding caused by a sanctioned wound through an incision made with surgical tools (arcere).
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops of cold that you introduce into the body where they can dry out or pierce through a limb then seem to come together here, and it is hard to restore what has been lost at this point.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when you wash away the old blood from within your body'thy chest especially so that it does not overflow and seep out anymore until then, keep pressure over that area where the fluid accumulated is located to prevent its further leakage or flowing forth.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place the cauldrons of olive oil only slightly and generously over those within that are inflamed with fire. For example: "Place the small but ample cauldron laden with olive oil gently upon them, targeting the ones ablaze from flames." Here's a line-by extralining translation of this medieval medical text into English for clarity and understanding:
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you move your knife and withdraw the cautery, then take another lancet immediately prepared at this focal point, so that it does not cease to insert within the suture remaining there.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Guard yourself that you do not burn out the nerves here and which is coming from above or other evil influences.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	When the artery is unblocked and swollen (especially if it's large), there are generally four methods: or use cautery where we need to remove blood, when not removed; when extremities come out for removal, they are burned off and restricted of flow, or whatsoever has a fibrous nature like sinew or tendon is tightened on the bedding (mattress).
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer proper restriction of the patient'dict to ligaments and bandages at a position due to causes of burns or mimicry not ease them but rather tighten.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen that no doctor or medicine is present, and then attend to the wound as directed here with these items we have on hand: understand when there's a major fracture inside this person from where they were born (the lower part of their body), over which nothing should be applied; also apply water poured at high temperature for significant inflammation within that area, causing the wound to become swollen and bruised. Moreover, if cautery or medical treatment is needed here:
Comensa la segonda partida.	Commences the second division.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and suctioning, and of bleeding cures and their counterparts.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Al-Zahrawi.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Ja have we written in this first chapter all the illnesses where it is convenient to use fire for treatment and medicine, as well as occasions and causes of them, and those instruments necessary are related herein; hence I order these chapters on how to elevate one'thy head within oneself.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When this process is carried out in this place for the sake of that which they desire (the patient), so it may be drawn to what they ask for, according to those who have knowledge or skill regarding gout treatment procedures herein described.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you come with urine, blood, or pus, and realize that in this place it is the first for cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For the care you must take, during this procedure where movements are made cautiously to avoid evacuation which is essential for life; here it involves aspiration or incision of an abscess or open wound (or extraction of maggots and cutting of stones), along with its resemblances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	When all these accompany fear and trembling in their bodies, it means that they are experiencing anxiety or panic which may even lead to death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	From them comes one who is afflicted by their illness and fears death due to the vigorous nature of this humidity within themselves, as well as from the prolonged duration of their sickness, which signifies impending death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	Of these are what gives them their health and tell it, you hope for that very same goodness; but ill-health is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so that you consent to this person whom they approach with such madness; your caution is greater than conquests and your rapacity not beyond limits—do not assume any cause for it but follow a certain science known only to yourself, which will eliminate the humor from them through continued use.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in their healing of all your illnesses for prediction and indication purposes herein lies help, as it assists you with acquiring fame and memory; a benefactor and glory come from this.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, God give you understanding and do not let your bones be deceitful or guarded within themselves; for here is where it resides.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And order it distinctly by topics according to the sections in the book of cautery for head within the feet so that you may attend what they requested and require, because this is necessary from time immemorial as a treatment methodology.
Capitol primier.	Capital First.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	From the water cure that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness moves continuously among children, and when the newborn' extricates its head from within itself.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Even for reasons due to an inflamed condition that is not clean or pure (perhaps referring to infection).
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May you not see this illness in children but among those who have hernias and are dying; all of which I witnessed as my work here.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Even you have seen that the child'thy head was of water completed, and his head has been magnificently restless since when it cannot bear to stand any more due to the great size of its head, perhaps because moisture within it increased as long as breath (mort).
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is added between the navel and the bone or is placed on top of the skin there:
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation takes place in that area where moisture is between the vertebra and bone, and swelling is slight, cut at once along the midline of your neck to create a fissure there; this becomes the form of an incision (or "spatum").
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So then if moisture increases and ulceration becomes more severe according to this methodology:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is down in your body, it means that you need to open up and expand the joints of the head which have been completely split apart, and squeeze out (or expel) the water there when compressing that area between partsitions/segments. Here's a line by line translation:
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut into the head area and make three openings according to this methodology:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Here are the translated lines:
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another operation of incision is considered when you observe the size of the ulcer and the accumulation of water; it can occur at the back of the skull, or in the lower part near there, or on the right hand, or left hand. Therefore pay attention to where the ulcer appears with fluid collection, and do so as soon as possible when you have a chance.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not separate the vein and pulmonary fluids in this flow of blood for the expulsion of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	In this translation of the medieval medical text into English line by line,
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From where you grasp the arteries, called they are holding gently tightly.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter (assuming "Capitol" refers met
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When joint pain or dislocations occur at the hips or chest, and it is ancient (old), we do not attribute these conditions to water imbalances within our bodies; rather, healing begins from this point onward in one of those two vessels—presumably referring to blood flow.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Thus when you wish to insert the dislocated hip (or chest), and flare up this area under tight clothing for that they emerge from these joints; furthermore, consider strengthening your thigh bone within the dress as well, paying attention also to where veins are positioned beneath those points which hold down garments. Notably, such practice is suitable only for people who understand anatomy (or more likely not recommended if they do).
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the splint into the vein and divide that portion between the departures below.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	When the length of the intestine is two feet adjusted, and when any vein within it causes excretion of blood pulse frequently, then this goes up and down rapidly.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow (presumably for treating or diagnosing) does not appear at the joint, then measure the size of the ulcer using three fingers and apply pressure with your hand until it enters the mouth/throat to swallow it down into oneself.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the amount of bile secreted from the spleen is considered (the quantity), it should not be excessive, and all according to the volume that appears in the urine due to the imbalance of the liver's repletion and excretion.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider the patient' extraneous matter (plague), and if any remains on the bone due to apoplexy (stroke or brain injury), then divide it up therein that it does not develop into an abscess lanced by physicians.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return strength to the child with wool and silk threads, and take care of it within which is being healed by ointment.
Capitol .iii.	The provided Latin-influenced medieval text translates as follows into
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the withdrawal of those joints which are located in the temple area (referring to a specific region near or within the skull). In English, this can be translated line by line as
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient witches or healers suffer ailments and when they seek medical care to alleviate these conditions (which may refer to illness associated with the head region), it is through their knowledge of medicine that we are treated, soothing those who have symptoms related to this affliction. Here 'extraction' likely refers not only physically but perhaps spiritually or metapsychologically from issues within one’ extricating themselves (or another) in the temple area by using methods such as traditional healing practices and medical interventions like cauterization, where we have illustrated how these treatments are applied.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manifestation of the operation and extraction from those humors that reside in the temples; understand where the arteria is shown on your pulse, it' extrinsic if concealed within few hands due to forceful motion.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you are hidden, then tighten the thigh bone with some cloth; and apply heat or steam to that place until your witchcraft appears (i.dict here referring possibly to an exorcism).
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take it, this is its form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence:
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is delicate, then wrap it around the limb's extremity and insert into that part according to the quantity by which their limbs are elongated and contracted; this will prevent blood flow unless they are not inserted at all – for without insertion, there will be no circulation of blood throughout.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Return (or bring back) the excretion from the sanct of venesection into three times its normal amount, within.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then cover it with material over two points on the femur bone or at both ends of the tendons, and do not thrust into it during constriction to prevent putrefaction within the tissue and fluid discharge.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Return the excess that is between two ligaments, and apply it at this time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, apply the pointed cautery inside the mouth of the cauterizing instrument and keep it at the location where that same workman'sup is operating.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	E it is better if the swelling has fever or complex inflammation; those cauterizations are for such causes that aid in drying up fluids, and thus they are more beneficial when done with care.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working you encounter an outflow of blood from the artery during labor, then immediately try to compress that flow, either with a cauterium or by filling the wound cavity and tighten your hand inside until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If any cause of those is not before you now, then pause over the place where his sanctity has contracted, and enclose it in water with vigorous fomentation until its heat subsides, and apply stringent bandaging as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When the leech is pushed out of arsenic for this cauterization that has already been done with two lances in these places where you have attempted to strike and delayed due to fire (ignition), it enters into the bones so that its length corresponds to what exists between the extremities of the patient, which are not consolidated by all of this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the cauterization works:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the tightness of both tunics examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Even if the patient' extrudes painfully (severely), two pillows are better than none when they become as sharp as any of their own joints and do not tear open the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is any swelling in them and heat accumulates at those places, the flesh detaches loosely from those areas.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety and has been made lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	When it is about the spaces between two belts wherein lies the quantity of the said body'dictum,
Capitol quart.	The text provided seems to be an amalgamation of
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Based on your request, it appears you're asking for a translation from what could be interpreted as archaic or regional medical terminology related to treating sharp and acid stings of insects (
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	The provided text seems to be a medieval or archaic description of treating insect stings with sharp acidity (sting from wasps and hornets). Here is an attempt at translation into modern English:
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	You command the malady to take hold of their own hairs in their forehead, and press them into three cuts on the upper lip according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure extends horizontally from the navel to the chest area at the forehead location, and the second corresponds to a small movement in the eyes where tears are formed, which is third among them.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Guard your jaw from the entrance of both arches and extend your tongue' extruded constantly between both lips.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If there is an excess of three days in any joint space, then so be it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have one of those sponge-wrapped or dry linen clothes, then apply it to the areas where secretions come out from the sancus (gonads).
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Return the spleen between two acute limbs of it; this is its form.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That is from within the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	When the knife enters entirely into that part of the spine where it crosses over the bone on which the skull rests and draws out its moisture, then do so with water drawn from this incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Return the splint to its cavity and place your hand over it so that the intestine does not protrude again into another area using an additional tool which you call cauterizing (referring here possibly a metal or heated implement), applying from one side but not on both sides.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	When the gout of that affected joint requires care for its attached flesh and must be lifted by force into the migrating split (referring to a fissure), lift it with all your might, removing completely all tendons running down from the headhair.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May there be continued flow of bile from the gallbladthy and have it in the midline crack between another such fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	When I apply a quantity of sanctum (sanction or remedy), expressing the locations of the swolthy thigh's kneecaps,
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And in the third day, apply great heat with hot water or oil poultice and other things within that heal the humors.
Capitol .v.	Capital : (This line appears to be an annotation or reference in
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the treatment of wounds for catharsis and healing derived from what has been sliced off by the head: (This line suggests that therapeutic practices, possibly involving some form of purging or detoxification therapy using elements like wine or
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the patient undergoes catharsis and continues this process, their humors (bodily fluids) become exhausted, leading to an urgent need for attention; thus, we see ulcerated eyelids and hair loss around their wounds. Herein lies a deep pain in front of the head so acute that it's both intense and sharply felt—a clear indication that these materials (substances used during catharsis) do not originate from normal vessels but rather are derived directly from dismembered parts below, as understood by wise ones.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all decay of the sanctum or dry and wet linens, fill in between the lips' gap of either small crack or bandages with them.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return (or bring back) it up above in barrel and oil, so that there is not an abscess coming out.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the putrefaction has decreased and blood enters into liver function starting nowhere in it (the patient's body), take care to remove that which causes further bloody discharge, as if you are taking two parts of flour made from wheat and four parts of beeswax. Mix them together well; apply the mixture externally on these sores and administer internally with respect for flesh origin (the patient'thy natural state).
Capitol .vi.	Given that this is an attempt at translating old or medieval medical
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	When treating gout, which occurs in the fingers (commonly referred to as "toes" when discussing extremities), it implies addressing joint inflamm
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	When the cause of pain in the fingers (often referred to as "fingers" or simply "joints") is due entirely because it's metal-related like iron and glass, or when it seems plant-based from peas and beans, this also includes water and vinegar associated fluids. Or if there are any animals involved in the cause; thus for comprehensive treatment of such gout affecting fingers, one must consider all these four potential origins: metal (iron/glass), plants (peas/beans), liquids related to acids or alkaline solutions like vinegar and water.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when blood appears in the ear or seems similar to those causes that do not fit into it and stops the flow of blood from the ear to the face, if you see this discharge coming out, then administer its removal, and make them stoppage by condensation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return rest in the circulation of the artery some times with cloth or wool padding and extend the artery towards the parts above it, which are moved regularly due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is not urination, then it administers the removal of matter through small instruments used for this purpose. (Here "urination" refers to a medical condition related to excretion or elimination.)
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is a festering wound (forum-gesta), be that so; but if not, administer its removal gently at once by taking out small amounts twice as much.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if there is not an opening made, then make one with aram and insert the tip of the needle into the hollow of the vein, sealing it shut with wax and oil softened by heat to prevent any leakage except through the needle itself.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Return or adjust the position of the bladder in the lower abdomen forcefully gathered during contraction; these are tightened together.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	May not be forked in this mannerism, then take hold of the sharp or heavy apparatus used to press on one side by force with hands clenched together and pause at the extremity of reach before wrapping it snugly around that spot carefully attended.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Return that into the disruption of the artery within the groin for ease and remove the artery from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if there are all the causes we have discussed so far, then take appropriate measures to treat abscess or spasm immediately.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	When the figure of the moon crack reaches the stone, and when the stone is hardened by your tool at this moment, fix that very same cracks with speed therein, taking care of it until healed within here lies a proper interpretation:
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is grease in the artery and it has swolthy up therein, then administers care and extraction; perhaps if you do not heed my advice, apply a delicate heat treatment as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	e administer that which was caught in his joint whereby it hurts, into the artery of him so healing may occur.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you think that it has become moistened by the breath of fever and stops intermittently, do not pull those limbs down or undergo small movements; for when we draw out this patient, they have been drawn inward already.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May enter the water into which the patient's malady enters via coughing, and fill up their lungs completely; if through this it is brought forth (i.softly-speaking), then he will be sick ("bo es"); but if not, take pebbles or small stones according to the length of that water, throw them into the fire until they become hot, cool those in the focus with a few grains and place one such stone between the patient's lips (in their mouth) and have him jump over it using his foot from where this stone is placed.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that all water is drawn into it where it can be cleansed and purified.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water from the purging has been taken and you hold one end of it (the bowel movement), place one part at the earlobes, stretch out the other up to where it burns your tongue.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And now let another cup and bowl be filled with as much water as possible until all the water is drained out of the irrigation spout, which has been pulled up from the extraction stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When an animal enters through that hole, if it is a small creature and escapes to its liking therein (the belly), let us catch such with pincers or knives when doing the division; but if it's from a large one causing pain in the chest, administer the removal of said thing using instruments like forceps or scalpel while removing all other causes present within that hole.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When extracting the evil produced in the artery during treatment and healing, which you have described earlier of this fluid (likely referring to blood or pus), it is necessary that if there are no comforts for your care, watch over the vein as though looking at the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So then if any cause by worms appears here (meaning the patient'thy condition), extract them carefully or with subtle hands, but if no such cause is found, take a quick-drawn catheter from below and remove it broadly; this is how we perform:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate extremity into the artery according to the quantity that suffering can tolerate; press with it there harshly until all worms are expelled from inside.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey to the doctor' extrication process, then your body will swell and close within the canula catheter as we have discussed; apply dressings that have already been applied on ant infestations in their treatment course.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion is where you release these medicines into the golden horn of this instrument, which is its form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E for that which is made of silver or lead and struck quickly in it wherein a small sponge lies, placed on the underside.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Thus is it when they press in the continence of the catheter here, which becomes necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the wand and wrap it around the patient'se limb gently, place oil or honey in the cavity of their chest (or some liquid from these medicines in a syringe—that is within your grasp), and insert/apply the rod upwards towards the back where compression fluid will be expelled into the chest cavity. Herein lies the procedure described:
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When it is found that something has been infused into the vein and cut at its focus with a small flame,
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	When you take care that what causes it will not be too harsh in the ear, for those remedies of the auricle do not endure such treatment.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The text seems incomplete here; without additional
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Translation of "Curacio de opulacio de auricula" into English, considering the context might be referring to medical care
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	The provided Latin-like text appears to describe medical observations related to the wombs of women and menstrual blood leakage in children:
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when you touch it in the groin of him who cannot contain his breeching (implying an issue with holding back or containing urine), it is one of the major difficulties for difficult recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that place where you pause the humerus of the malady at its point and look there:
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So if you see an obvious swelling, handle that subtle part of it with your hands.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the limb wherein it lies has one sharp and another not-sharp edge (referring to different parts of an extremity, such as fingers or toes), and if its spine is divided into two leon's backbone segments (indicating a possible bone deformity or break in that area), so that no harm comes to the wrist.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to fleshly origin in the thigh or in his body, then cut it gently and make an incision forcefully within until all the flesh is stopped.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the stone is in the area of the armpit, then place it gently undernethy and heat that spot with a small flame, and insert that there into the flesh of the armpit.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E then if there is an urgent need for intervention due to excess water that weakens the spleen, this pressure will become easier; make sure you do not harm the nerves of the arm.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If you want to lower the flow of phlegm (syc), immerse sponge or cloth in boiling water and place it over the forehead, using another remedy that restrains the flow of phlegm, which is mentioned in the tractate of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The provided text does not contain enough information
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	When care is needed for the condition that occurs in the eyelids:
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When some cold dampness enters into the feet' extricable spaces of our bodies, sometimes these occurrences are dry episodes.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So that you hold those things in your hands and separate the pieces of their entrails from where they are joined, placing them over the areas previously divided into three parts.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	May it be that if there is a flow of phlegm coming in, then you will burn those points on the subtle vessels with caustics.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The best cauterization is applying it on sensitive and directed parts returning when any remaining cause of pain remains; and once applied at the focus, those causes are burned off and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from an old medical treat
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This line appears to be discussing the treatment of large eyes, likely referring metaphorically or allegorically rather than in strict modern clinical terminology due to its archaic language construction
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	This sentence translates to: "Movements that occur in the lids of the eyes (palpebras) for no apparent reason cause them to bulge and become hardened; hence it is called when they are very large." Here, a pathological condition related to enlargement or thickening of the eyelid borders ("grandeyssa") seems implied without specifying an exact medical term. In modern terminology, this could relate to conditions such as
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	The translation of the line you provided would be: "Addition of excessive moisture in both upper and lower lids." This could suggest an imbalance or dysfunction causing abnormal accumulation of fluid (hyd
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Translated, the line means: "Therefore their condition is considered when excessive swelling occurs in the eye area and it appears moist throughout." Here 'excessive' refers not just to any amount of water but specifically suggests a disproportionate or abnormal level that affects all parts. In modern medical terms, this could relate to conditions where there are signs of fluid buildup leading into an ocular region with accompanying edema (swelling due to excessive watery pressure). The cause being 'leugiera' points
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	The line translates as: "Therefore the issue is over that fissure for liberty of passage; choose and apply one from all parts to ease outward escape while suspending others gently until they separate." This sentence implies a treatment approach focused on managing fluid dynamics within an ocular context. Here 'fen' suggests handling or addressing, possibly referring to the drainage mechanism (like punctal plugs used in dry eye conditions). The mention of choosing and applying from all parts indicates that multiple interventions could be made for different aspects
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	May it be that if you are not dressed for the incision and do not insert your finger even at once to half an inch, there will be nothing observed as a result of any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; and take care that which has healed within.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little (of fluid), you will not come down with evil because that remaining blood in the body restores and nourishes itself.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the great size declines at the edges of the eyelids' surface, then lift and suspend it for an hour or so as you decide, and remove that entire portion; if the eyelid through incisions becomes elongated, do not note any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And apply cleanlinzyme water thereon, and take care of the place wherein it harbors inside to make healthy again.
Capitol .x.	Capital Chapter (assuming "Capitol" refers to a
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The provided phrase appears to be from an archaic or regional medical context, possibly in Spanish due to the use of words like "palpebra," which is Latin for e
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The text seems to be from an older form of medical documentation, possibly medieval or early modern Spanish with influences from Latin terminology related to ophthalmological conditions:
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	When you press those groans on the cheeks for all time, and on the cheeks when they sleep; over their dripping foreheads which are already inflamed, there is a likelihood of asphyxia in the throat; but if at that moment you find them lying down, then catch 100 times these breaths within those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When you cut the belly that enters into arcs (arteries), in those days, cracks through which blood flows according to the shape of white seizures appear.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those sheets you have wrapped around the limbs at the joints, and turn them between the right and left sides inside out until they are evenly distributed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Guard yourself that you do not adjust in the crack, so that your spine does not extend to the belly and navels below it; therein lies caution for proper posture.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If there is no artery visible in the fissure, you may insert a small wax instrument into where it can process an artery; adjust that position according to what we have mentioned herein before; remove those instruments from undernethy's clothes and place them on their location within water, allowing for rest periods between each application of these poultices.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	So that when diarrhea and constipation occur in the state of a wound, to ensure that what comes out is no longer from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that which needs healing inside it back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the internal body part does
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Return to the lesioned spot within which healing is taking place; therein lies where care will yield results when employed by those who are implanted with it. (This translation assumes that "apostema" refers to a wound or ulcer, and "lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia
Capitol .xi.	Return to the lesioned spot within which healing is taking place;
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	To return or attend to that sore area where wounds are dressed, using materials like linens (which seems implied by
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the palms of hands natural hairs are adjusted, and they become old or neglected—these belong to us who tend them, causing ways for ailments as with persistent tearing down and moisturizing fingers and skin; healing can occur through:  
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so you pause the head of the malady at its jaw; with your right hand on your left cheek (or vice versa), if it converts, then take a needle in that part where fidelity has been placed behind their eyelid, insert the needle there through which hair grows – this is located between lashes and fur – remove the thread from below the eyelid with your right hand (or vice versa), bend it back to its respective parts.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	May there come when the figure is according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for then among men various things are distinguished, and from those which have been inserted into the eyelid in great quantities as per what extent the lid has softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Return or fix the scapula on the lines which you have drawn, beginning from the greater tear duct to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair split is as large as the king' extrinsic body part,
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return the stitches in the fields within three to four days and take care of it properly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, stitch up the wound, and take care of that which expels and tightens it, for when the eyelid is lifted away, apply the bandage to the wound and add more; thus repairing old injuries becomes easier so: do this.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	May it exert pressure on the thighs and is good work without fear in here.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Here comes another symptom in the temple area, and it is that elders raise their eyelids with three fingers as they separate and gather according to this shape.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to have the needle in hand and without causing harm (since holding a needle can be dangerous), then use an awl through which you insert that into the body silhouette, placing one eyelet therein; similarly place another on their legs' larger tear ducts, as well as on smaller ones where they merge. Adjust so all inserted eyes are at equal height and elevate your hand to lift both cheeks high enough for those who have been advised upon together with you here (with the medical practitioners).
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When lips are set with bandages for treatment and care of that which is healed inside,
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have an abscess or crack in your intellect or body surface, clean that wound with salt and water to resemble its appearance, then bandage it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases when their lashes turn towards the eyes of them that use for this (the method mentioned), you may also perform a stitch there, if needed, even though it's an artificial one.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxiny as second forms are thus described:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and when you change the eye lid and divide the figure as I have described, apply cannulas or fine needles to them according to the length of the eyelid and its lower jaw'dictum corresponding to the thigh bone's vertical measurement.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the ends of several parts divided, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Aproximately add any excess under the subtlety beneath your eye lid that overflows from the corner of the eyes, and constrict the fingers of several divided parts affected by strictures with forceful pressure; leave it for a few days until the cervix (the uterus) dies due to lack of nutrients or neglected care, after which return inside using your own means.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then break open (or cut) the bandages around their thighs and take care to ensure that healing occurs within them.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when secured, the eyelid is raised, and the hair does not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you make these types of catheters according to this method:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e has only the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii. (The text seems incomplete or possibly a reference
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hair of the cat is pricked, it hurts when lifted from the skin.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When hairs are not natural, hard and sharp, the operation in them requires you to grasp gently with subtle force under that tender spot of yielding softness there, delicately holding each extremity as needed:
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And if it is about the length of a thumb'dictated by nature or body size. (This translation attempts to capture both the literal and contextual meanings,
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And adjust component two more subtly as needed under it (and hold your limbs if you wish to do so). This line suggests a hands-on approach by the medical practitioner in case they choose, emphasizing their direct interaction with the patient's body parts for better management of health conditions. It indicates that personal touch or adjustments
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Hold the hernia at their head under pressure and let it be said that your work is subtle yet meticulous (assuming here 'operacio' refers to some form of treatment or medical intervention). This line underscores a cautious approach, where manual techniques are employed with precision. It speaks to the delicate nature of treating certain conditions and emphasizes control over bodily structures during such procedures—in this case potentially
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Introduce the needle into the tightened part of the skin adjusted for use and make that go in as far until you pull it out naturally (likely referring to a technique where precision is key, perhaps related to acupuncture or some form of dermatological treatment). This line suggests careful manipulation with tools—here implying needles used by practitioners. It emphasizes the importance of skillful insertion and extraction while maintaining patient comfort without forcing instruments beyond what's comfortable for both parties involved in such delicate procedures, which is a hallmark approach often seen
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Hold the skin within it and introduce that into alleviation (and keep hair to two or three strands at most). Here, practitioners are likely addressing issues whereby they might be managing a condition involving excess body fur—possibly in preparation for some form of treatment. The directive is clear: remove as much superfluous material beforehand without stripping
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And take your hand upon that within which it has come out from the eyes, naturally lodged there.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	May it happen that Aesculapius will attend and you won't go outside the area of faith wherein you have laid out what belongs there; when in this space he ascends, then his essence shall absorb into himself without difficulty.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	When that vision of the belly arises, and you play with likeness and faithfulness to it, grieving whatsosever in the belly, leave for two or three days until the pus adheres to its place and rises upon good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If it is necessary to shorten the hair, then adjust one of its natural length and raise that particular part; elevate until appropriate spacing within has been reached according to your judgment, and lift at this point as well.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (The translation may not be accurate as there
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When treating a condition wherein it appears within the lower part of the eye, specifically below the eyelid:  
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When one enters the eye and contracts their palpebra (eyelid), either left or right part of it due to poor formation of flesh or bone or surgical intervention, they are called eyelid twitcher; this is natural or accidental, and occurs because of weakening of body'dictions or as a result of their illnesses.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the reason for this operation be that you cut through that solidification and separate their lips, pause in between where there is a cloth curtain here, and bind those inside so they may heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	When using the cure for your patient from these causes that expel phlegm which have never had time to focus in, constrict them; even if you make this return now, there is still something harmful present.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use that which soothes the pain when applied with fenugreek and immerse it in water wherein are cooked lentils or fennel, boiled down to a liquid by doctors' hands within this vessel; apply therewith to relieve them.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your care is that you pierce through each organ not solidified according to the plan for its treatment.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not any correction of humoral imbalance as long as the focus (disease) remains in its place.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the treatment of which eye drops are applied to the corner of the lid, it can be deduced that this line refers to a medical procedure involving some form of ophthalmic medication for an issue located at or near
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This conjunctivitis (eye drops) that is applied to the inner corner of the eye, which has been named acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), and it belongs neither here naturally nor by chance in any way; there's no natural occurrence or accidental presence. The text seems to question whether aspirin should be used for treating conjunctivitis since it does not occur spontaneously within the eye but is a deliberate medical intervention with known properties
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May happen by childish misuse, or due to laceration or surgical procedures and similar cases. Here the text suggests that aspirin (again referring back to acetylsalicylic acid) may be mistakenly used for conjunctivitis when it is actually intended as
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The way of the operation is that you take a needle in which there are two holes and keep one inserted into the flesh while making it pass through the tears (from left eye) to enter into both ends, reaching downwards until they touch the extremities of your body—this passage might indicate an ancient practice for draining or administering treatment from within the eyes. In modern medicine this doesn't correspond with standard procedures; however, in historical contexts and possibly mythical interpretations, it could suggest a method wherein eye drops (or salves) are deliberately inserted into both lacrimal ducts of an affected individual’s left and right eyes to treat certain conditions. It is essential to clarify that this description doesn't align with contemporary medical techniques for treating ocular issues, which rely on established
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Return the flesh to the parts below the belt and above it where that is on the navel or lower area thereof; suture through the broad thighs of him with a thread which then will be between his hips, as well as in his spine (the waist).
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	So if you return the shape of the eyebrow as it is covered by your brow; and if not, take a sharp instrument and pause on the cracked part of the eyebrow'dictum (eyebrow), turning that area into its original form with this tool, thus closing the cracks in the skin above the eyebrow.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	When the extremities of the body (the legs and arms) have their cracks where they meet at joints, it has entered therein that something enters upon meeting each other; when these things come together in gathering or convergence, so too does its figure appear through those openings.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek letters: the line (or 'landa' in this context may refer specifically to a medical illustration or diagram used for teaching purposes
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Apply the flesh over it according to how much has been removed from your eyelid there where they touch each other (likely referring to surgical removal or treatment of tissue near the eyes). Here 'oste' means apply, and in this context refers metaphorically rather than literally as humans do not have bones around their eye area. The sentence implies that after
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Align those parts that have been separated and sew them together with wool thread, taking care of those we've mentioned as soothing from the discussed remedies (implying application or use of moisturizing ointments/creams within a healing context). Here 'ajusta', 'separadas,' 'cosido,' 'lana,' and similar terms are translated directly into English, while retaining some medieval medical terminology for authenticity. The sentence suggests post-surgical or treatment care involving repositioning of body parts (possibly near the eyes
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If you need to incise or perform a stitch for separation (possibly referring to an eye-related surgery), cut those parts so that the incision is flat over the skin of the eyelid as previously indicated (suggesting careful and precise cutting in preparation for suturing). Here 'alxacrati' translates directly into English, with some archaic terms retained to give a sense of antiquity. The term implies surgical intervention specifically related to the eyelid ('
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Separate between those lips as previously mentioned (indicating there's already been some discussion about how far or where one should make an incision, likely for medical reasons). Here 'separar,' 'labios,'
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary of the discourse on gout treatment when it is removed or withdrazyme taken during operation, as prepared in its form of pills, that shape varies greatly.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The skilled craftsman prepares for any necessary measure in each position he may take, and according to what is required by the operation and instruments used during procedures on major anatomical sites.
Capitol .xv.	In this translation task of medieval medical terminology resembling Latin, Italian,
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	This translates to: "From the eyelid attachment either to the conjunctiva or to the cornea." This line is discussing anatomical connections, likely in a context of medical examination or
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	This translates to: "When this consolidation occurs in men who have it under eye tissue (albuginea), making the eyelid firmly attached below and restricting its natural movements or works, thus intervene outside of where morning light enters [the eyes], raising that part above." This line describes a surgical intervention for ptosis—a condition in which the upper eyelids droop down over the pupils. The physician is explaining how to correct this issue by lifting and securing an excessively heavy lid, potentially due to weakened support structures around it such as fatty tissue (albuginea). Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your finger, when it returns the eyelid back into its natural shape and heals the adhesion entirely, does so accordingly:
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	1. Apply your instrument in salted water, or draw out and dissolve ith the drink of juniper.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply separation between the eyelid and the mouth' extrinsic part of it, pressing on the wet lining in an album leaf until the third day when causes are becoming solidifying within that is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.: (This line appears as is written in medieval
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	From the moisture of the eye and the prominence of the cheeks' flesh.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You understand that the second kind of bone is like a small cipher undernethyra; when touched with force, it breaks immediately and doesn't stay in one place for even an hour. This suggests that if it is nervous (nerviform), it resembles white congealed moisture (humidity) that disintegrates upon touching—it vanishes instantly without remaining longer than a minute.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter unless from the greater tear within that gradually covers the sight and prevents light and motion of vision.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the action of the malady in its insinuation into his eyes be that the humors pause at the top of the head, and apply oils to their body, lifting the eyelid with your hand, and applying grease from a spoonful or two doubled over.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	When you seek that which is within her pelt upwards towards him/her (the patient), here it goes into translation as follows line by line in English:
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And place your knife into the eye socket under the thin veil or small lancets, and cut through the flesh of the eyelid to allow that continual flow of humors to pass outwardly.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Some times the unguent applied to the sole or palm is extended for an hour and a half as they have said, which form this substance takes in its essence.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	E safeguard yourself so you do not touch the transparent skin and cause it breakage in place, and that the pupil is penetrated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the lancet is not sharp and you cannot insert it or leave it in that place, then continue rubbing this specific type of lancing instrument with medicine, and he will be cured there as well when taken care of according to division (proper treatment).
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that part, then work the thigh of the patient'se hump and apply a subtle lambskin pad underneath as follows:
am subtilitat.	am delicate or gentle action/method; translating into English line
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is rare and confined and begins today, take the poultice from your hour of evening sickness or morning displeasure (refers to applying warmth), apply it tonight within the other'dictive pulse herb poultice for healing purposes.  
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Return your operation over that reason within which it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The semen of the tear gland, if present in large quantity within the body, is suspended for an hour; and you examine that which has been extracted from one part, ensuring not to cut into it further so as not to let bodily fluids leak out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Return it inwardly into the teary eye cauld and hot of sincerity within which it may heal.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (The specific content of this line cannot be translated
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	From the insight of dietary and bodily fluids originating from meat properly cooked in heat. (This translation attempts to interpret medieval medical terminology into modern English, but please note that without specific knowledge of the period's language nuances, this interpretation could vary.)
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some women are born with rough flesh and overblown eyes, or they may have their forehead compressed between the parts of disfigurement (perhaps referring to facial anomalies), assembled like sails on balustrades:
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in them be that their bowels stop at the belly; and with the humors of that body you collect all necessary flesh cut for it, using either a forceps or an instrument like one, ensuring everything is finished by hooks (the instruments used to close wounds), while keeping guard so as not to allow any part of their blood enter your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Thus when your understanding is complete and the body as a whole has recovered, then apply salt to rub down everywhere on this flesh, whereupon drips or distills in it medicine'gy powder and resembling medicines of corrosive nature, stopping over therein until securely bound within an album by apostem cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of algor and fever occurs due to poultice cauterization, be concerned about abscess treatment with this substance; apply it where the wound has healed from such a procedure on its body part that feels sore in the thighs. Thereafter repeatedly treat these affected areas using what was applied during therapy until there is improvement and resemble healthy tissue restored to place, which causes discomfort when present at this location of our intervention.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even though you remove the entire cure for hernia through natural means or accidentally with iron tools, do not insert your hand into any of these operations while observing that this member is suffering from it.
Capitol .xviii.	The text provided appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into modern English
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	When translated from a language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French (as indicated by the mix in your
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	When joint pain is caused by hard veins in the body that prevent movement and need to be brought out for days (presumably through some form of treatment or intervention), it's essential not to disturb these vessels during operation, implying a careful procedure possibly related to their removal or manipulation. However, this translation attempt may still carry elements specific to medieval medical terminology which might require further refinement by someone with expertise in historical medicine and languages mixing
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary that you contemplate whether the joint where there are hard veins (sabel) has strength and not another illness present along with this symptom; if so, then gather together such a strong vessel in question herein for further consideration or treatment. This suggests an approach tailored to each individual case of sabel-related discomfort within the context of medieval medical practice—focusing on both diagnosis and holistic understanding before proceeddicting any action towards remedy or
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is when you command the humors to stop flowing in their vessels, and suspend those veins by one or two inches according to your discretion—and if so, that amount may be doubled for this form of treatment as seen here. In medieval medicine, controlling the movement (stop) within a patient's body ("their humors") was believed crucial in managing health conditions such as sabel. The directive implies an intervention where specific limbs are addressed through direct manipulation or restraint to prevent fluid dynamics that could exacerbate joint pain and other related symptoms, showcasing a hands-
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	So that they are gradually introduced in this manner:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And bind those thin veins therewith tightly, with subtlety in mind, and wash them away hour by hour until they become swollen from the cold within their chambers and are agitated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Guard your hand that does not touch the humors in the extremities of the spine; and if your operation takes place during daylight near the sun, ensure that you do not injure those veins within your work.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it all, then draw in the cold clean water from the well or request that someone brings some for so that your body'thy wounds can heal what was swelled therefrom (i.e., of bile).
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	May it not be within your power to collect all of it here at once, and if so, then apply the fluid that escapes its pain, allowing you to let it flow out for several days until the pain subsides and is secured by an ointment poultice.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Return (and apply) over him/her as healing progresses after being administered by his/her wife's medicine.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how they are used: (The term "forfeits" does not seem clear in this context and could possibly be a typ
Capitol .xix.	It appears you're referring to something related to the number "XIX,
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The phrase provided, “de reduccio di arzaiti al nas,” in English can be interpreted as:
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you care for arises with cautery or acute medication as soon as it is described and does not heal, they are not in the body but rather fractured bone surfaces where moisture has accumulated; herein extract all of that which resides within. (Note: This translation attempts to preserve medical terminology from a medieval context while converting into modern English comprehension as much as possible.)
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover the bone and it is in decay or impairment, then this is its form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is made of hard steel, and its point is iron or alloys such as alumium-iron for small incisions with a lime or fine scalpel.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Pause there over the area where the bone is damaged, and turn it between the thighs slowly with your hand, little by little until you know that this damage has been worn down.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When there are some withdrawals, and it restores the location where causes become dry and precise.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So that the location is consolidated and good flesh has arisen there from illness and disease for forty days, it does not renew itself or develop pus nor suffer an injury in this place, provided you know that healing occurs.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then you should reduce the crack to its shape of the nose and following this method: as soon as you discover either one or both arms are broken (or acute medicine), take them according to this form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	That part of it is forged from iron and its handle is worn down to the extent at that joint with such frequency.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the location with drying agents used in medicine when you are examining it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and place have sustained it, then returning to those parts where fluid has accumulated, put oil over the area thereof.
Capitol .xx.	Capture .xx. (Note: The given Latin phrase "Cap
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	The reduction of the prominence of the hump (neck). Here, a medical practitioner would likely be referring to methods
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hump encompasses the entire body and does not soften or diminish on itself (meaning through diet alone), it is necessary that we loosen the belly, after which continue with good suction to remove excess fluids from the chest cavity; then apply bandages over the place where treatment has been applied using asphalt and aloe oil along with seeds and sawdust (sarcocolla); also tighten the liniment on top of this, especially if it is warmth or pressure being felt. Here, a medieval medical practitioner advises that when diet alone does not alleviate an enlarged hump (which could refer to obesity), they should proceed with manual techniques such as applying leeches for suction and using specific medicinal preparations like asphalt combined with aloe vera oil, seeds of plants possibly known at the time, along with sawdust. After these applications are made on or near where treatment is administered—often over an area that may be numbed by prior scarification (cutting) for pain relief and healing purposes—they recommend tightening liniments which likely serve both to aid in recovery and possibly as a form of physical massage.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English would be as follows:
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Return these breaks according to the amount that they need (the intestine/hernia).
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If while maintaining the ligament it is softened, then there has been a movement causing discomfort or pain.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Return (or fix) the bandage properly for day and night as we have mentioned.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If you see that the wound has been reduced, then do so; otherwise, continue with the application of bandages and compression on both swelling and stricture until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line appears incomplete or out of context as
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	This Latin phrase translates to "From the depths of the profundity of the uveal layer." Here's a translation line by line:
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the vaginal membrane is torn and protrudes outwards like a finger, it is examined by water with which you will pour inwardly; according to its form, insertion of the needle occurs herein as if handling something soft (the vaginal opening), inserting another on the part below this one. Position both thongs within that area and draw out each strand individually following their arrangement—insert it into the lower positioned string's location; firmly press there, drawing everything back through to where the membrane used to be in its circuit with those strings.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Return and place an arrow (or point) on the wound area soaked in wine alcohol or plant extract, letting it enter inside what is believed to be infected fluid like that from a grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	When you care for the wound with this water that comforts it within, wherein lies the patient'supayed by vermins or pus:
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	From this line in an ancient or medieval script (presumably written with characters influenced
De curacio de alconati.	The phrase "De curacio de alconati" appears archaic and may not
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	The text provided in Catalan seems to be discussing gout, which is referred to here as "alconati," described historically or dialectally rather than using the contemporary term for this condition: artritis gotosa (gouty arthritis). The passage you've shared translates roughly into English like this:
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	May the cause of action be that you fold your thigh over the apparatus and drape it down to your feet, placing your head on top of your two hands belonging to yours (doctor's), securing what enters inside when illness approaches from afar quickly, ensuring dryness without descent or dripping, as well as preventing discharge; thus, the malady flows along with its causes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not descend into joys, you understand that water is involved.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent to health has not been prepared with what we have said, then inflammation enters between your thighs and above it apply a subtle sponge undernethy that rest on the cornea's surface within the eyeball (inside of the eye socket), whereby disease is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when you are getting undressed, then draw in the anal water where you have mixed honey and already boiled fenugreek (and possibly some more honey).
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return its care for other causes within that it has been healed from.
Capitol .xxii.	The text provided is challenging due to its archaic language mixing elements from
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Translating this line into English, while considering the mix of Latin and older forms that might resemble medieval texts in Italian or a similarly linguistified version
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Translation: "We have these spices from the water in division and agree to pierce through by speech according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	And when you make a separation between your legs on a mattress and hold the patient' extricating them gently using force or restraints.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply pressure above your left eye'thy cheek if in there is also water (tears), or apply it on your right temple; otherwise hereby you do so at the top of thy head, where my hand rests upon.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Return your right hand (ma) above the head if it is left-handed; or return your left hand (ma) if it is right-handed.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Return the limb extremity above the crown due to the bulk of the head'dictum within its chest album and place your hand over it with vigor from which you can exert force, holding firmly onto their hands.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then insert into the bladder and feel that already it has come down due to weakness.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	E apply pressure immediately inside the location where water is contained, and place your hand over it gently as directed by another person, so that if the water descends to the level above from which you see its reflection (i.thy veil), at once your gaze will rest upon thy sight itself again.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	When rest is needed for one period (henceforthy), and if water descends (possibly indicating an imbalance or excess fluid in the body, akin to edema from modern medical perspectives), then you must provide that other recovery time before things get worse.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is secured and does not descend, then extract the soft part with ease, twist that portion around your hand quickly, and dissolve a small piece of clear crystal in water; pour this into the hole to stop its bleeding out. Apply pressure outside the wound using cloth soaked in rosemary oil and egg white mixed with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we also today rest upon that which has been consumed on this bread of water (presumably referring to some type of food or drink).
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your mother in the house due to his hardness—for this is what happens with some men who have a belly (the barbel of which represents its form), then bind him tightly using straps for the stomach, which he possesses.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus pierce that part of the joint with a needle and do not deepen it in the ulcer; there is no longer any way to go deeper into its subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; place your hand over it in such way that the intestine does not protrude
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And praise your work, which has been prepared as a bed with warmth that allows you to lie on top of it restfully within the darkened chamber and is forbidden for all movements. (Please note this sentence combines elements from different languages including Latin phrases; therefore, my translation attempts to preserve these nuances while conveying general meaning in English.)
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And so it rests in its natural state that the water within him is quenched and his head does not move towards the fourth or left side of all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	When it is time for the second ligament according to its position in the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which has fallen into the dark and gloomy place therein to its location within seven days, for some reasons may occur, then return it with the ligaments inside.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Whenever you make an application of fluid during healing or shortly after setting up, apply it properly.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They have coverings that you remove, allowing water (fluid) outflow liberally and abundantly through large and forceful gazing upon them.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you apply a caustic now and then during the day when pus is discharged from the wound, it corrects that which yields away (i.dict breaks down).
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you take away the patient'dict sight and place your hand over their face for several days at a time, they will then be existing in the darkest of times.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return its position from that place gradually and discuss among themselves regarding causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	When you know that students may take some detours on the way to learning, and you yourself are skilled in performing operations.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from those of them who have knowledge in this art, and they say that a fire is present within the Ailac Magna (large gallbladthy), wherein water also rises upwards as if sucked through its opening.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	May never have been seen on our land such water as has affected it or was brought by the free from lands afar off; and perhaps this new water is to blame.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the medicinal herbs that, on those things which he does not know about them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These are arrows or iron by themselves, and they extend beyond their delicate triangle-like form, in shape acute as such.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv. (The exact meaning of this Latin abbreviation
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From meat care nothing comes into the nose." This sentence, likely taken from a medieval medical treatise given its linguistic style
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various kinds of nasal growths appear in the nose for no apparent cause related to black dung or pus, this illness is called polyps; it bears similarity to that which represents flies on excrement." This line from a medieval medical treatise indicates an understanding (or hypothesis) about benign tumors inside the nasal passage. These growths are thought of as being caused by something inappropriate—possibly dirt or waste, hinted at with references such as "scorpion's tail" and "flies on excrement." It illustrates an attempt to explain symptoms using a combination of metapthyical concepts (like the scorpion) along with observable phenomena. This
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	Regarding the decayed meat which is dark in hue and concerning that it does not retain its natural golden shine." This line addresses two points regarding changes in the appearance of flesh, likely as a result of disease or spoilage: Meat may become discolored (cancerous), turning black rather than maintaining its usual color; conversely
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in this meat that is not fraudulent nor cancerous (implying it's healthy), make the cavity of your body open between your thighs and place over, exposing its armpits to sunlight; then use needles on these parts within those meats." The author here seems to be advocating for an early medieval treatment approach involving both physical manipulation (opening up a section of one's own skin) and possibly some form of bloodletting using thorns or similar sharp objects, with the intent that sunlight might have curative properties—reflective of humoral theories prevalent at the time. This reflects an attempt to balance bodily fluids believed responsible for health by
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the scabbard or occasion of incision occurs suddenly and you need to stop it immediately; if it is about malignant ulcers, then tighten and cauterize that which has detached from sanction and are protruding in all cavities within.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	When it is necessary for its place in the nose or throat and water or air, this goes there accordingly (and naturally).
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May it be that your nose is opened and moisture enters through the mouth, then you already heal.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May if the moisture does not penetrate secondarily after covering, you will understand that there is no flesh remaining in the feet where it has not reached absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you encounter any obstruction in the area where it belongs to him and his natural lubrication, as well as intervals between each joint of that body part, count for its quantity within one or two days, and introduce movement back into the malady (joint issue) through this intervention. Here is a line by line translation:
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Put that odor into his nostrthy so it can travel through the nasal passages and settle in its place within his gouty area; as these excessive urges cause children at schools to do this, which leads them astray from what should be done here.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return two points outside of the foot, one that appears above and another below it, apply mineral salts for meat consumption within these parts of the foot where flesh is present; this way you know if there are carnous matters still inside.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Extract the essence and translate each sentence line by line into English:
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	In the face of the cause, pause in the nose with a lead pipe for several days until it heals.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be that you seek healing for what has been extracted (referring likely to something previously mentioned in context), then use this very thing.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how the tool used for bleeding in this place is made, where oils and medicines are prepared.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which is similar in appearance to a small torch and handle), it comes with its own weight like this instrument:
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, use a closed canula inserted with forceps and its flat surface exposed; hold it behind the patient where tongs are placed when draining fluids or causes of secretions as desired by you.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxv.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of Romance
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	When translating from a medieval or similarly old language, especially when it borrows elements from various languages like Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French,
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When the nose is constantly kept in its external parts and it's magnified on certain days when looking at it falls under supervision of him/her, likely referring to a medical practitioner or healer during observation periods for nasal health:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which means you have inserted it into the belly of its appearance and extracted all that from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand or pointed cautery/medicine that is in place, over the location where it's needed.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If it is late for your entrance, consider whether laxation has occurred and if so, hardened with a dark color and little feeling; do not touch that iron set upon the skulls of those who have inscribed this amputation therewith out of malice towards you.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the inflammation is caused by a red touch and not of cold color, then when it'se possible in all that, evacuate the humidity and incise thereupon with care due to his old age concerns, thus cleaning out what has seeped and constraining entry inside so he may be cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi. (The Roman numeral "xxvi.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	From the nose and lips, and from the ears when continuity is disrupted by dirt or figmentation.  
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You understand that when you break continuity in one of these joints, rarely confer with anyone about this operation unless it'dict men and women who are knowledgeable enough to comprehend such matters properly.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So when any cause arises for that which you consider as the patient'thy fresh blood (sic), and at such time adjust their lips with stitches, ensuring proper care so that it may heal properly.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of continuity (i.imagine this as referring to a medical condition or indication) are already separated and there is any healing, then cover each divided piece within that boundary where you draw sanctioned cleansing.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	Mighty the act of knitting is that you add the thread of continuity or needles together as we have instructed in sewing on the abdomen, or join it with your fingers likewise knowing how to do so.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From the extraction of those causes that come into play in matters involving teeth injuries:
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Movements often directed at the hard-shelled appendages of their lips in these parts cause discomfort and pain; some are tender to touch while others are more severe.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So that you convert the lips and openings of each of those hardened parts throughout the body, inflate the abscess within its cavity where it is constricted by the sore, and apply moisture with water or medicine to this location as soon as possible while treating the area affected by suppuration.
Capitol .xxviii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing various
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Given the fragment "Insight into the flesh adjusted in the gums," here is a possible translation, assuming it's written or spoken with influences from Latin (which
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	The provided text appears to be an attempt at translating a concept from medieval medical Latin into English with some degree of interpretative freedom due to the fragmented and archaic nature of language use in such texts:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return your hand position over the swolthy or other powdery spots, either abrasive particles for scraping off impurities or medicinal herbs that have healing properties to apply on them directly (this could refer to applying poultices). Here is a
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns (refers to bleeding or reopening of an injury), inspect and incise that immediately, then apply pressure with those instruments—thus preventing them from returning again due to continued use which may lead to further harm. Here is a translation into modern English: "If the flesh comes back/bleeds openly, look at it carefully without delay and make sure you cut (incise) precisely
Capitol .xxix.	It seems like there might be some confusion or typographical error in your request as
De razo de dentz am ferr.	From reason to iron, which doesn't form a coherent sentence and appears disjointed without additional
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the mouth and between gums, sharp points are placed therein with straight lines drawn by you (suggesting some kind of treatment or procedure), along with black veils that may be citrine (possibly referring to colored dental materials) or green within which decay enters through these placements into the gum and they turn out yellowish. Here is a translation:
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so when you separate the patient's thighs and pause at their head in such a way that no cause from those threads and slivers inside them, caused by blackness and yellow sickness (gallstones) among others contained within which have been sanctified, they do it with forceps.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if you are in that part of the reasoned discourse, be; and otherwise, iterate the reasoning over those parts at other times until it is cleared up for tomorrow as per your wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You understand that teeth have required various tools and shapes according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Through which the razor is used for cutting what part of the body it currently serves as another' extraneous section. These sections are those you have prepared earlier, and now they come into use once again:
Capitol .xxx.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating Middle English into modern
D’eradicacio de dentz.	From teeth." (This line suggests a focus on oral health, possibly referring to the removal of something
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cover that heals the tooth's pain at all times and throughout the entirety of its removal process; there is no reason for a dietary supplement while it is being extracted, as sublimation occurs within itself during extraction." (This line discusses self-healing properties related to dental care. It implies that once something – possibly an herbal concoction or remedy mentioned earlier in the text — has been applied for a toothache and undergencycle therapy, there is no need for dietary supplements during extraction because of internal sublimation properties.)
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the thigh is fused to eliminate that which you must certify as the painful one; continually moved away this discomfort from within the thigh and its associated with unhealthy teeth, until such time whereby neither should exist anymore after removal of diseased knee/tooth (contextual ambiguity), and we have already witnessed these operations performed by barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So that you can confirm which is the painful tooth and what it hurts when touched, enter where there may be any movement in the area of the tooth socket containing the root(s), until the dental pulp dissolves completely from all parts, and apply pressure or fine forceps gradually inside while this process occurs.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	When the leg is bent strongly and you pause at the head of the humerus between the bones that do not touch your fingers (which should not ache), place it in alignment with proper motion so as to prevent pain from this area or greater discomfort up here, where there may be more severe distress.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if there is no forcus (likely a term related to medical procedures of the time), then take one of those instruments, and apply it quickly everywhere that makes things easier in order for their departure from this place as food.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is displaced or corroded, then make sure you wrap that area with cloth and apply gentle pressure below it to prevent dislocation during your compression on that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	When you work exquisitely with the scalpel in all parts of the gums and guard your strength so that it does not weaken that part, nor break off what has already been removed from there, return over the thighs through cunning to prevent further major pain experienced by them.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Returning its cleansing, it is washed in water or vinegar as directed; this pertains to the patient's cleanlinthy mouth care.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a flow of blood for so long that it seems endless, and if you wipe some quantity of saliva or water over the ground (presumably to cleanse an area), but do not address this moisture, then burn (cauterize).
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers are those through which her painful teeth come out when biting either way on short or long foods to avoid them being doubled in their mouth while using these instruments for action.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When they enter with large movements as soon as you begin treatment, they should not be doubled over but rather externally compressed and made thin.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here come the ferrous needles of India descentment are points made from hard materials where some enter into others and tighten down forcefully by contraction; likewise, certain shapes taken on these external parts resemble a crow'se-beaked bird (ciconia), which they grasp with their fingers. These implements have strong constriction due to the way they are assembled together.
Capitol .xxxi.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or text related
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The removal of teeth and fragments from the broken jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the cause of tooth decay you must eradicate, after pausing over its location at the border for a day or two until the place is softened; and apply an analgesic or external compresses made from what are assembled on the beak of a crow or swallow, using forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The outside parts of them are pains stitched with a reed or awl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my treatment with these forceps or tenacles, then I will bite into the joint and remove all flesh from where it rests on this small lever which is its shape.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Even if it is a short but heavy limb and not suitable for breaking down completely without risk of fracture.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if the razor is forked and sharp, do so; but otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the shape of one such an instrument may have thickness in its outer edge.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it's trilaterated and has a subtlety at its extreme end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will assist with this tool which has two slopes like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And use other instruments that we prepared with the tooth blade; it is well-made for this purpose using these very tools.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the twisted or shortened limb segment, which is any swelling and not due to dislocation, comes this line for translation:
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Another understands that these tools of teeth motion are similar in appearance to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Mays the skilled craftsmen and subtle in their art, are cruel for themselves according to what means this work signifies; they suffer from various illnesses that neither ancient physicians nor even with proper instruments do pause or address them due to different forms of diseases.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it occur that the jawbone or other bones of the mouth break or are displaced (fracture), and where necessary for treatment at hand is here with instruments such as forceps previously mentioned in tooth extraction, which form our intervention method.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And whether there is any thickness gradually growing, or if it's tightened by the tongue in such a way that no bone escapes from its socket – restore the place with appropriate medicine for this condition; and keep watch over where the treatment will be applied to ensure proper healing.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it happen if there is a bone fracture in the os (bone), take that part and of what caused the breakage as well as its darkness; heal that within so that becomes cured.
Capitol .xxxii.	The provided Latin-influenced medieval text translates as follows into English line
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	When it comes to the care of teeth, special attention is needed on other aspects (implying there might be related treatments or considerations for overall dental
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude naturally from their sockets, and most often in women, particularly among the pious (the devout), it becomes necessary to consider: if a tooth is not related or connected with another dental structure, then root extraction cannot be performed herein; but if there's an attachment present on this particular tooth, you should inspect that using the tool of its form - just as they are made from pig iron (an excellent steel) finely forged in India.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your tongue is where you examine that which has been in motion for several days due to the hardness of the teeth, and make sure it's not affected by other issues with the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an excessive opening of fluid in ligaments, then it' extruding the iron from Indian steel with which this thing has its form.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And all of this iron from India and elsewhere is sold here; it consists of pointed needles made of metal that are sharpened little by little over several days until there's no other sharp tool needed, so as not to cause pain or exacerbate conditions.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines there in time, and cut them as needed according to reason of direction.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is pain where one part has been broken and the tongue lisping occurs, then you must limit that which entered into it to prevent its sharpness from causing discomgy of the tongue or distortion of speech, so as not for the tongue nor words to be affected.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" seems like an indication of a section
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	In restaurants with poor teeth, it is often related to one's financial situation being either gold or silver (possibly referring metapfortune). This could mean that the restaurant may be too
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When pain occurs in the teeth before concussion and loosening due to percussion or extraction, you have applied appropriate medicines for dental restorations (referring to gold as silver), but your treatment has not been effective; hence they risk falling out of those that are strong like precious metal and cannot be changed at any time. Gold does not tarnish easily—it remains solid over days or weeks, while silver can corrode quickly without proper care.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for the finger in such subtlety and finesse according to how much it can enter between the teeth; its form is that you grasp the finger and double back over itself through two healthy teeth, increasingly so if there are crooked or multiple teeth (or molars), until the thread reaches a clean-cut tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Return and apply the poultice within that section where you begin, stretching your hand firmly but gently to ensure it is not moistened.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And if it is your turn with which you hold fast, do so tightly on the area where there are teeth that should not escape (possibly referring to maintaining pressure or grip).
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Here insert the extra teeth of filthy blood with forceps or tweezers into any part involved in the gesture, and convert those that are hidden between healthy tooth and diseased tooth, thus preventing damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Return that which has been seated with Roman style.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is detached or ruptured, hold onto that one or those ones in such a manner throughout the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and the straight line of two healthy and diseased (malign) teeth are linked together sometimes:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns a tooth or restores the clasp in any of those places where it has been removed beforehand, and they are rubbed back as if having had them repaified with us, becoming stronger again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Not unless an expert toolmaker and healer appears.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxxiv.	The given text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance languages
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Based on the words and structure, which seem reminiscing a medieval linguistic style with Latin influence mixed in Italian or Spanish elements:
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	A ligament where from time the tongue occasionally takes signs or is naturally located on which body it has already healed; this may happen intentionally by itself (intrinsic) or due to worms that have become established and caused decay, leading to an accidental condition of the area.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The operation in him is that you rub his mouth of the humerus, its head exists in the chest; raise your tongue, and insert therein that tendon which lies within as far as it can be freed by the movement of the tongue.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If in that there is any hardness or swelling, and it stands by consolidation of pus within the wound, then give an ointment and divide it as you have sliced off what was tied with thread inside where you previously cut into the ligament.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Guard your body so that there is not a crack in the skin of flesh, and here you break apart silver arrow (or cautery) and mercury flow (likely referring to medical treatments with these substances).
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If you cleanse the flow of bile (choler), place it over the jaundice spot that has been tainted; if the gallbladthy is congested, then cauterize its location with a pointed instrument to direct the matter towards exit.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that healer for other causes within which it shall be cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or text for
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The phrase in question appears to be related to a medical procedure, specifically the removal of a ranula—a type of cyst beneath the
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	The translated text suggests that, in some cases, the aspirated sounds of certain consonants caused by dental diseases can impair tongue mobility and force it inside the mouth, potentially exacvanced a condition or cyst like ranula (a mucous retention cyst under the tongue). This could necessitate medical intervention.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in him is that stones are thrown out of his bladder before sunr║e, and consideration for the abscess must be given.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see it of a dark or black hue and hardness, which the humors do not deprive of sensation, do not touch that piece there; for beyond doubt it is bone.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it declines to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then place the onion thinly undernethyou, and insert that throughout all of your operation; if wind comes during your work hour, then stop working three times quickly, so as not to irritate its juice.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have been operating until it is clean and well-moistened with water; care for that part while the other treatment brings healing into being inside where they are applied.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Given that "Capitol" appears as ".xxxvi.", it seems
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the removal of golden nails and those that are nothing in the foot, as well as from all other such detachments:
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gout attacks the joints, those are the swolthy lumps that have been assembled from algid wax beads, which do not heal where they were divided and remain as hardened iron nails without feeling; when you treat them, consider if the inflammation is persistent, dark in color, with little sensitivity, then avoid touching it directly.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is desired for the color red and if the humors are thick (thick or congested blood), do not touch that with iron because of the flow of phlegm; let it remain within itself so long as possible, and either you will drag it out yourself, or it may be crushed by its own weight.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or blue hue, then its nature is subtle and thus should be kept hidden within oneself.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	When performing the operation on him/her (the patient), considering your surgical action already done or if any decrease occurs at all, then you proceed with treating the ulcer as soon as possible. The head of the patient is placed above their knees and mouth hushed down by a servant holding between his fingers nowhere near the tongue using an instrument noble to which this treatment belongs:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is made of silver or gold, delicately handled with a cautery.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you perceive it as their tongue and show them the lesion, placing your hand over that area for an instant or more keeps it in place therein until you can withdraw it to those parts beyond where possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another time when you pull any cause from the tunics (the patient'sup clothes), note that this is where your tool of choice will act on it.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps; however, the external parts of them are bent backward, so that for each one among those things there appears a sharp point (made of iron), which enters into another'sin cavity and causes pain.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this tool is not with you now, then cut that bone from which it belongs to here: And if it protrudes on one side but does not on the other, take care of its treatment accordingly.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Put that cut has been made, mark the other according to this method of incision, and apply moisture from water wash to cleanse it.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that if there is flow of phlegm, apply cold water from the goblet made of grain or honey and myrtle berries to where such flows within that which obstructs its discharge; care for what enters inside so that whatever has entered may heal.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here come some measures in the groin or other warts elsewhere on those legs, and cut them as directed within their mouths' cavities (the spaces inside where saliva is produced).
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And there was an abscess so great that it had measured up to six inches within which I passed through two cracks.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you cuffed them tightly and made them stay in one of their bellies, then drew that out; this was the large portion taken from another' extrusion, to which I also applied pressure at its mouth, cleaning his tongue, and had him hold onto that position within that fistula.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over it so that the intestine does not protrude further.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So it is the gout of that woman, and immediately drink water, then consume food accordingly so she will not cease from those morbid motions for a long time, until such healthy motion enters into where that illness resides, which continues as long as that condition persists.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So then you heat and cauterize the gout in him/her, hence ceasing its addition; likewise I walk about without fear that God will take away this provision from me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When the humors are in excess and rise, it is known as gout according to customary medicine practice when pain occurs specifically in the joints or feet
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrhos (indicative of excessive humors in medieval medicine) occur within a joint or hip, it is not named perpendsively; and if they are found in the large and round part of the body's structure—this being likely referring to an organ such as the liver (which might be perceived as 'gross') with its rounded shape ('bulbus'), then it shall be called a "bubba" according to medical practice.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When you are healed with the fluid we have discussed in section division and do not hinder your recovery, and periodically check if poultice compress is applied softly or firmly; when directed to that long-lasting application which has a dark color (like brown) or black consistency, it pertains specifically to fear of internal organs. In such cases, where there's concern about the insufflation within your body and its location not being at center but elsewhere on one’thy abdomen; in this area resides anxiety for you concerning those internal elements deep inside that are colored dark (either brown or black).
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you turn that second as directed by the patient's whim of blueness and length, which causes them to tighten their belly and press their tongue with an instrument through which they dictate their form and fix it in place on their navel (and pull that outward into one or two instruments used for inspection within the grooves of two molars), here comes:
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When what is not inserted into the body so far as its natural addition has been adjusted on it; if you insert anything from there at all, let your speech be clear.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Return the inflammation (empodera), using that same liquid which has been recommended for use in two joints of a person' extricated from disease and heal it within them wherein they remain ensconced.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by his ignorance and uses force during cauterization due to fear, this reaction of using instruments for treatment is nothing but sharp water agitation. Keep their head at waist level when performing lancet insertion into the wound area; place your tongue on that instrument you have been holding out, and moisten it with the same water used earlier in cauterization. Thus fulfilling this living cause (meaning effectively healing), ensure that neither thick nor subtle is applied to their thin skin layer—this completes the hollow form of our chosen tool for treatment:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here you place your hand on the medicine to express it over the tonsil' extralarge spaces within which time, and through this application of pressure with the medical tool (mordicacio), make that substance blackened and numb for its healing properties.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, prick the wound and cover it with this over the extremity of the ray (which likely refers to an arrow or similar sharp object), immerse the covering in medicine, insert your hand into the body cavity through which the cautery has been inserted so that the covered end adheres within that channel. This allows you to take as much medication as desired for wound healing after a few days (three to four).
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you have indigestion and travel the medicine pathway, repeat that treatment; apply cauterization within the loop of the uterus beginning at the navel, cleansing any moisture present in this area using water rinses, washing with soap if necessary. Treatment should be done thoroughly until healed through gargling with saltwater (presumably as a mouth rinse), and continue treatment within these guidel extramural spaces where worms may reside while achieving cure.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This remedy has been placed that penetrates deeply and out of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times it is healed by water that has been put under which cauterizes and anoints with, whereupon this recipe includes mint, hyssop, rue, Arabic scabs, camphor, powdered herbs applied to them; all causes are adjusted in a pot of boiling water, and on the surface of the hot water there is placed a spike over which an instrument made from arsenical silver or iron according to this practice.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And when the limb is thrust into the mouth of the malady until the breath rises to the palate and makes the uvula dimmed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here applies pressure to that which has been dried out within herein and ensure you do not perform this treatment on the patient' extrication process; otherwise, it will worsen the abscess/ulcer condition, but if done properly by your hand swab (caut), there is no harm.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a can and compose it outside the body'dictum (likely referring to an incision site), so that the mouth of the bladder is moistened, which prevents bodily vapors from entering through there.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This healing is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Given that "Capitol" is not part of the provided medieval medical text ex
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the removal of thorns and water stuck in the foot, as well as from other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Movements persist in the groin or backbone of the leg, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Now cover the liquid that has come out from those places with your hand which you hold over it on the forehead; place your tongue in this tool used above the head to make clear what is coming out of these areas, indicating gout or other issues present therein.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If not through examination of these causes we have mentioned beforehand, then use a metal tool in this manner.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a large stone that enters outside of its cavity (the patient'gy bowel), which you insert into the opening for ease, then place your hand inside to prevent further entry and potential obstruction.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient'se head upwards, and ensure that their mouth touch does not affect either the face or backbone of them; this is what the doctor holds for caregiving.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even if the patient has encroached upon that place (the affected area), due to their science of understanding the cause and purposefully inciting it there, they draw out their tool according to the quantity prepared within so as not to exceed what is necessary for intervention at this specific site.
Capitol .xxxix.	Given that this text is written in an archaic or pseudo-Lat
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	The phrase "Capitol .xxxix." seems to indicate a reference section, possibly from the end of a document where specific chapters are numbered (as is common in Roman numerals).
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodletting is administered as part of healing in medicine and not to cause further harm, consider that the humors within the body flow from above (head) into below (legs), so provide yourself with tongs which you have previously recommended for this instrumental use.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, when you feel a sudden or subtle gout attack coming on, extract that little bit or gesture delicately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the malady'dictum, placing a heated iron pin in the concavity of the cannula, allowing such amount (as long as the sanquiusugua dies and remains within the dictum) so that it is kept out of the swelling for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	May it not be forefated if we have recommended the water that has been humidified, then submerge or apply frankincense (or saffron) to the mouth using the instrument used in moistening with saliva.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When it is necessary (and) in this way they come down with feverish illnesses that occur suddenly and unexpectedly
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another maneuver in the process of suffocating (it), is that you take hold of an enclosed space where carbonized materials are present and place it under a covering layer; within this covered container, another item sits on top, which then compresses inside the vessel containing these elements. Meanwhile, away from the act of smothering beneath, position your mouth at the end of the tube (canula), sealing it shut so that the suffocation process is considered complete as soon as you realize this has happened within the wound itself.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not cured, then repeat the subfumigation movements, and prevent the humors in the male from drinking, eat salty and acidic foods, do not smoke or water (drink), which are necessary when this treatment regimen is needed to be adjusted.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool by which one extracts pus from an abscess when seen; and it seems like forceps used times over again, but with no curve herein.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	the tablet of his urine is likened to the beak of a crow (cuckoo), which he licks, in it sharpness from lime is applied for up to four days when any cause arises, so that nothing does not harm him.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears incomplete or out of
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	La frase que has proporcionado parece estar escrita o transcrito incorrectamente, lo cual dificulta su traducción directa al español y entendimiento del contexto previsto sobre el tema de los sermones
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	La frase dada podría traducirse como: "Las estampillas son señales especiales, movidas por maquinamientos imaginarios, recordando a cada una de ellas aquí dentro del libro." Esta interpretaUBACCIÓ el texto al sugerir que las pequeñas marcas o impresiones (estampillas) en un
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	La traducción lineal del texto proporcionado podría ser: "Están diversas por medio de su acoplamiento y secuencias, debido a sus movimientos imaginarios (manieyras), donde cada una es peculiar en cuanto al tipo de estampillas; así que se obtiene parte de estas humedades." Esta interpretación toma la libertad para llenar los vacíos lingüísticos y conceptuales presentes, suponiendo un contexto médico o filosófico relacionado
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	La traducción al español, asumiendo un contexto médico y basándonos en la información dada anteriormente sobre las manieyras (movimientos imaginarios) relacionados con los apestamentos o "estampillas", podría ser: "La segunda manipulación es lo que se hace a estos lugares donde acude el cuerpo; allí, el accidente de estampilla del cráneo difiere de la estampa ocurrida en una junción y las propias estancias corporales tienen su tipo único de apestamiento. Por tanto, cada uno sirve como instrumento para intervención.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May some of which worms, not having penetrated but rather reaching the stage of disease in those places or their complementary parts, be allowed to exist.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other appliances that are torn when crossed and do not mature according to their nature, similar to those applied at joints, which become a cause of contraction in that limb; or if the intervention on it within its ripened stage is delayed until reaching the main member, or towards the belly button (umbilicus), where an incision must be made as soon as possible before necrosis occurs. If such an appliance is pierced while incomplete digestion continues inside of you; but this one corresponding to your navel, a puncture thereof will cause indigestion and elongation at the body's division points (perineum), leading possibly to fistula formation or abscess that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know when the puncture of the abscess is due, and so it will be ripe for intervention.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	E realizes that the pain and fever are subsiding, you improve breathing and heart rate, head swelling is decreasing, and other symptoms as well.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	When you know where the puncture wound is located, especially near the area of old/decayed sores and incoming infection from treatment for elevation (implying an abscess or other issue related to high levels that need addressing),
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Through incision is performed along the length of the flesh or body, if spicules are in the parts of muscles or feet, and at joints like ligaments, nerves, tendons; and finally throughout all awkward places where reflection does not occur naturally. In those areas that reflect, use an incision according to which part it is located on.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in the flesh, then you must perform its incision within which it has been confirmed that digestion of this person'thy (the patient) is complete; and if one pierces there now, they prolong the leg or thighbone of the sufferer, making their lips hardened and increasing depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May one pierce through the flesh or bone according to its necessity, or as dictated by which part of the body it desires (needs).
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When administering a small incision, and in large punctures or extensive sections according to the variety of the abscesses' size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other than the apendices in which the cecum is ruptured and inflamed, when pain occurs with food intake or during menstruation, it resembles that caused by putrefaction or boils; for then your hand should be on them as well.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who are seated and have three angles; they sit similarly as a mitten of myrtle or the appendages of joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From those joints where treatment is administered with round and crescent-shaped instruments, they appear similar to them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May those who cannot be pierced with surface lancets also have them penetrated only on the surface so shallingly.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus already, do not attempt to extract all of it at once; take out some from that place today, put back into the other part tomorrow, remove a larger piece afterwards, doing so gradually until full extraction occurs—they draw portions each day following gradual progression for complete removal.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly if the malady is caused by excessive bile or phlegm from women before menstruation, infants, or elderly people who are weakened, for their spirits move and seek to exit through illness, and they fall sick quickly; then you perform operations on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Guard your actions with great care and place your puncture in the instrument where you pierce these thorns; make sure to avoid contracting diseases, considering if the pus from the thorn is scant or a flat layer, then administer what was used by ancient healers for such cases; but if the thorn is large and there are fissures in your puncture site where blood comes forth, pause at any juncture within which we arrive.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess has separated a part of the colon or if it's concave in its circuit, then cover it with wool cloth threads or linen fabric as you do when carrying pans and razors; keep moisture within for all day until tomorrow. Then process that area carefully to cure what covers those intestinal enclosures which are healing inside where the cleaning agents have been placed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	May you provoke a flow of bile during your operation; if so, administer cold water and agree on these points where robes are wrapped around the body' extrication site for pressure to control bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, then if you manage your diet and care properly with these recommended powders in places specified within our text and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter time and the site of ulceration is a place where nerves are located, then cover them with powder made from vine leaves and oil to stop bleeding at those locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are carnal (meaning fleshly or swolthy), then when you pause pulpils at the beginning, immerse them in water and oil as we have said before, so that all this enters into your body on a clear day like today. Moreover, cover up any abscesses and cleanse away whatever has entered therein for its treatment within the healing of it which I am to provide herewith (today).
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And so it is that knowledge of universal treatment methods may be necessary, perhaps according to the distinction method I have already discussed regarding how each limb should be treated individually.
Capitol .xli.	The provided text is not in English or any of the mentioned languages (Latin
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	In this segment, which refers to parts that come into contact with the chest:
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck where they have pins attached (apostems), and of these spices contain their tunics; for them, it is that which drives/motion.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	From them come drops (likely referring to bodily fluids or exudates), and from those that contain moisture similar to lemon juice:
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	From those parts that contain moisture similar to the palms and from those hard ones:
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In all of them, and in their removal there is no fear, for when you perform the extraction they do not oppose hardy iron (arthritis).
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for these operations concerning them, you call upon those instruments of which form they have appointed themselves, into which one must enter knowing that it contains within itself what is necessary or appropriate at this moment in time and procedure.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it is known that there is moisture (suggesting excess fluid or "humor"), then you divide that segment into parts according to the length of each part on this basis.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Here begins in the section of line B and moves into the section of line G. Thus, when humidity is expelled, you scrape away that layer containing such moisture; do not leave any cause for this extracted fluid—since traces (tropes) may return if a cause remains within it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here's the line-by-line translation of this medieval medical text:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Return it to that spot on the Egyptian wax as thoroughly and gently as possible, until you find comfort without any cause for concern about that layer; thereupon heal what is wrapped within by returning it under such conditions wherein no concerns remain.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If there is a gangrene of fatty nodes, then proceed in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	am section has the shape of a crescent, and cuts between the lips of this section, pulling your intention out from within that garment which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May it happen that your cautery causes opposition, then you must know immediately the first thing to do.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: As for appearance and healing according to what you have said before; above an ulcerated lesion it was placed with little salt and a small amount of moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May also occur in other openings on the head; these are like those seen when children' extrud their teeth and nails develop therefrom—and all of them form its surface layer.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	When they make holes in the lower parts of them, so that sickness can be drawn out from those upper places.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Return those in need of care with that which is needed for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xliii. (Assuming "Xliii" is a
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the section where they have thrown acid into the colon.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Movements recurently occur in the neck and shoulder joints, and sometimes worsen in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here comes the first source sentence:
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The spices of these scrophulas are movements, some from those that contain stones within them, and others containing moisture inside, and among these harmful ones not cured by care.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Here is the translation of each line from Latin-influenced medieval medical text into English:
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	Es possible that a vein or nerve has not been pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Even if the spine does not provoke gout, adjust your hand inside it carefully or keep calm to prevent distress in the womb, and do not insert needles when unnecessary; but if you must pierce veins or arteries during the operation, pause here on the scabbed glass windows filled with other powders where blood flows out, clean them off thoroughly, allowing for rest while inflammation from the abscess subsides and healing occurs.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanction has detached.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Thus return to your operation within which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if inquiry is necessary about any other small bubbles of pus inside the body, then investigate those areas and clean them out.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the state of severe scrofulus and not inserted that scrofulus into its cavity, then do so accordingly.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Based on my understanding of Latin, Italian, Spanish and French languages as well as medieval medical terminology, here is the translation:
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	When you complete the wrapping of the small wound which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that bone completely, then make sure the lips of your tongue and palate are adjusted just enough so that not even a single excess is placed therein.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May you find that there has been an excessive swelling due to the greatness of the scrofulus (a type of skin disease), and understand its cause, then perform suture as directed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And when the scrofulous that contain moisture within them are pierced here at your place of healing, and a puncture prevents what has been put below the chest from escaping upwards as we have discussed.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And administer injections of wine and oil to those affected, so that the corrosive substance does not break through the crust.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you turn over the patient and their clean linen is put in place wherein that fresh cloth will heal them inside out.
Capitol .xliii.	In this line of medieval medical text translation into English from Latin-influenced language possibly
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the given context, it's challenging to provide an accurate direct translation without a clear understanding of specific terms and their usage in medieval medical Latin or related dialectical language variations such as Italian,
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	In this translation attempt:  
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the writing of that speech/discourse by these individuals.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May there be scantiness in men'thy bodies where evasion of excretion is not possible; otherwise, it will harmfully affect all the veins and major arteries here within their systems.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	May occur in those who have applied cautery to the mouth or ears (or two fingers), when the illness is not in the throat, where it shows itself as sharp pain caused by intense congestion that needs to escape—this refers to a condition known for its acute and piercing nature.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want to draw out the effluvia (impure humors), encircle three or four small circles within each circle of the effluvia, as much in between two circles where possible so that a section is enclosed by membrane and not cartilage. This location should be free from flesh and sinews to allow for proper drainage (evisceration).
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is fearful, then extend one end of the gout-needle once or twice until it reaches the channel (likely referring to an entry point for treatment), this may prevent sepsis if any cause originating from there has been identified.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E propone inscita li ciplach secondo che havem recommat; és significat sobre la secció de la canàl per la flaca que es va deteriorar aquella eixit amb l'aqua que ens resta i pel abscess del vost.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Lay down for some time has been done by someone/something (the context is not entirely clear without further text). Translated line-by
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour arrives in which I pierce my tongue (likely referring to a medical treatment or examination), add some saliva from your lips onto it and swallow that single spoonful; this will soothe only its soft palate tissue, if done correctly. Translation is based on interpreting an older term "plaga," which historically could refer to either flesh wound ("plaque" in French) or a tongue condition (in medical Latin terminology). The phrase
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the medicine that causes pain inside to heal it within them (the patient's body, in this case referring specifically to internal organs or tissues). This sentence suggests using a treatment designed not only for external application
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	The distillation of the whole speech about which we have been advised (likely from an expert or medical authority like Albucasis), is nothing but that outpoured blood veins in some form of apoplexy and they've entered into death, their bodies are dried up here on earth; these vessels will settle down near the epiglottis to allow breathing for any possible respiration within this body until such time as it passes away. Translation interprets a complex procedure from medieval medical literature likely discussing post-mortem resuscitation, which is an ancient and somewhat fantastical concept where physicians of that era believed they could restore life by manipulating the position of vital structures in relation to breath—a practice not supported or recognized today according to modern medicine.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by the water of commanding said person who has been laid down (likely referring to a resuscitation attempt), until after three days have passed since being consumed with malice—this is how you will order them and thus heal within that which was diseased, provided it's cured inside. This line suggests an early understanding of the importance of time in addressing disease (perhaps referencing internal bleeding or poison), emphasizing a directive to take swift action before more damage occurs — indicative of historical medical practices where immediate intervention was seen as crucial for recovery within three days following exposure, aligning with some remed
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when you have seen for me through your eyes, a servant holds the couch and mattress in his lap and places one part of lung tissue therein; it is called healing care for him/her, and soothes their chestache as if they are moaning from feverishness.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So he admitted that she had not inscribed a vein or sinew, and the breath of flies affected her, and treated her until the focus was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not occur on the banquet day, then return to moderation of their dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now it is said that there should be no fear in the section of the patient's flesh where they are performing an incision or puncture (epihloth). Here, translated line
Capitol .xliv.	The given text appears to reference a specific book and chapter within a biblical
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Now it concerns the section where you are inflicting injury or pain on the patient's spine (golayro), and one calls out for a herniated disc in that area. Here is what this could translate to: "Here, concerning the part of the body dealing with back injuries—wherein
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	Now it is about a noticeable (or grave) slipped disc in the spine and its cause lies within women's bodies—as indicated by this specific affliction or pain manifestation therein: "Here, concerning the part of the body dealing with back injuries — where herniated disks are particularly severe according to their
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	Now it relates to two potential causes—whether through certain habits or as a result of an unintentional incident: "Here now we're speaking about the reasons which can
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And when considering naturally occurring conditions, there is generally no means for self-treatment in this context; suggesting that professional
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And when it comes to accidental causes—this is one where the individual feels like they have small nodules (similar to growths), and another manifestation resembles an ailment with blockages in blood vessels that instills fear: "Here now we're addressing two potential reasons —one being likened to having tiny lumps, as if
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And where there is not clear evidence of metal within that which they have forced in—this uncertainty exists only with the one small object; emphasizing doubt about its metallic nature: "Here, it's concerning any supposed use of a thin piece or
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.: (The specific translation for this line is not
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Secció de les especies de nos fetns": This translates to "Section of the sp
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the node sections, they mention all the spices and have divided them in this section": This translation suggests that within a particular division or segment of their discussion—possibly related to medicine (given the context)—they are listing out various spices being categorized or discussed
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Where you recommend distinguishing between a node and an effusion with doubt": Here, the speaker is likely asking for clarification on how to differentiate specifically when referring to medical symptoms or conditions (since 'node' often relates to lymph
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that an effusion is fever and violent pains within which the boiling overflow subsides as sedation sets in – furthermore, it's completed decay when heat decreases (fever), pain wanes, and excessive warmth ceases": In this line from a medical treatise—likely discussing symptoms or conditions such as an abscess ('putrefaccio') following feverish inflammation associated with 'effusion', the speaker describes how these signs of illness diminish in intensity. Sedation is mentioned alongside reduced heat (fever), pain, and swelling once a medical
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May not be fever or warmth nor pain; here lies the lion'thy heart which is within your body": The speaker implies that certain symptoms such as heat (fever), discomfort, and possibly inflammation are absent in this context – perhaps referring to a patient’s current state where these
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	According to the color of the body's surface, and its constitution is like a fox or wolf—either major or minor; these are second spices (possibly referring to medicinal herbs) that contain moisture within them – as you have detailed in this section": Here, it seems the author discusses how one can tell if someone's condition might be serious by looking at their body’s coloration and understanding the nature of certain medical remedies (perhaps humidifying agents or herbs). These elements are considered secondary treatments which contain moisture—a vital factor to consider, as emphasized in this section. This line reflects a nuanced consideration for individual health states when choosing appropriate medicinal interventions and showcases the author’s knowledge of how different subst
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you reach the stage of treatment for this issue, whereby that which is expelled shall be introduced into it at once as its form arrives in your abdomen (wherein it belongs), according to what has been instructed by those who have knowledge on these matters.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here comes the last step according to your measure of swelling size and push out the protruding parts while considering what has emerged in its traces.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of moisture, regardless of its color, then inspect the surface just above as mentioned in the other stipulations.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is not a withdrawal of moisture from their trace (signs or symptoms), then you understand that they are fatty in nature.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it is a dry socket that has the shape of a sickle according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	When you have learned it as taught, and thus remove that which has been cut out from the whole of its nature with ease, and protect the perineum or scrotum if possible; then extract that part which is diseased at once.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	May it be that during the operation, there is not an option to remove such healthy ones; and if they are accidentally damaged along the way, then extract them carefully before any damage occurs due to external causes.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from your body any cause arises, few or many, then return it according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find any small part of the patient' extricable or need to break it down further with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten up that which bleeds profusely after pricking, press on this very spot for medication while treating the other wound.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great, then taste those saliva of him and heal that which contains water within.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is towards you, or not, then attach and place in the location of bleeding where pus (abscess) has formed, let it flow out for two to three days within which time flies while maggots consume the dead tissue, cool down with cold water as prescribed by fire bathing therapy followed by boiling remnthy; then return to separate what is broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The original text does not provide further context
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the necessary elements in section and puncturing:
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From those forms of insertion, and from these three species, the great is formed by them, and they migrate within it; also, their small ones are derived from them.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of insertion is thus this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of entering into movement is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of insertion is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are sharp iron points from furnace and lower limbs descent, in order that food may enter the orifices properly.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experience, and they bear names; one among them is called Berith.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So with three spices, some of them are great for taking away (medicinal) and others in small amounts.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience is thus like this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experience walking, like this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	La shape of experience is little form (of limbs):
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	With these aphta spots and exits, openings between those of the bones and other causes:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	So they sew on the heavy ones, lions, with large needles made of ivory or horn, and these are pains caused by earthy humors; when iron-made needles do this work, then it is called pain from metals (probably referring to metal implants causing inflammation).
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	Here are the translations for each line:
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Here are three kinds of materials used for their treatment and removal based on the extent of the fistula and stricture'dictation here indicates a medical context where different substances or tools may be employed according to specific conditions, likely referring to procedures related to surgical interventions.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of this great experience in lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the patient' extrusion of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of small lead figure for practice:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ligaments are from various spices and these simple ones alone have a bending motion, and they consist only of three types: large, small, and black pepper.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	From those they apply ointments made of three specifics.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those points has come a bend or curve, and from three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From what they have three curves, and from these three species (referring).
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Everything that is necessary in its place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a common coin: form
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a single joint movement:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a single bone, form like limb:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of large joint:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an ointment, form of lead:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of an egg-shaped pulse, form of liver:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an elbow has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of anointment has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an undulated unit has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an egg has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of an artery has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an ill-formed unit has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of knives used for cutting and removing nodes and attachments, made of three kinds; four from these are bone, hawk (a term possibly referring to certain sharp stones or materials), and few others.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the surgical scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of scalpel few:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The outside of those parts where there is a sharp section and the others without sharp sections, nor stopped in such mannering but for that it hurts moderately during lancet puncture to fear damage to veins or nerves; through these, cures malaute (a type of worm infestation) and achieves tranquility quickly due to dryness caused by the incision which helps remove pus from an abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of leeches, and they come in three kinds: large, small, and very little, as when you see them coming.
La forma de magda gran:	La forme grande dua:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of Margaret'thy migration:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of maid is scanty:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Such pains are of earth and similar appearance as this wine, which also gives pain.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When it is in the extra membrane pierced by a needle and hidden within that area, when you wish to move them about here are they with you as if they were breathing on their own.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of cauterization, which are aimed between the thighs to pierce through apathectomy wires and not visible diseases, and thereof three kinds: large, medium (medium), small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are those forms.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of phlegm are those from which the humoral flow is separated into three species: large (gran), migrant (migera), and small (pauca); these refer to the types of spleen discharges.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sourced from lemon pits, round in some length, and subtle they are.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these herbs for the ventouses must be large and few, in order that their ascent through the humors may proceed quickly when medicine has not been administered yet.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those stones to break apart the entire body, and only in fleshy places such as between the thighs of cushions or hernias (in leg bags and hipbags), on breast/chest lumps and belly/abdomen protrusions, resembling their fleshy counterparts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Here are the translations line by line:
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some pains are round according to this form.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	From the care of mothers whose bodies are made up of women, we can infer that this line is likely discussing breastfeeding and maternal health in a historical or cultural context where such practices were common knowledge but
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some cues are puffed up the breasts of barren husbs when they dream to nurse and thus their nipples become erectile; accordingly assembled are the breasts formed by women' extrinsic features which stand out in pairs near each other, like columns. (Translation)
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who takes it inwardly, cover that which is drawn out according to this form from line B to line G, and scrape off the growth entirely, applying padded medicinal flesh externally; adjusting the lips of the flesh on their body garment, and heal whatever has been taken within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that the breast declines to its parts and becomes milky due to her own nourishment, causing two pus-filled swellings in each section of these breasts, akin to crescent moons whose contents are held within one another by their respective larger lines (B. line) and smaller ones (G. line). Then scrape the linea alba which lies between both lips of prey animals; hold back any secretions or leaking fluids until healing occurs in accordance with what has been discussed for sutures and powders, when recovery is achieved.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the incision of the fluid that needs to be drained due to the restlessness of the humors and their flow, pour oil corrosive into it soaked in wax and place this inside what is being eroded by the fluids, with proper care for whatever has been healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Since there is no actual text provided for translation beyond what I've been given as a
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When the pincers come into contact with flesh, they can cause puncture wounds or pricks.  
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When arthritis points (likely referring to joint inflammation or bony growths associated with gout) come from the spices of stones (probably a metaphor for hard deposits like uric acid crystals), they touch down on the skin, holding your hands.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	From those that contain moisture; and from the ones where there is contained moisture which are inserted into the lunar cycle according to this figure: From line G to line B, when all fluid expelled during apoplexy of illness has been drained away completely, then on another day cover it with a clean cloth and insert inside.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Return the wound or injury and apply healing oil as needed until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the putrefaction of the spices in the nodes and abscesses occurs thereupon as we have discussed in this section about abscesses, then divide it over that very place.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the patient is expanded so much that it burns down when touched, then apply treatment as we have discussed hereafter.
Capitol .xlix.	The text provided seems like an attempt at translating Old French or medieval Latin medical terminology
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	From the segment where you've inserted a line of what appears to be Medieval Latin, let me translate it for you:
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken and the chest is consolidated on that (which means it becomes firm or rigid), often inflammation and abscess are through arteries or veins: when an abscess occurs in the thoracic region, where a projectile has entered; you will feel painful pressure sensations there.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And he who is drawn upward by the vein appears in the body'dictor (as if indicating a symptom or sign).
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Upon that which is of theirs for inflammation caused by the rheumatic joint(s), cut into the shinbone (tibia/fibula) leg bone, and cauterize part of it; also return tendons to its attachment site on the bone so they don'n come out.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Return and apply pressure to the place between two ligaments where there is already bone exposed within it, breaking apart the adhesion (apothecem).
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess in the vein's section, then hold your hand where you have felt (the abscess), and insert the needle there with what is possible of your power; put the suture thread into that place which you have held, and make this entry penetrate; ensure double-entry here so as to remove one part from another in ligature according to how it was previously stated using hemp twine at both ends of the incision.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May you fear that we extract the thread (needle), then insert it into the hole of today' extrication device quickly as required by your initial puncture wound care with this first needle, and tightly bind the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Aprop secca le apostema in lo mieg loc'l entro chanqu el quon essit anchoche che èn al lorlo, lahoras tu incidis surplus de cudena e layssi aquo que es resta.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the pillow upon which you have immersed him in wine and oil, and apply the treatment that he is said to cure with these means inside where they will become softened until healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	When it is necessary for the apothecary (doctor) who suffers from curvature of nerves, as in this case which causes painful inflammation known as rheum
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	When Ayssi suffers from chest and vein inflammation due to arceria (likely meaning pleurisy), as if suffering from nerve compression when experien0ffered with palpation or excessive pressure, seemingly showing symptoms of neuralgia.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is pain in the parts of the body or on the feet that are uncomfortable (mays), they occur at the locations occupied by assistants or the toes (talos), or anywhere where joint discomfort occurs.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it is severe and black as another limb, located in its major positions of placement, when struck with violent force, feels maddened pain throughout their body.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess in the body' extrinsic parts, and its head moves freely throughout without going towards either side or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So those who are infiltrated by metal at the joints will find that they have a strong force against them soon afterward.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is at the head or neck due to a spleen disorder have a splint for their spine.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	May it be small if this wound is present in your feet and knees; then cut those parts away from the roots (which could indicate removing damaged tissue or perhaps addressing issues at their source).
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, then hold up one of them (referring to the thighs), and rub that area, and apply pressure thereon; adjust the bandage on the stitches, and take care for as long as they are healed.
Capitol .li.	The given Latin phrase "Capitol" can be translated into English
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Translated, the line from medieval medical treatise reads:
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Endeavoring to move away from homes for the sick in their bellies and other parts of those bodies that resemble fungi, whose root is subtle beneath its bulk; moreover, even their lips are conversed with by these things, which concern them small ones who magnify.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes another source sentence to translate: And you have already seen one of them (the two parts mentioned earlier), which were like fungi and there was no difference between these white ones, so small they seemed nothing at all.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned outwards and began to split apart; moisture flowed from that entire time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So then I have incised those and drawn blood in one foot for sixteen times, and the other for six units.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you see the patient fearful and anxious, guard your senses with iron; but if necessary, a freshly forged nail will suffice as well, which is what we have described herein; leave it in place for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another line to translate: Adjust in the narrowness of the iron pipe so that it does not continue bending and tearing itself apart on its own accord.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If there is a large tumor present, it may cause fear and pain within him or her, mostly in the abdomen area.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Mayhaps you can divide the patient'thy, and properly apply cautery therein so it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return that which must be healed within (the patient), then take care of it so as not to let anything come out again from there.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	E even if you do not suppose that there is a black spot of few feeling and movement on your limb which signifies cancerous growth:
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When time approaches for recalling memory from above (often referring to higher cognitive processes or divine inspiration), it is coming near.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol .liii.: (Please note that this translation assumes Latin influence
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of care for the prominence of the navel." This line suggests a focus on attention or treatment related to the area
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The prominence of the navel is pained due to causes; or for fissures in the flesh over which it resides on the abdomen and where cloths or belts are fastened according as they occur elsewhere through breaks, or because of constriction hereby narrowing (of this area)." This sentence implies that navel prominency can be uncomfortable due to various reasons including fissures in nearby flesh potentially exacdressed by clothing elements like belts. It may also refer discomfort caused by internal restrictions or circulation issues within the umbilical region, as indicated by references to blood flow (vena) and arterial supply (arteria).
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If for the crack in the flesh and due to linen threads, the discoloration of ulcers is similar to that of this part (of the body); here lies the lion's pain, appearing from various situations." This line indicates a correlation between signs like skin discoloration indicative of an underlying condition ("ulcer") on one hand and physical symptoms experienced by patients—often severe in nature as suggested by "the lion’s pain" metaphor. It implies that these manifestations can be seen across different situations,
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If for the emergence of an entrails (belly protrusion), that is where they have recounted to us as having been before; sometimes with great intensity varied, and when you presume them herein hidden within these limits [of our understanding], then return: but if so at this place it happens—and thus their movements are glorified by baths (as treatment) vigorous motion." The passage touches on the notion of certain abdominal signs being recurrent or previously noted. It suggests a course-correction in medical observation and possibly indicates how proper intervention, such as hydrotherapy ("bath") combined with energetic physical activity can reaffirm the body's health—or 'glorying movements.' The text implies an understanding that diagnosis involves recall of past events or symptoms ('what has been before') to properly manage current conditions.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May it be due to moisture; I shall remain hidden from you when near your hand and will not tighten nor swell up.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanction, then immediately display where black decay descends on these limbs.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is through flesh nothingness, then a severe and hard spitting occurs, which follows a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be due to windiness, then handling of him is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And if the operation on it is that you consider whether the navel' extruded by splinter, or vein, or wind; and where prohibited in its treatment, there fear and worry accompany me as I taught in the capital city where I instructed about arses (splinter) and venae (veins).
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the navel is due to the intestine or membrane, then command the humors (to retract), and have it extended; also set your password for testing throughout the entire belly area where you touched with intent during insertion, and position yourself in between its parts above over that specific point on their bodies. Additionally extend around the spinal column within this region of the navel through which contact was made when inserting intentionally or accidentally (with a tool), encompassing even the large intestine sections below; furthermore raise the lesion marker to the body's parts downstream from where insertion occurred, and position yourself between these areas with force using either strong faith/faithlessness tools of varying types.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the skin, then take that one and apply it there; also incise away any excess of yours.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, surround that area, and return to your work; take two needles and insert them into those fields strong enough so as the puncture you made near the fistula (abscess) caused by a wound in the knee joints has been closed. Then strengthen the abscess over these four parts where the needles are inserted.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them into the spot where it pierces and expands the flesh; when they are subtly inserted and positioned therein, take care that whatever liquid is within the linens comes out for its own healing purpose.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel's prominence is of flesh or due to moisture, then cover it with cloth and wash away dirt and humidity from there; this removes what is in excess within you, and take care that which covers and consolidates the location.
Capitol .liii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or content in Latin
De curacio de cranc.	Based on your provided text and using some educated guesswork, here is a possible translation
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	And when it comes to the division of species or types of head (or skull), and how they are treated by medicine, so that there is no ulceration; we have discussed this matter related to their treatment which involves care with iron as a form of prevention against such conditions. It seems like an old-style medical text discussing the importance of proper dietary or herbal intervention (possibly using 'iron' metaphorically for something healthful) in treating skull fractures to avoid ulceration, which could suggest a form of soft tissue injury.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here are the translations for each line:
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	May it be ancient and severe; I cannot propose to you that such shall not heal this patient who has yet seen me or others, nor have they come upon water for aid.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation in him is that you allocate with drink and wash away some of the black fever'dictly if it has been rubbed into openness manifesting as overtropy, then begin your action accordingly.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it bring about opposition to the large internal vessel of vein or artery when there is flow within that vessel; and take care for that treatment will be part of another cure once healed.
Capitol .liv.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical
De curacio de ydropici.	It seems you've presented a line in what might appear as Latin or another ancient language
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Translation attempt: "We already have recommendations in the division of water-borne spices and fragrances from each herb for healing.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And that which is cured by iron alone, it is not brought nearer steel or tympanites nor hypochondria; for this disease is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herb of ydroptic tympanister and do not discomfort yourself with your medicine, then consider that if relief has been achieved in the malady or illness within it (the body), as well as for those above or below its scope—keep guard so you will not treat a different affliction; fear is upon us.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If at some point the patient's waist becomes excessively full of vitality, and this is not another illness nor childbearing for her, then it is your duty to lift up the belly between yourself and others, and have someone else express the abdomen under you with their hands; hold water near the onset of labor pains, pressing firmly but gently using a spiked tourniquet as described:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is when two sharp parts (likely referring to the legs or limbs) are present with spike-like extremities and there may be small brevitys within them that during surgery you should ensure nothing enters into these areas and keep it here.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop considera si la generacio di ydropici es da parti dels budels; quar lahoras couve che tu alones della seccio te lungo dal ombelic per quantità de tre diz alle partite giúte, in le dreit del lü.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of humid fluids is due to illness from walking, then your limbs (or hands) should be on the abdomen for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If it is due to phlegm (produced by), then your section should be straight in the lower region.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And when your section is on the chest where you wish to speak about the humors for that they do not run excessively towards this place freely,
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here is the line-by-line translation into English:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Through an incision I will enter within where bone marrow comes into the place of water (the joint).
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that outwardly and insert an implement of which this is its form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it seems like a silver syringe or jewelry of silver and lead/laterite, to which I have attached a small probe at the bottom part beneath you, with three probes on your limbs - two from one set and one from another; this is what holds its sharp end according to the directionality of writing instruments like quills.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And when the bucket is outside of it, and you bring that instrument into the water, then they will exit from there onto the instrument, so much in one hour time; but if what comes out does not leave within this same hour, swiftly the malady (illness) resolves itself due to the spirit animal's transformation or by applying five presses appropriate for death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May his excretion leave according to the quantity of its essence, and as you understand it means about the positions of the wind in the body'se humors and healthiness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here comes the text to translate line by line:
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	May you fear about the waist and pour a large quantity of water upon it, so that healing occurs within sand as burial would do, while also tightening his belly with baths; let him expect for long time under sunlight until this wound is cured by medicine drying agents.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	When it comes to the abdomen, apply cauterization and use the knife for water extraction, as previously mentioned in this discussion.
Capitol .lv.	The text provided appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical termin
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	When children have bladder infections where the urine is not perforated, it suggests that they may still be able to passively release or drain their bladders without requiring a surgical procedure like catheterization which might involve
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are suffering from their mother's womb and/dictum, or the head of mixed nature is not pierced (or it has been torn apart or remains in its place). This line suggests a situation where there may be complications related to childbirth affecting either an unborn fetus within the uterus that hasn’t undergone natural birth processes such as perforation, which might have implications for delivery. It could also imply issues with retained placenta or other abnormalities resulting from a
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is covered by the membrane so thinly that birth occurs under its delicate surface. This implies a natural birthing process wherein the neonate emerges through an extremely fine and possibly translucent amniotic sac or membrane (the spatium mot), which might refer to labor occurr
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And pause the break with gentle force using a small hammer and secure it there for three days or so ('.iii.' indicating roughly 'three'). This suggests that after an initial intervention like stopping minor bleeding, one should keep pressure on the wound to aid in clotting over several consecutive days. It's important to note this instruction would be highly relevant during a time when antisept
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And it is necessary for them to return (urinate and defecate); I shall bring that back again. Here, the practitioner acknowledges the need for patients with certain conditions or after specific treatments—possibly
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not stop the flow of blood (implied by "ploma"), then it is possible that the urine will pass over this area and fail to be stopped here.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that which is torn be treated with iron as we have said, for up to several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When they are out of their place, which leads to these issues, causing them not to be able to urinate in the lower parts due to elevation of the uterus above those areas; and it is not semen generation as a result, leading to this illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E guarda te that in your operation of body fluid flow, some moisture you will absorb; pause at this place wherein you remove the blood, and cure within which if healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Given that "Capitol" in this context likely refers to an ancient
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	From the albeit where sores occur in the foreskin at the base of the penis and involve decay, blackening, sticking together (adhesion), this line describes a medical condition affecting that area. Here's a possible translation into English:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Movements are rubbed here in the vein and there is thickened fat tissue.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	From that one is evil, and from the other not evil.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No harmful, cover under which you delicately and gently withdraw that within it; place above this spot as much Egyptian wax, then apply the oil contained therein over it for healing purposes while inside is being withdragyed out.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the gallbladder is black in color (which may indicate something harmful or morbid), then take care to apply points on its liver and spleen areas, respectively.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May it be that the foreskin is on the head of the penis and one part has been cut off while another remains intact; after you have done this cutting inside where they will join together to become fixed, take care of that separation now as well when curing the restoration within the foreskin so that it does not tear apart.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And examine the testicles and foreskin of blackness and corruption; thus ensuring that you cover all that has already become degenerated and may potentially deteriorate further, applying liniments made from freshly ground rice flour mixed with honey and crushed herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that healing is taking place within it at this time.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May it happen if there is a flow of blood; then administer luna-shaped cauterization according to this method.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	When two methods of bleeding are available, it is by sanction and pus when it becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the worm is corroded and destroyed in an hour, then place a lead pipe into the body of the penis to allow the uterine fluid to flow through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuce at the base of the foreskin (and this adherence is not excised from where it' extrudes, nor compelled circumcision; when attached by dirt or carbuncle), scrape inside that which has hardened into a bone-like object. Here you must cleanse with salt and remove completely the head of the foreskin.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to reach those exquisitely, then have someone gently scrape the spine or penis area for any cause of headache and prolapse of the prepuce, so that when you insert the prepuce, even slightly forceful entry can be made due to its delicate nature.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return separation between their testicles and penis undernethyel (the subtle part of it), which already exists in the fluid that flows there, preventing other humors from sticking as well.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And now apply some styptic within that which has been inserted until it is firmly set in place.
Capitol .lvii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with influences
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	In the context of this line, which appears to be in Middle Latin—a language used during Medieval times that shares characteristics with Late Latin and was employed for scholarly works on medicine among other subjects at universities like those found within medieval European monasteries or cathedrats
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Translation: Circumcision is not solely for continuity with other diseases; however, when it comes to our work and the will behind it (or perhaps intended by God), we must assign in this particular operation—and place them where they can more easily achieve salvation. This suggests that circumcision was seen as a preventive or curative measure possibly related to hygiene ('more easily attain salut,' meaning health) and/dictates moral purity, reflecting the intertwined nature of physical well-being with spiritual cleansess in medieval medical practices within certain communities. It indicates that circumcision could be considered not just a procedure but also an act steeped in religious or ethical significance beyond its immediate health benefits—a viewpoint rooted deeply during this era when medicine and theology were often
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Thus, the ancients did not decree circumcision in free communities where laws are absent, and they do not use it themselves but only acquire this knowledge through experimentation. This leads to many artisans (perhaps referring herein to practitioners or skilled individuals) being misled about using new tools like scissors/scalpels ('novacula' meaning 'new tool') and forceps ('torores'), instead they rely on leather straps made of flesh attached with sinew from the same source (ungla). This passage highlights a perceived misunderstanding or misuse among practitioners about what constitutes appropriate tools for circumcision, which could reflect regional variations in surgical practices. The emphasis is placed on tradition and possibly rudimentary methods due to limited access to modern equipment—a reflection of the disparities between different regions' medical capabilities during medieval times when knowledge transfer was not as systematic or widespread as today. It underscs a time where practical experience might have been valued over standardized
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already employed all these methods and cannot do better with refinement or needlework as it is done with glue or thread that in craftsmthy the penis protrudes, whereby the penis hangs down below, also the foreskin between two tunics, tightening the thigh when drunk quickly; therefore you are forced to seek other knowledge and pain relief.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	May impair your operation with iron and rot during surgery.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The natural cecum of a child is short by nature, and movements are made that do not require purification; it has been seen as such already.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the refinement that I make with forge and chain links be beauty, goodness—experienced by me; as such proportions of these materials correspond to their respective hardness, so too does its sharpness match when taken outdo extricated from it. Therefore, having measured two degrees of acuteness in my hand, I shall engrave them according to a proportion and make contact within the time frame: thus is formed the shape of the nail containing all of its part, where there will be no mistake at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first thing in performing surgery is that you make sure the child mostly remains calm and let them go into another day afterward.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And if it is possible for your mind to receive that which has come, then apply the joy throughout all of this action that you are capable of doing.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Prepares yourself so that nothing remains outside of your state, and hide the knives in your hand or under your chest such that even an infant would not see them nor any other person among those items.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Here's the translation line by line:
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here the translated text line by line:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of scissors is thus defined, this being its shape.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	These are the bones outside of joints and others that should not be outstretched like the length of two implements held in hand, extended vertically along with their elongated states from painful pains.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	May a mistake in understanding be far from it and require the internal essence of all or any part of him/her to be understood clearly.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So that you stretch it out on your finger nail before the rash appears, and insert it again according to equal measure.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your tongue, then extract that amount from under the tongue and incise it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days, and when the point that was inflated with air begins to deflate, then apply water inside so that the pointed object (cautery) withdraws from its place gently, and clean off any remaining fluid easily; also administer what you have prepared for this purpose.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Guard your head from the vertex of the veil; it will not touch you here.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, take care of that water which the soil consolidates within the passageways of the soil where we have recommended them to place.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is inscribed on the spine according to measurement, and you observe below (below), then he/she will not notice at all.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he take care of that which we have inside so it may be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	The provided text is from an ancient medical manuscript with elements of Latin influence combined with Romance
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	From the context given, it seems that this line might be discussing issues related to retained urine within the bladder (vesica). Translating a medical
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is a fault caused by excessive bile accumulation or liver stones (pyre), phlegm, or fat deposits; these are similar to those mentioned for treatments related to female temperaments during division procedures.  
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and remains within a stone already in the lower part of the bladder, then it causes the ureter to contract upon them (the patients' kidnedicts).
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place their feet on top of their chest and extend their abdomen as much as is possible below their chest; tighten the belly so that it presses against the area under consideration, if necessary with what they have at hand.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Thus when the uterine neck contracts and pushes out of the bladder into behind parts, so that urine is completely expelled.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If there is no dissolution in the water we have discussed as being vehemently felt upon the abdomen, then cover your removal from here with an instrument that has a silver and subtle lion conquau form: It may be thin like a needle used for catheterization (a slender tube inserted through body cavities), shaped somewhat like a palm or finger, held in the hand.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Return the bladder to its cavity for ease of reaching the urethral opening; and bend the penis upward toward the pubic portion; lift this position with your hand until it arrives at the entrance, whereby the urine will be expelled. Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Return the wool inside (or within) it slowly and gradually; as for the urine, also release its moisture in small amounts from time to extrusion.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Return that which is outside for cleansing with urine and use a cup, do not cease to clean it until the bladder and large intestines are relieved of their burden; then they become alleviated (relief or ease).
Capitol .lix.	Capitol LXI. (This appears to be an annotation or reference
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	The quality of the enema, as well as the instruments that are suitable and conform to it, have been arranged or brought together here for this purpose (implying an appropriate setup for administers a cleansing procedure using specific tools). This line suggests meticulous attention has been given not only to selecting proper clamp-like devices ("clampedra" which
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When acute inflammation or suppuration occurs in the bladder (ulceratio) or when it becomes congested with pus ("apostema"), and/dictum is compressed by catheterization of urine, waters and medicaments are drawn out from there; hereby we use that very instrument which was previously referred to as a clamp-like device (presumably for drainage or application during the procedure), this represents our approach:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sin embargo cuando fuera extra-matriz lo hay suena silencioso y está cerrado.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that situation three troubles arise from one party, which occurs several times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the commensal place where it is drawn in and its second quantity that rises from there when any cause draws it out (drawn by humidities), once pulled, again to be drawn, until long enough for the naphtha used in sea battles gets released.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of the cucurbita into the moisture, and draw it out towards that water which pushes against the parts below, whereupon the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the cucurbit.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the urinary bladder under which the bladder becomes distended, and it is this shape that.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is silver or wooden (referring to the treatment tool), I have placed its head like a small feather on him/her and immediately began drawing out lime with threads.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return (or fix) the extremity of the knee joint into its cavity (the hollow part), and place your hand over it so that the knee does not protrude out
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then begin to place your hand over the bladder, addressing its moisture that has entered through the central channel of excretion within this womb where such moisture has arrived. (This translation attempts to capture medieval medical terminology and context while making it understandable in modern English.)
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If there is no bladder present to you now, take a stone from the womb and break it completely; place your hand firmly into those disru each in turn as if seeking out where everything has become disturbed or displaced within these structures (this likely refers to organs); this action should restore their proper positioning. Once that is done, continue placing pressure on them so long as you wish for the accumulated moisture; and then introduce additional water into those spaces from which it came back up again like fluid flow after an intervention or catheterization procedure (in a modern medical context).
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your tool to it in the instrument and make connections as you did with your hand in the bladder; express that which is inside of me so that moisture can reach the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol .lx. (This line seems like it may refer to
De extraccio de peyra.	The phrase "de extraccio de peyra" is in Latin, which translates roughly
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 "de extraccio de peyra" translates to:  
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And in this stone where operation is performed today, a section has been completed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The provided medieval text describes various medical practices and observations related to joint pain, referred to as "gout," according to the humoral theory of medicine prevalent at that time:
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	Here it is presented by that which reports such an external manifestation and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that semen originates mainly in the bladder of children; and from their kidne extruded urine seems like water due to its subtlety, appearing therein; and the uterus rubs his scrotum, with recurrent painful motions. And for this reason they go out into that arena (the public place or marketplace where medical gatherings might occur).
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	It is difficult care for those children within that have attained twelve years, and in the limbs it becomes even harder.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May also in young people travel through these fluids that between them move.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that from which the stone is larger and poultice softer; if it is scarce, contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when you arrive at the treatment of that, cover with a cloth from which we extract out all cracks where it has entered into your joints; this crack may for some time prohibit urine flow and inquiry thereof.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Return its position to the thighs and count as many drops or pourings necessary for it to descend into the bladder'dictor of urine, or that which may jump a few times from place to place on its own accord.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And place that catheter you prepared within themselfs (the patient), and the more of it there are inside their body, the sooner will all parts be cleansed out sequentially.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Return that which is inside for each of those things; everything must be returned within its place (or cavity).
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then if you feel pain in the space, then bend over it with one hand on top of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you do not touch the entire body at once, then when urine is discharged as indicated on your left side (if kidney disease), insert it into one' extraliminal opening that has been made for this purpose; and place therein what was previously brought in.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through the entrance of the stone that was inside at once enters this water.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that small entity is converted into something tiny within the bladder'dictation line by line translation and understanding of medieval medical terminology, here it becomes clear in English as follows:
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And place that small entity at the neck of the bladder (vesica), and remove it from there to where your hand can be placed for assistance (seccio). This sentence is directing some form of procedure likely related to urinary issues, possibly involving catheterization or extraction. The use of "tieu dit" suggests a traditional instrument that
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And commands the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and directs another minister to extend their right arm over those parts above (presumably below), placing it underneice as well for assistance, while also having them contract their other hand around where they have inserted one of their fingers. This sentence appears to be giving instructions related to a medical procedure that may involve bladder palpation and possibly the insertion or manipulation with instruments like forceps (genetius).
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return inside the entrance of which this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Here is the translation line by line:
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	E understand that there is any stone from which you extract (treat), and therefore the removal of it will be difficult by water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid (referring to pus), it looks like a lion and is round, made of yellowish excrement for purification purposes.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is no forge-getaway available, then you must create one over that area or where it hurts intensely, and apply force with a limestone (or similar) tool on the skin above that point without escaping from its grasp; otherwise, insert immediately an instrument of subtle curvature.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot cover it there, then slightly increase the disruption and if you see a flow of bile, dissolve that little amount with vinegar already tripled.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is present in one, then you will draw it out through her mouth into its bladder (urinary tract), and place your hand over it therein; also carry a small amount to introduce water-like substances. In this sentence:
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is blood flow that flows excessively and profusely, it may be due to ignorance on your part for not recognizing this great section of the urethra; hence its location lacks complete solidity: because either it remains or comes from continuous urine distillation.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May you administer the removal of it within which has come out or is involved in a fracture, wherein are placed inside its fingers to extract that very thing from pains.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So that when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with the juice of Aloe and dragon'dictum, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place it over that cloth in oil and vinegar or water infused with pungent herbs, to allow the poultice (ointment) to be absorbed by the sore area.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the bladder over the patient'dict chest and do not release it into the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air escapes, apply water and oil herein; carefully insert the liniment and unguent within which it shall be healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Might you apply cauterization to heal ulcers and decayed flesh, as if the sanctum is congealed within the bladder; because through it urine cannot escape (and thus becomes part of its outflow), therefore insert a tube into the wound and remove that sore, which if left alone provokes further deterioration of both the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: "Apply warm water and salt at this point, against all other species, as is suitable in healing within which it has become cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	In those hours of the entire healing process, where you have both thighs and adjust the stopped medicines at that location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder's meat, where it rests therein, then urination of this matter is prohibited. However, when healing has reached a stage such that passage through the tract seems imminent; these are accused of being constipated—and you have already drained them out and now must grasp hold of an iron tool with a pointed end for removal:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From outside of the womb, gout settles in a cane.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Return it close at once and hold it over there where its stone is located until it does not return to the bladder again.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Return the needle into the vein, piercing it through where the lancet enters that part of the body.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Revolve the cautery in your hand slowly over that small stone, and continue to perform the puncture until another from the other parts also pierces through; at which point the urine is expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply your hand over what is broken from the bone of the separated part below the pubis, where there is a fracture and an opening for urine, and the urethra heals.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not within your equipment due to any reason that you should prevent from happening with it, then use a pin immediately on the stone (the implement), and another one under the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Upon returning it inside over that stone in between his knees of pain,
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that outside (or out of place), it is necessary to bring back or correct its
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Correct the ligament and purify the sanctified knee joint, which has become diseased in the soil (or body). This sentence likely refers to a medical practice from medieval times where healers would physically address injuries or deformities they believed were caused by imbalances of
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary for the patient to use chain mail (fierce steel), but rather so that it does not return to its urinary bladder home; and if you remove this outside item, then the cord returns to its place in the body and recovers itself. This line likely discusses a treatment method where an external object—possibly used for binding or support—is removed carefully when treating conditions related to organs like the urinary bladder so that it can return naturally without causing further issues.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary for you to lift the foot from undernethy (patient's leg), raise their thigh to the parts below or return must be done and take back your handful of earth that we have spoken about before.
Capitol .lxi.	The text provided seems to be from an old medical treatise with archaic
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	From the stone of women (referring possibly to a gynecological context). This line suggests that something is being extracted, potentially referring
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in the womb; few are produced/generated therein. Here it implies discussing osteochondromas or other bony formations within a
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	May stone also be present in any of them; it'sintricate to heal (the condition), and is forbidden for those who are foolish/irrational. This suggests that not only can stones form within a woman, as implied by "peyra de las femnas," but their treatment might pose difficulties if present ("mays si ve peyra") and should be
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is the woman who lives very far (distance). In this context, it seems to suggest a particular case where distance plays a crucial role in diagnosis or treatment
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second is that you cannot find a woman who knows how to remove it (the condition) when the doctor lays on her or if she belongs to those women with small minds/feelings ("o es de les femnas haventz marits"). This line appears to convey two key points: first, there may be cases where not even proximity allows for intervention—meanfalteringly by a skilled practition
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The tender one is that you do not have women who know this art (knowledge or skill), mostly in operation/surgery (ma). Here it indicates a shortage of expertise among female practitioners for handling such conditions ("La tersa es quar tu no hat
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the location of the stone in a woman's body (the stones being metaphorically referred to as 'peyra') exceeds the area where it needs to be extracted ('es longinc del loc de la peyra'), necessitating preliminary procedures, and therein lies danger ("en aquela es temor"). This suggests that removal of such a stone may require more complex or risky surgical interventions due to its location.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to cause them to go downwards (to treat the condition), then take hold of a female medical student'dictor and do so gently without causing discomfort.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Might you lack that which is needed, seek out a skilled midwife or woman present in the field of women' diseases for participation; this person shall join your division as specified herein.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do that which you present now, and command the patient to hold all of what you have directed towards their bellybutton'dictum; this causes concern if a woman is virginal or desires entrance into her private parts in his/her lower abdomen – observe accordingly.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you have bruised it, strike that spot immediately and command your patient to lie down on top of that (the injured area).
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not a vein, then the matron commands that her duty be inserted into the cavity of the womb and placed on the breast, so she rests her left hand over the bladder, and obtains such good medicinal preparation.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if you have bruised it, then cover that which is gradually worsening from the urinary bladder to the parts of departure as soon as possible until reaching its exit at the entrance of the flank so that nothing comes out there.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Here comes the line to translate: And if that portion is scant at mealtime; and place your hand over it as much as you know it has been dislocated from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	Be aware that the stones of pepper are movements: some few and large (like a lion), sharp (asp) and long (like a snake or round stone), with ridges/peaks.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you understand how many spices are needed for what I am indicating about this that will come.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see outflow of bile, adjust in the glass vessel thrice set and stay there an hour until it's evacuated, then return to your operation while the fat is discharged.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Prepare now for your instruments that are used in extracting stones from men' extrication will ensure you can assist them effectively during this operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see a flow of phlegm and know that its expulsion is due to the internal urine being unclearly seen (likely referring to kidney problems or uremia), then pause over the location, spreading salt on the spot and relieving congestion with gentle patting. Do not continue walking; rest there instead, which may lead to the resolution of the illness.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Return care for the child. (This line is directly translated without breaking down into individual words
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the sharpness of the sick fades with each day'0sunrise, your location will be restored; this is when you return to continue your work until the patient has fully recovered. (This translation maintains medieval terminology and context where possible while rendering it into modern English.)
Capitol lxii.	Capitol LXII: This indicates that what follows is part of a
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About the section on hernia protrusion (This label suggests an organized content within a larger document or
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not merely an accumulation of moisture within the white circle which contains semen from the testicles and it's called a cyst (This translation interprets what appears to be descriptions or understandings related to hernias, potentially referring to hydrocele in modern terms).
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Some remarks are on the panniculus (a layer of subcutaneous fat) within which nature prepares itself in semen's portion; here we have already mentioned it before and this is not where another sperm resides—it remains solid or hard, as stated previously. (This translation explains a concept likely related to male reproductive anatomy from the perspective of medieval medical understanding.)
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to suppuration within the testicles causing them pain; thus these secretions are released from those areas and some may be caused by direct puncturing (Here, a medieval medical explanation for conditions possibly related to epididymitis or other inflammatory processes involving seminal fluid release through induced discomfort).
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has movements, whether the color of it or turning to lemon-colored (citrine) or blood red (sanguinea), or black dregs (feculenta), or white foam (aqua). It is what may occur.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And for the joints where it has been said this water addition is present: if in the cistern that we have mentioned before (the white basin), then exacerbation occurs during a long bath with its shape of hollow, and appearance of genitalia emerges; because moisture from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the patient' extranodular membrane (the lining of the body cavity), then there appears an abscess, and thus he considers it another body part affected.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If there is moisture between the navel and the white line (the linea alba), then touch gently with one' extrication tool or two separate tools – for this area has more parts than others to be treated separately, holding their hands in the process.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to learn about the color of humidity, look at the moisture that has entered where it preceded its form; and as soon as this is felt in the place of entry, observe for which type of wetness it was introduced from your body.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the treatment of him/her who is suffering from gout (malaltie), if it's possible for you to eat something that will relieve their excess fluid condition (hydrops or edema), then apply pressure on his/her abdomen.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When it is necessary for his upper body (probably meaning above waist) to rest on any cause due to weakness or slight movement and immediately pause cloth movements:
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Place yourself on the patient's left side and command the servant to follow you on their right side, where they extend one hand (their staff or baton) two palms wide from between the chest and waistbone down to the lower part of the stomach.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	When applying pressure with arsenic and dividing the neck of the vertebrae within its length through the prefrontal area,
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And when pain occurs in the second segment distantly from the line that should be between the thighs and buttocks, it reaches the chest cavity where a white compressed can is perceived to come.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and observe it carefully so you do not re-injure it; your excision should be as gentle as possible while closely monitoring the area in accordance with what is feasible for treatment.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Through proper puncture of the bladder with water, and by draining all the water out completely.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Return the membrane between their labia of that section which is cut and stretched outwards; extend your fingers to those parts above (or beyond); do not touch the udders with your fingers, and insert your fingers into that manner as much as you are able.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the instruments progression through that part of your spine during surgery time occurs, when you have completed the section with cauterization, return those tools to their place and adjust the lips of the wound in the knee joints where sutures are made; take care of it as if handling other livestthy (servants/tools), so that heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have corrupted the humors through another illness, then place those vessels where it causes discomfort and remove the humor from there; take care of that which we mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May if water is added to any parts of the body, you will understand that these are hernias; therefore examine that part wherein you have felt elsewhere in the abdomen; and if it appears an operation must be performed there, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Return the snake to its sections, submerged in oil or rotten oil. Place another wool soaked in wine and oil that you have immersed above; spread it over two belts of your waist and chest (the abdomen), then pause under double folded sheets and pillows, lacing them together as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and lay two drapes with woolen fringes in this manner; and they are bandages on the extremities which you must secure tightly or wet wool, arranged along the waistband of their pants, one leg fetter within them, another thong at the crotch area, two limbs each over a hip joint, with all straps properly adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases this hernia is artificially reduced at the site of dissection with a fine cautery instrument held undernethyne line; and it so happens that you grasp such thin cautery instruments, placing them along the linea of the intestine, where there appears to be discovered white phlegm containing water. And then hold this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Through this opening in that joint of his body, it is kindled and all the moisture inside gets evaporated.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Here you extend the chisels sharpened, and scrape with small sharp instruments, scraping precisely where necessary until everything is eliminated within your reach—and keep yourself away from the flame of the hearth so that it does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Be aware that this operation is saving and prolonging the flow of blood, better than an incision (operation).
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If at the time of scraping or treatment you cause an abscess to form due to your action (causing inflammation), as soon as that happens which is in line with what has been said here, attend immediately to it for healing purposes.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient'thy groin is painful and you fear that another operation due to its horror, administer a puncture as I recommend; when confirmed by what we have said about signs, it shows that this hernia is spilling out.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you have opened the space in the patient'thy thighs (perhaps for a procedure), pierce through the abscess at its lower part on the back of his/her spine, and stop the puncture according to the length required by the situation.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	When I have opened a wide space where water flows throughout.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return your pace over the place of containment and hold that one here while holding another there, to prevent him from falling into water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which is within so that it may be healed. (This translation attempts to maintain as much of the original text'dict syntax and vocabulary structure
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Return that which is within so that it may be healed: and if you pierce through the water at this time of day, then such water isn't pain but rather creates contradiction in the body of the patient wherein the bathing prohibits medical treatment from taking place; provided only when a small object has been inserted into the patient for extraction. (This translation attempts to maintain as much of the original textdict syntax and vocabulary structure, while also trying to convey the meaning based on medieval medical practices.)
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You understand that water returns and is reintroduced after several months or at those times when the malady has passed its days; as it's added back in accordance with the medical approach of treatment, wherein once permeated, lethem will pass through according to this method. (This translation reflects an understanding that water may be used therapeutically and is returned at intervals or when symptoms diminish.)
Capitol .lxiii.	In this translation of what appears to be excerpts from an old medical treatise with
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	The provided text seems like a mix between Latin and possibly local dialects or shorthand, which makes it difficult without additional context to provide precise translations. However, I can
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Understanding that in this section about the carnal hernia, people fear loss at large movements; thus it is seen by me as best to release and be saved thereby.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	When remembering the operation in that place and with those instruments.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Thus, say that the effusion occurs in the joints where muscles are attached and they swell up due to either acute excess or impact: from which seeps out into the muscles, or is caused by a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The translation of each line from medieval medical treatise into English is as follows:
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When it is loose (probably meaning "detached" or "loose"), its color darkened and not centered in place.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May it be known that when inflammation of the joints occurs, they are perceived as a sign of apoplexy (stroke) and should not touch them upon compression of these swellings with such objects; and this knowledge is understood by everyone.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is felt due to inflammation of a vein not be dispersed anywhere else, should compression occur at these points.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the humors have become those congealed meats, then when you extract them and introduce their essence back into it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an attachment within any cause of the spleen or between the liver and gallbladder stones, then you must release that entire attachment completely by means of enucleation (inspection).
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the origin of flesh in the place behind is what you have inserted herein (from your body), and withdraw with us as we previously had done.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, fill the woolen padding with oil and wine; then carefully ensure that it takes care of itself to heal properly.
Capitol .lxiv.	The provided line does not contain enough contextual information or content for translation into English
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Given that this phrase appears in the context of medieval medical practices and involves a treatment, it seems to refer to an intervention related to treating
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The provided text describes the treatment of what appears to be an inguinal hernia:  
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness there is concern for what has come before, remembering it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	Despite what we say about that second which I inflicted upon you in your place, here is an English translation line by line:
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	When you say that the swelling of the male organ is on an elevated cushion; and properly position the suspenders (belt) around the parts just below it; hold your penis between your legs with those other servants, stretching them firmly as instructed.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Return the ligament or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from protruding through where you have passed across in the middle of the vessels within which they've been discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Expose all parts that we have removed during extraction from the forge, where these are placed in their respective chapters (temples).
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Here comes the line to translate: E propici in quella dove è il ferro doppio nel quale sia fido, e li mettere nell'inizio del luogo dove si accidono vitto, e lo mettere altrove alla fine di quelli stessi.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Return those into the warm place for seven sections according to length of body, and remove what is added from fresh and decomposed fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return care for the worm in caring for other diseases caused by which drops do not nourish two of their descendants; it is not bad when they come.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If you inject vinegar into all the vessels, it is necessary that their testicles are extracted or removed as far away from them as possible to prevent nutrition for these organs and make sure they do not benefit (i.dict grow), so they remain starved and devoid of nourishment conducive to growth within those vessels.
Capitol .lxv.	The provided text appears as if it were from an old medical document or manuscript due to its
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Based on this Latin-derived phrase, we can infer that the subject is about treating intestinal pro
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The arrival of this hernia occurs because certain threads or cords from within the stomach's cavity extend outwards over its surface as if they are unraveling, leading to protrusions beyond these extensions nearer towards our hands—the external indicators we touch. This description suggests that a physician is observing an intestinal hernia where internal structures have become noticeable through the abdominal wall ("ventre of part dels angunars del mirac"). The use of such imagery reflects medieval medical understanding, which often relied on analogies with familiar objects and experiences
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture comes either from within the cavity or due to external influences such as concussion (shaking), thrusting force, loud noise exposure, heavy lifting ("elevatio"), or seemingly supernatural phenomena—all potential reasons for why these threads are unraveling and causing a protrusion that can be felt externally. The mention of diverse causes highlights the medieval physician's attempt to understand all possible factors leading up to an individual’se condition, even considering what they might regard as extraordinary or mystical influences ("clamor" suggesting loud noise exposure; "similitudes", implying resemblances that could be interpreted within their medical lex
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this condition—when caused by straining or excessive exertion on the abdominal cavity ("ciphac") —is that it seldom causes sudden severe pain and does not suddenly become excruciating; instead, mild to moderate discomfort persists for a long time. The physician advises applying pressure inside (entro ves le preon) the belly button area near where one pressures on the hernia ("comprem le ciphac"), suggesting that this external intervention might help manage and possibly reduce pain related to such unraveling within, hinting at a form of manual treatment or self-care
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the patient' extrication occurs through one of its sections, it happens forcefully; and different symptoms appear on their protruded pubis as if bandaged thereon (which is where they are), and for intestine extraction takes place herein, causing issues in various parts from which this section originates.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes a prolapse of the intestine is withdrathyre at its covering (the peritoneum), and this condition is called intestinal hernia hereinbelow.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In treating this illness with its spices we fear the extraction therein; so avoid it in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is at all possible that from that hole more may come out,
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And return that instrument for scraping the hardened white chips of semen to where it has been discovered in the tailbone' extruded portion.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the testicle into this water that they put it in between white sacks (the scrotum), and under these two bags (between the bladder and the penis), freeing whatever adhesion is present behind the organ,
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Return the testicles to their parts in the pelvis, and extend your white cautery on their left side, raise it up into the part of the scrotum; command the minister to stretch the organ outwards herein, dissolve what is behind (the obstruction).
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	E seeks at these joints where there is not any cause of swelling within the white membrane encasing them.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause within them (the body), then immediately remove it from their belly quickly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here, the translation line by line into English would be:
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	When the other cord follows through the first loop around three days from now (and holds it in place), and traces out all of the circumference according to its size, hold on to it for a while; this maintains pressure on the area.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return incisions are made at intervals on the part of the scrotum by which health and sickness flow, as we have recommended herein what has been said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And administer the wool soaked in oil; and apply it to dirt (and some white cauterization has been applied here, which we have prepared for them due to fear of fluid discharge from their sore joints – these movements often cause pain), and let the thread go inside that by itself may fall off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the water drainage is delayed, then it will be unclogged with a catheter, and placed over where it falls as soon as we have discussed this matter.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the maid is with respect to the other cure of the diseases within which she has been healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript with archaic language usage that
De hernia ventosa.	Translation of "Capitol .lxvi." into English, considering
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this situation with the belly-button (umbilicus) related to a venturesome hernia ("herniating sac"), none has been shown daring enough that they could fix it themselves ("am fer" refers to self-treatment or attempted repair).  
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	In the first days they said that you fell ill because of something we recommend for this hernia which is above your navel (umbilicus); thus place the cords around where it becomes easily accessible; and secure dry in its location with traps to catch whatever causes the ailment there, doing so until those bands come down.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when it is time for care according to what we have said that it should be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	The text provided seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing certain conditions
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	When joint pain occurs in the knees (anguinis).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some days later a tear in the joints occurs with us here presenting it; identify and address (the location).
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Ne do not let any cause from the intestines enter into the intestines; if they did, it is scarce (only a little), and return to their cavity at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time of water extends, it is adjusted that when opening and closing within the coccyx; with its extenuation in the angle where we have mentioned beforehand (indicating a specific painful area previously discussed), this causes extension of the coccyx. With such application, you soften not only the location being probed but also your hands holding them.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of him is with pointed cautery as it was preceding his accounting for him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here are the translations line by line:
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Return strength to the white phylactery that is found within the cleft of the throat,
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	When applying pressure over and stopping it at that prominent place of the chest where there is excess (humor), apply gentle touch here and press down upon the abdomen'thy location.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	When you bind together both locations on the surface of the limb' extrremity with its joint (presumably referring to an area near a knee or elbow), adjust one binding from these two for proper alignment and healing.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Return the limb to its position, and do not insert into or extend beyond the coccyx in totality; nor should any other cause enter while you seek treatment for an intestinal protrusion (hernia).
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Here's the translation of each line:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And in this place, it is better for health if placed properly with the pointed cautery.
Capitol .lxviii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing symptoms
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Regarding the soothing of the scrotum." (This translation attempts to convey that there is content or discussion about treatment methods for relieving
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Regarding the gentle easing of the scrotum in men," it is said that this process involves softening between these bones (referring to structures within or related to the male genital area) and mindful observation, implying a holistic approach combining physical care with attention. However, please note that medieval medical terminology may not perfectly align with modern English terms due to changes in language over time. The translation attempts to preserve meaning while translating complex concepts into contemporary understanding:
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Now it is necessary for that which assists in the patient' extrusion of their urinary bladder according to its two joints, and encloses completely the cushioning part whereby it has been softened; also adjust your lips around the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, in the meal there is an excess of softened bowel material that has been cooked three or four times and which we have secured with stitches.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return your instrument between the stitches, and take care for the healing of other diseases within so that the fields (body) may recover healthily.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol .lxix. (The provided text does not include a clear 
De castracio.	In this context, it seems like there might be an attempt
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	In this context: Capitol .lxix. (It appears there may have been an attempt to quote or reference "Capitol" at section lxxix in Latin legal texts where castration is considered forbidden, except for specific reasons which might require remembrance of the law; only when needed should we think about castractions on other animals as well—if necessary even including horses and donkeys just like mules. Here's a possible translation line by line:
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	So it is said that gonorrhea affects in two ways: either through withdrawal or due to an opening of the section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When it is caused by suction, the way of treatment is to submerge the beast in tail within which its kidnegy are softened and made limp so that they hang downwards.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return those who are inside you into your hand so that they do not appear suddenly during touching.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May joint pain occur because of a crack or breakage, when you hold the beast and press on the scrotum'dictates to its left side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Return the belt or support device and press upon each part within which two legs pass through it.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those pus that you have caused within them.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not place anything on these of the cisternal cause, but rather under them where they are over the waters.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This malady of castration is better than what happens when impotence occurs due to the outflow being forcefully strong enough that a beast wants to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Here applies care for what is inside that has been healed.
Capitol .lxx.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise written
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	From the treatment of hermaphroditism (also known as intersex conditions). The term "hermafro
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodismia in men is described here as two ways: one where it appears that semen fills the space within the scrotum (where sperm develops), and another where there'dictor inside, between the testicles—a structure resembling a female with hair.  
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some of that flow from the organ in which semen is stored enters into the area where it resides, such as when an imbalance occurs within this space due to various factors (implying a disruption or disease affecting the re
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 In the female body, it is considered special: because that content of woman over her pelvis area comes from two little homes (the ovaries) with only a small amount at any given time and when replenished quickly as if filling up twice simultaneously using men's bodies.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure consists of three kinds: two from men and one specific for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And that you insert those stones adjusted inside where they escape from there, and treat those other diseases as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men where semen is produced in the area of the cords (testicles), neither treatment nor operation takes place there.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: (This line appears incomplete or out of context
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	From slowing down and flesh manifestation in women, due to reasons that are not specified here. This sentence is likely from a medical perspective during the medieval period when Latin was commonly used by
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	From lentigo naturally adjusted due to causes within which it is aggrasht and examined by look; and some measures are magnified in certain women until they spread during sex, as with men. This line suggests that there were particular self-care or health practices considered natural for treating skin conditions like age spots (lentigo) among medieval medical texts. The reference to its progression during sexual intercourse hints at a belief that lentigines could worsen under certain physiological states, thus requiring attentive observation and possibly specific care routines in women as it does for men—a reflection of the gendered approach often found within historical medicine regarding bodily functions.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, when you have an excess of freckles (presumably being a metaphor for other skin imperfections as well), take it from your hand or between fingers and place them in water; this suggests the practice within medieval medicine where certain skincare remedies involved physically removing perceived
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Therefore do not put them into the opening (which could refer to a body orifice), mainly in front of thorns (possibly referring metaphorically to something harmful like venomous creatures); thus preventing their flow, which may allude to stopping bleeding. This line indicates that medieval practitioners believed certain
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary for care of the diseases within what has been healed, take proper measures; this implies an emphasis on continued observation and possibly further treatment after initial recovery from a disease in medieval medicine texts
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May unborn flesh is the meat that does not enter within there where it fills up and overflows its place (and according to this likeness of a rope), so called "malady in feet"; therefore, we must observe how they come into being slowly, and treat them while cured.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol LXXII. (Note: The original text seems incomplete or unclear as
De curacio de alratica.	The phrase "de curacio de alratica" appears to be a fragment and doesn
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 The incomplete sentence translates as: "Artritis is when the woman's joint has not been pierced or if it’ extruded small." This fragment suggests a medical context where there might be concern about an injury to a female patient's joint,
E es o natural o accidental.	 The phrase "es o natural ou accidental" translates as: "It is either
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 The translation for this line reads: "It's accidental if there has been an illness preceding it; and that is due to underfed or improperly spiced meat, or subtle worm." In a medical context from the medieval treatise, these lines indicate potential causes of joint pain being attributed either to prior sickness (such as infection) or dietary factors like
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 The translation of this line is: "It's a result from the mother before birth, or in her clothes/bodily parts and pus rising within it; and forbidden are drains and evacuation methods as well as child-tending." Herein lies advice on how certain practices (draining fluids internally) might exacerbate conditions like joint pain which the medieval physicians believed could be caused by these sources.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If it is for some subtle sign or in their mouths' sores that you come here seeking help (oppilacio), then I am suitable to alleviate these pains and tear apart what obstructs them, with my touch upon the cleft of your lips.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied over the sores on the lips and takes pause at the teeth of those more in pain,
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is on her two legs, with extended thighs, and place your hand inside so that the subtle knife can be cut off and the pillage be removed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	May it be that if the scab is large and thick, you must insert either a linen sponge or walnut husk into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May it be for flesh (meat), then suspend that one on a cushion, and incise into that area.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	When you have the remedies that stop the flow of pus, apply them when they are in their infusion state, and with blood from serpents, bones, adjust honeydew scales accordingly.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And administer a broad iron rod for that dirt (impurities) may not be solidified by the ligature.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	When that tongue is moistened with water for several days and administered medicine by it,
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And once it is healed by other forms of convalescence within which they recover,
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some pains in the breast at birth of others, and it happens according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for apoplexy (stroke or brain injury), the one in which occurs not contrary to any particular movement, this should be noted as well.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	From the provided Latin-like text, it seems to be about treating hemorrhoids and ulcers on women's anus ("le conh" likely refers here as "the anal area"). Here is a possible translation into English:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: From those places where blood flows through orifices, there continue constantly leaking arteries and thus pains arise (levis).
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And in the division of those things and their senses, I have directed these that receive care to them and these that do not receive it.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So say that hemorrhoids and varicose veins do not appear in the month of May without feeling them, there is no cure using iron for such cases.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those that are on which mother caresses have their sensations there and thus they heal themselves.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in moist and warm cloth or rough fabric, and dress those areas with these clothes, do so carefully.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return powder on those that come from one of your ingested sharp objects, like bitternthy or similar things, as they remind you of them when applied.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into shoes for an hour, and pause them in cool water afterwards.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, they will form a mass in sweating and excretion from mercury, gold, and similars;
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Return bread and honey, mixing it with water; apply this paste on the two of them (presumably referring to parts of a patient's body).
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction has detached itself (meaning if there is an abscess or infection that requires drainage), apply oil and massage it between the two breaths; otherwise, perform friction on the breasts as well as scraping them off.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return wool and immerse that which is extracted from honey or pomegranate syrup, allowing it to stick to the location; also ensure care for the area covered with oil while healing occurs.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request what is necessary for strict observation, so that you can note down the details of what I have mentioned earlier in this letter.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that within which has been healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	When interpreting the line "De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre," it suggests that we are dealing with an excerpt related to
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The line "De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre" translates to:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already mentioned these illnesses and their respective remedies in the division of them.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And when you consider that the pain from the abscess in their abdomen is sharp and accompanied by pus and fever, do not press on it if your hand feels its sensation; sometimes apply pressure to alleviate what helps inside while waiting for the acuteness of accidents to cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Evening when you place the woman on a cushion that has been given to her; recline their backs and adjust their weights gently towards the abdomen portion of the belly, expand their hips slightly, pause their breasts momentarily at intervals according to necessity.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you intend to administer this tool against the head of a woman'thy master and lord (possibly referring to medical instruments or treatments), only what is in her crown, along with her vagina, should enter through it; nothing else may do so from your instrument.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	May it be that the tool is greater than the patient'dict size, then you must pause pills on the texture of the patient's thigh to prevent the entire apparatus from entering the patient'sdict.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Even when you pause the flow that runs down below in the instrument of lye and hold it with your fingers, while making sure to prevent overflow from the soap water (the mixture), turn over what has collected inside using a tool within reach or as directed by the midwife.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and it touches the mind and body (the liver and spleen), then cover that which you are applying to its head with a layer of steel asphaltum (a type of metal compound used for bandaging).
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the illness is cured, then you should pause in a muddy or greenish oil bath where there might be any secretions; and place your hands on the chest section of the belly before it becomes hot from fever (the heat).
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause firmly above the breast and upon the pendulous linen cleaned in water, where they are boiled:
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it is cured in two days with wax that has been brought back into where it was sick, when the patient shall be healed by then.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the patient has been thrown into the chamber and you are forbidden from their care as of now, they have water that was discussed in our division; take it for their healing at this time.
Capitol .lxxv.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating Middle Aged or Medieval Latin-
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	This sentence can be translated into English as: "The midwives teach the embryos their medicine when they are not in a natural state." Here, 'ensenhar' refers to teaching or instructing, 'matronas' means nurses (midwives specifically), 'bius' is an old term for infants or b
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The sentence in English would be: "There is a need for the midwife to understand and observe pregnancy as natural gestation by means of her senses; when she touches parts at various times, wishing to smell the air above it on this condition that over it lies what constitutes part-time or secondary natural birth. Thereafter rush treatment immediately for the fetus within you (the woman), noticing which position is most suitable as per her knowledge—it's typically an appropriate time and place in a sitting posture, with the second attendant either suspended from above on their belly.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you lift those limbs, ensure that the patient's belly is compressed for them so they can bear their head without discomfort; at this time, give them a second one (possibly another type of support or remedy), and cleanse away any excess humors beneficial to purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is not natural and uncontrollable occur when you are seized upon your feet and the body of yourself comes before your head, and also on top of your chest or undernethy/your abdomen, turning over onto oneself like one's own figures cannot be controlled.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary is it for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, so that she may guard against error and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When showing his entire figure therein and where he stands in it is evident for water (humors), thus indicating its significance over the waters within him.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the foot is on its head naturally, it hurts a lot in that part and sometimes becomes weakened; at those times, apply this dressing which women hold onto their bodies, consisting of fenugreek seeds and honey from olive oil mixed with these impurities.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the metronome between your thighs and at their fissures in that location where it holds water, which is its moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press down on the woman'dict belly until she delivers the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not done so already, then the woman needs to be covered with mucilage of flax and fennel thickened (thickened).
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "Appoint it (the patient), apply heat and make that swelling cease; hold its mouth and nose herein for an hour until the foreign body is expelled through the orifice.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the greater parts of the body have been cut off and brought to the common table (likely referring to surgical procedures), then it is necessary that you gradually reduce those pieces back together, piece by small piece.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not obey the interior (meaning to follow medical advice or treatment), then rest her on a couch and lift the feet off of it, positioning the couch over the earth; thus keeping her from falling due to weakness caused by intervention/treatthy.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the masses are not turned inwards and rotated towards you while on your lap clothed (referring to examination position), then examine those areas carefully and remove whatever obstruction from within the fetus or womb is present, which will be found by probing further.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From childhood over their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on their feet, you push them downwards and make it small again, then warm up that part of it, holding your hand to bend that little one over there (the baby), making those tiny ones stretch slightly.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he enters the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make that protrusion conforming with his condition; provided God wills it so.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no opening in the water that we have treated with salt (indicating treatment), then return the fetus gradually within while pausing at each second natural figure, until such time as this opens and allows for drainage/purification.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited that some of the fluid has been removed too much by treatment, then take up muslin from above and dissolved rubber, and crush them all in the mortar for good grinding, apply lines to the fluids contained within the woman' extramural pus.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Return that part in water immersion, so as to obtain relief from flatulence.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts of him are liquefied and become fluidic due to smoking (presumably belladonna), apply it under the nose and below that area, holding his hands.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you submerge them in the fumigation for an hour, then place your hand on their chest and extend the sternudar (possibly referring to some external body part used here), remove it from there, and press downwards into the lower abdomen with a pressing technique that causes tightening or compression.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eye examination of her body' extrinsic muscles (and).
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you engage them little by little; and place the woman firmly on her back, with their feet bent upward, and those items resting on the bed, holding onto their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the belly is not protruding (meaning abdomen), then take your patient'dict feet and press them firmly, gradually applying pressure on their lower ribs until the stomach settles into place underneath.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert their hands and gently place the little one into its hole gradually, commanding the woman to express herself within that space which it is set up as a portal/entry point (this interpretation assumes some knowledge of medieval medical terminology).
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eye examination is generally conducted with one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When it is reduced in her body, if you cannot perform that reduction yourself, then lift the woman and carry her to where she can be made comfortable again.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it cannot be done otherwise, lay the patient on their back and press down firmly on their hips, causing them to convulse violently, and administer ligaments as recommended by poultices (or medicated compresses).
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has come, then they will apply that same cautery on the bedpost (possibly referring to pain relief during labor), and study how best to reduce the belly, making the female form its second natural shape again after birth, causing it to contract and instructing her to breatse through what is now open.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Eye salve for expanded belly and its flesh is at two from her mother' extrusion of pregnancy-related bloating or abdomen expansion, commonly experienced during late stages of gestation or after childbirth in medieval times when medical terminology was not as refined. In English: "A cure sal
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Here comes another sentence to translate within the context of medieval medicine and childbirth: "The midwife holds her hand on the belly and gradually turns that small one over, making it easier." In English, this can be interpreted as follows: The attending nurse or assistant (midwife) applies pressure with their hands upon the expectant
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is necessary for as many people to participate in an examination or treatment process related to childbirth care provided by a midwife, they rest their hands upon the patient's chest while applying oil and liniments recommended during this time of need: In English - "Whenever there are enough assistants present, we place our hands on her chest where olive oil and mucil
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	This sentence describes the process of applying warm compresses to address discomfort or swelling in medieval medical practice: "Commands her who is experiencing mild fever, and when she applies it (the oil), directs that same person over a small cloth pillow laid flat on their chest; commands them furthermore to elevate this position vertically. She instructs the individual so they will stir restlessly." In English: "Direct her who is suffering from mild fever, and when she applies olive oil (or another remedy), direct that person onto a small cloth pillow placed flat on their chest; furthermore order them to raise this position vertically. She instructs the individual so they will rest uneasily.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exitus fetus prepared over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the queen exhales her breath in this manner, consider that you have entered the second stage and your nail is within where it can be expelled of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is hanging on the face and chest of it (referring to a pregnant individual), then you will incisor that part which belongs to the umbilicus, ensuring that it does not remain suspended or stagnate.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And employs the fet (the patient) in their divisions within which they pause that second one where rests a cove (an abnormal growth or tumor), and sends the woman charged with caring for them, if God will permit it, away for treatment.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that limbs move naturally without effort, and occasionally three or four times a day they may turn strange and twitch involuntarily; perhaps it is due to external causes of nature, which are beyond our control as living beings.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	With these things in mind, even if they are swolthy and a second assistant is present, separated by fingers (thumbs), we separate the intestines from each other within their belly button's navel for natural healing purposes at some visits to our clinic. Here it translates line-by-line into English as follows:
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult for them to bear their childbearing and come upon us as we have described the non-natural figures, then attend to these difficulties accordingly.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is subtle and skilled in using water (presumably referring to techniques for easing labor), providing ease and delicacy, and delay as needed according to how she has prepared herself mentally or spiritually for childbirth; then her assistance will contribute entirely to deliverance.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what formed within the womb and was aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some pregnancies occur in the month of May one to six and seven or even ten times over, and I must verify whether a woman has had five abortions herein, another having thirteen such occurrences causing pain as measured by your distinguished scholars.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxxvi.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from what seems like a medieval medical manuscript
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When extracting the fetus upon death, it translates in English as: "Upon extraction of
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus (fet), what we have discussed in medicine and without failing, use a wax sealing to cover it; provided that the woman is healthy and not prone to accidents causing loss of purity over her body.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying down on her back and her head tilts forward along with lifted thighs and hips.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister takes hold of that limb or the one bound to its place, so that the body does not extend further and necessitating removal from the womb (extraction).
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Return yourself (or someone else) moistened the mother's mouth with honey and hoarse secretions of aloe and fennel, and sesame seeds belonging to her.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Here is the line by line translation:
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Where convenient in water: therefore consider whether the fetus is prepared for it, and have your fingers pressed into its head, or on the chest, or under the tongue (or mouth), or palate, or atop jaws/cheeks, or over backbone regions, as desired.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	May it be about his feet'dict that he feels pain in either on the leg or between the back and shoulder blades?
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place your hand on their chest (or another one if necessary), to hold the tongue down and prevent it from being extended too far outward alone according to its own tendency.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And if it is necessary throughout the entire body for purgation, then such treatment shall be applied as in a toothache so that expulsion from within can occur naturally.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the body has been torn apart, then have them entered into the place where it was pierced; and thus let everything back inside the body that had been torn out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	May it be an inflammation on the other side as well, and not possible to reduce that with the compression of this; take out that which is inside it so that everything comes out in total recovery, and examine or incise that within wherever that may occur either at the juncture of the ma (the thigh) or at the hollows.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	When you cover in this manner both feet (meaning applying some sort of treatment or covering over each foot), it suggests that such action is being taken, likely as a therapethy measure for joint pain caused by cold hum
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When the head of the fet is large, or there are acute pains in it at home (in other words, when you experience severe pain within yourself), and if water balancing on top of your skull becomes necessary – that means applying pressure between the spinous processes bones and opening up the gap where the blood collects underneath – then insert or apply something called "alundat," which comes in forms similar to other instruments used here, appropriate for this situation.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Here the patient appears to have great strength by nature: and when this excess humidity is introduced into him, it inflates that part as we discussed earlier today with drinks; furthermore, extract from his bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is sick and compressed by the sternum, then its moisture which is in the chest has been discharged.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	May it not be complicated, nor should you eat at this time, so proceed with treatment of the head as soon as is within your power.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there is an opening in the stomach or it' extruded, then you must pierce that which contains the moisture within.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	May it be on their feet, then the attraction of you is light and your direction towards the mouth of my belly also gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the belly and chest have been pierced, it is necessary to remove that which covers your hand currently, so you can open them while allowing fluid (presumably representing blood or other bodily fluids) to flow out within these areas where they are located.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May it happen that the other limbs are elevated and return to the head; if the mouth of the woman is open wide, place your hand inside her lower part before reaching for the breast'dictate (assuming "preon de layre" refers to breasts), secure his/her cap with this same hand, draw it inward towards their chest—and insert one or two unguis herein; now grasp these fingers and pull them back into her mouth.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted by apatemy that inflicts pain upon it, then do not cover her with you—here comes to manage effusion of causes moist and fatty.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow up with the patient in waters that soothe and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the stone is on the patient's chest, and if it can be done so far, then use this medicine as previously mentioned for the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then be inserted into pillows and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When no cause of secondary origin has been detected.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your treatment, then administer what we have discussed for the care of these hot compresses that are applied by the mother (doctor/healer).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have an excess of black bile flowing, it will descend into the precise and quick streams, where you must administer other treatments.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Occasionally an ulcer appears on his/her extremity; and as it becomes swolthy with pus formation begins to ooze discharge (fluid or viscous substance).
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	When care is called for him/her, and has been provided with medicine for long periods of time, the child has not yet become solidified (or matured).
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And with some strong binding plaster applied for heavy compression, and you massage the bone here (indicate area), then take a day to apply pressure on it again; another time of application is needed there as well; they find this excessive when their abdomen does not contain any bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So then clothe the patient, and extract the stones from their bowels where they are positioned in the sieve spaces, having done so for a long time; correct them with an instrument of bracelet size.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you are not meant to be strangers here, but where there is knowledge and aid that the doctor applies with care for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the tools that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of turning about by which it is turned out that she has entered:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how one becomes entangled in the manner wherein two vitalities are found at the ends of both feet' extrications.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Even though this virtue may be subtle and either painful or related to bone or wooden tools,
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additional measures are inserted into the mother'thy mouth so that they can be taken when you rotate these prescribed ones.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another resembling form of that subtle and painless one:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Such pain is of wood from ebony or ivory according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Even there at the end of it all, two additional measures are added twice each time, and the length of these adds up to a handbreadth, while their height is two fingers high.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish for these ribbons to be held up by the belt lying on their hanging down breasts, where there is already something between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method by which they perform it in old times:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of push that makes it move:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship that he knows which contains his great head (the meaning could be interpreted as a reference to an individual's experience or knowledge in maintaining friendships, possibly alluding to understanding
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	He is assembled with forceps to the extremity where he grasps it repeatedly and occasionally makes long turns using these forceps as if grasping teeth, in accordance with what has been previously inserted and known by him within this instrument. (This sentence suggests a medical procedure involving precise manipulation of tools—possibly for extraction or treatment related to dental issues.)
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of assessment is poor:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an arrow has a point:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an arrow has points:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps by which your teeth grip where the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of thorn has two ends at which the head detaches itself:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spaces in Latin:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Totally these instruments are exercised, and when multiplied species of that thing is prepared as needed on its platform and distributed to the required quantity for each person'suponently this refers to medical procedures where specific tools or ingredients (species) used in a treatment must be precisely measured out before being applied.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not perform any actions on those instruments or their parts unless necessary, for there is no exemption from doing so when required.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the second extraction (assuming 'dextricus' refers to a stage or part of an extracting
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second (or secondary) extract is retained by you must command the patient who holds it back, and instruct them to perform that dislodging movement as directed, placing your hand over their mouth and ears, and if so done correctly, relief will come; for this remedy does.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, take a pebble and pierce through the covert (skin or layer), pause in that burning herb where the mother's mouth is inflamed, apply mustard and rue and chamomile dew and cassia bark and holy basil.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave, and rest upon the focus.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Return your hand inside the mouth of the patient and insert that thumb into where the vomitus enters the cavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Return that joint swelling as it came along with us, and if there is any speed in its return, then apply a quick remedy swiftly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if this remedy is not to be abandoned, then command the maid that places her left hand in sesame oil or millet paste, and insert it into his navel; place therein also what has been recommended for you beforehand, and when found, take out little by little as long as the mother does not forcefully grasp.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Absent when both sides are tender easily - this likely refers to a situation where it is noticeable that, upon gentle pressure, discomfort or pain readily arises on either the right side (dreyt) and left
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Adjust according to the quantity of attachment; it follows rules but avoids sticking on anything - this likely means that one should adjust or modify something based on how much it is attached and ensure they don't cling onto surfaces unnecessarily, possibly referring to a practical method in medicine such as applying less pressure where
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the maiden's mouth is constricted (possibly referring to a throat obstruction), then we have already recommended cupping and medical treatment for her earwax blockage - this suggests that home remedies or alternative treatments like cupping therapy were advised by doctors, likely as non-invasive methods of addressing symptoms caused by excess cerumen (earw
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If it's not clear all the reasons we recommended, take care that you do not dwell on abstraction; however, if what is inside of her mouth lies in the woman’s belly area (possibly referring to a gastrointeststancial issue), and cover/apply this ointment with four remedies; so then purify it daily until dissolution and expulsion occurs - here we delve into an approach where if there is not clarity on what has caused the symptoms, one should refrain from overthinking. If something within her mouth (possibly a foreign object or dental issue) causes discomfort that extends to internal organs metaphorically described as 'belly area,' then specific ointments and remedies are applied four times daily until the problem resolves itself through natural processes, emphasizing careful observation over time rather than immediate invasive intervention.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the humidity is high and it rises to the head and stomach area, then diseases are managed under a smoke atmosphere in an appropriate manner; consequently when medicines have been administered below (under) this method of treatment.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May cold from antique and dried fruits be drawn up under smoke inhalation.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of this tool by which a woman is subjected for retaining menstrual blood and the second individual:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Such pain is of bone or sinew.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the subtle part is stopped under the belly and the large part above the navel, and the moist exhalation is also stopped beneath the breasts,
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	When that tongue is inside which has been consumed by underground fluid and repeat, do so again.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	From childbirth care it does not perforate (the implication is that there's a method or practice used during childbirth which prevents any
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 From the phrasing provided and drawing from medieval medical terminology as well as a bit of contextual interpretation—it seems to refer to childbirth practices that supposedly do not involve piercing or cutting into an area (presumably referring to interventions in perineal tissue). Translating this line while considering the era's medical understanding
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Therefore instruct the midwife that pierces or enters into this cushion (referring likely to a type of support used during childbirth). If she does not perforate it with her tool—whether an acutely pointed instrument like what might be called 'a spatula' in modern terms, which could refer either loosely to various surgical tools or perhaps something more specific and less common for medieval times (like a thin metallic blade)—she
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 Then place it over that linen soaked in wine and oil, applying care to what is inside (this likely refers again to some form of padding or protective covering used during the procedure), within which she should attend diligently. The mentioning of 'wine' possibly alludes to its believed medicinal properties at the time while ‘
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 Perhaps if it is inflamed (indicating concern over potential infection or reaction), she should pause for a day and use an air catheter to relieve pressure; hold off until the child stops fussing, indicating that action might need waiting on after birth symptoms subside. This suggests some understanding of rest periods during treatment which aligns with contemporary midwifery care's emphasis on monitoring patient response post-intervention before
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 And also inoculates the midwife for reassurance concerning childbirth or apostema; therefore direct her to ensure that this consolidation is embedded (which likely refers to administering a form of preventive care, such as exposure therapy with mild pathogens), and make sure she treats it using the same remedies we've discussed for childbirth. This could indicate an era-specific method used by midwives intended to build immunity or address specific infections following birth procedures—drawing parallels, modern medicine sometimes employs
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of those abscesses that come by chance.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Lumps that occur in the lower abdomen and large intestines, which arise from behind or within one of its divisions, so:
E es una fistula o motas.	It is either an opening (fistula) or pressure ulcers (motas).
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that ancient connection is related to the moisture of salty fluid or slight perforation, and some measures are taken from these ulcers:
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those penetrating things make them fearful because they are leaving and due to imbalance of humors; some even suffer from these exits using the exiting fluid, and others fall ill with those very same ones.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	From those fistulas occasionally found within the passageway and entering into the bladder, and from those that enter at the junction of the hernia and its navel; so they are from these sources.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	In the fluid where it is both penetrating and non-penetrating within the anus (the 'cul'), placing your tampon inside ensures that there will be no further rupture when touched, due to either soft or iron wool being placed in the fistula.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that condition, they enter under the subtle attempt of lead or horsehair within which you feel the attempt or hair there too.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that for all of it nor proceed from any cause of indigestion or worms and windiness, as we have said before, then know that it is non-permeable, and thus attend to yourself (for self-care).
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or to the area of the urethra, it signifies that I must treat with urine from there and prevent its ascent so that this place can be made medicine'dictory.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May it penetrate the juncture of the thigh or enter into the bone and cause pain in circulation, then this individual is said here to try entering if not already inside the bone; burning treatment immediately follows; such intervention has no value in medicine nor can it be sealed with wax.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those perforating ulcers there is not healing at once, and the treatment by doctors works hard to strengthen the skin where it has become weakened.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May heal as hoped for when you advise it, and if already begun, continues accordingly to your recommendation, so that nothing is missing in the treatment process.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es que le malaute jagua entre les tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that person feels a malady entering their colon (translation may vary slightly based on interpretation), then immediately insert your tongue into the rectum to prevent it from happening further inwardly.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a thrust in the belly and perceive it as something that wants to penetrate further into your body, be certain that this is indeed penetrating; therefore do not attempt movement therein, for it is neither healthy nor safe when we have discussed these matters.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May those who are healed in stone houses also be healthy at home.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	From the medicine by which you hope to cure them, do you lightly apply (the) delicate flames as before and insert that spark within the fistula until it reaches outside the ulcer; then repeatedly introduce that same fire or three times its amount into all those carved-out veins resembling a feather quill of an ossicle.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If it enters within and does not penetrate deep into the bowel where you are inside (the abdomen), between this lining that is expected to swell with flesh or fluid, creating a fistula on its surface which dries out the peritoneal wall around the opening of the fistula; once it' extricates itself from there via the tract within the fistula and through the tunnel created by it (the tube-like structure formed inside), then sealing is done at that point, freeing you trapped.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Return moisture to those stones that have been clogged by the penis needle and for which there is currently no cause, using the channel of this instrument (the penis needle).
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May it happen that the flow of bile sometimes comes between you and your opponent when inside those stones, then take an instrument to cauterize at the focus or acute medicine; for once these stones are adjusted in place, and bleeding from them is stopped by means of this tool: thus healing occurs for those stones that have been properly aligned.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	In those treatments in which stoppage and execution are involved, when healed again, there is no fear of repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has entered into the belly of the patient and is extended on the surface of their body; then insert your finger therein and examine within this area.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if one hundred times the temptation and between you and it is flesh or meat, then there is an inclination towards penetration; but at this time, not operation in sight herein below rather than trust and hope as a way forward.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause requires administerpective three methods:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And when some purgatives have finished according to this method: it is when you insert the cathartic into the fistula, and it ends up in the belly button area on the skin of the body around the navel and at the edge of the belly, using a needle prepared for treating wounds as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that hood of fields or around those, and attempt to insert the finger within the fistula where it continues (the state of the body),
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May if it penetrates into the margin of the anus prop (deeply), then you extract the foreign object that you have inserted there with your fingers; and remove its tip, adjusting both ends, doing so once a day or twice for up to two days until possibly when you can insert back the extracted pointed end into the flesh where those carnal parts are between the extremities of the finger.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Return care where it has been solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	May if the purge of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way you have prepared for it, but that will only happen before its time and place (meaning when it'dictly needs to be expelled), wherein you shall perform this act. You must do so within which space has been healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine is what causes the fistula to be split: its curvature makes it sharp and the other division not; therefore, there'mightn’t be a need for intervention as often.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows within that cavity.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras," which can be translated as "Diarrhea occurs in two forms." The following part, “quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos,” translates to "which is also between the belly similar to grains" and suggests that diarrhea involves passing substances resembling starchy or grain-like material
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	The given sentence translates as follows: "From those small and large ones, which come from the roasted grains (and are one), they cause motion in the belly and go out to the limbs." This line suggests that whatever substance is being discussed—perhaps a digestive byproduct related to dietary intake of certain foods like grains—triggers movement or discomfort within the abdomen ("motas, e so mota") and affects not only this
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	The translation of this line would be: "Those that come from the belly due to little moisture in a short period of time (humor), which are either citrine water or a continuous drop of essence; these also appear according to the color of one's humors." Here, it implies an understanding of health and disease through imbalance of body fluids ("humsores"), with symptoms manifesting in specific conditions related to hydration levels. The reference to "citrine water" suggests a yellowish discharge that may be
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The translated sentence is: "To cure that which has entered the colon, you must command the humors to settle and express within there where feces appear." In medieval medical texts like this one, it's clear that they believed in balancing bodily fluids (humorism) as a way of treating illness; here specifically pointing towards managing constipation through directing these internal waters. This reflective approach underscubs the historical reliance on understanding and manipulating supposed body humors to restore health
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you knead and stretch those fingers that have been glued together with your nail polish (ungua), applying pressure to their flesh where they hurt.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May it be that the knives are not stuck in those places due to their moisture, and with an iron or a waxed cloth, take out those irons; sprinkle some of these ash flakes on top after inscribing them there for cauterization – as per procedures established beforehand.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Return that same care for what is within it until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the belly does not push out (indicating obstruction or excessive pressure), cris-crush it in the place where there is slight pressing, and wash with that water which is already present in the colon causing expulsion when the belly presses out.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are out of the anus, then their cause is humidity, and you must grasp those with your tongue or fingers, insert them back in there, and take care that they remain inside so that they can heal as stated within which we have discussed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	Here's the translation for each line:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And apply it all over, and do not use that one for the excess of this (blood), to allow its overflow from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand over the belly, wrapped in rosemary oil or cloth; and place that same on the colon and command the humors to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within the box until it heals completely, and when it has mended, take care of those inside with oil or another form of treatment contained therein to ensure their well-bedictition.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treating fistulas (or ulcers). Here is the translation line by line from Latin
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Deliberate walking pains through cracks or because of a natural stone formation. Here's the direct English translation:
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	When such joints are not cured in that medicine and you reason these out as being damp humors within the point of spine or your own blood entering it, preventing its discharge below (potentially referring to pus), and after ensuring they have been consolidated—this is what should be done.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When you hold those powerful rubbing actions that first enter while moisture and friction are made, then ensure these areas have been healed properly.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of care for limbs, this is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You understand that it is tight and not red according to the color of one' extramand on top of a clavicle; pain occurs throughout the body but mainly in the joints of the lower limbs and genitals, and due to these pains you must wear an amender (correction garment or bandage).
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when the fluid has entered at the joint and is present in both bones or tendons, and has been removed from its source within the body, take care of it there.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then cauterize the second that was preceding in his chest.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers sharply protrude on the surface of the body, and recurrent movements come upon children more frequently than others.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	In care of him is that you extend and insert it therein, or what new willingly enter into the place within which they are enclosed.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it out, as we have mentioned before, at the focus or in sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already are eliminated inside and outside with that same tool which you direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May a small furry or thickened spot appear on the surface of the body and when it is crushed, it causes pain throughout the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Here comes the translation:
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, use a silver or iron needle according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here is the line by line translation:
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to burn the flea as mentioned in the burning of the anus, then proceed with it using one of our instruments for cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of course using these instruments to administer poultices.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some of the times it hurts with silver or lead or tin ornaments made by hand and some times with these small and large tools which are used for treating children; when they treat babies' navels hurt, those instruments cause pain to them.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of scab or thinness is:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the downpipe below in which the bag is wide according to this treatment method, and it's positioned at that distance where the bag was previously attached; thus ensuring proper alignment as per tradition.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	Whereas there is a bag in which the poultices of beast'dictum or sheep peel are paused, and its handle is made up of one hand:
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	When pierced by forceful movements as you turn, and if the space between these disrufal spaces is where the large part of it lies, then:
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine forces it out (the humor), take as much as can be poured; and if sleep takes possession of him for all night, he may yet improve in health.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you tighten that within the abdomen of evacuation and its exhalations (likely referring to constipation), then repeat the use of caustics until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is bleeding or ulcers at the bottom of your belly (abdomen), then gently apply pressure with a cloth moistened by urine from the kidnethy stones, which are what children find to be effective for stopping it.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treatment for diseases or sicknesses.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You are already in the division of curing diseases suitable for free individuals, and you declare here how this cure relates to those parts affected and their respective remedies according to compatibility.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it is said that pains are diverse depending on where they originate and how they manifest themselves as the flesh (body).
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	When the causes of movements are humors that come with pebbles or stones in their passage through veins and arteries, or by insertion into spaces between them (such as interstices), or from percussion against bones, or wood pieces, or splinters associated with these movement causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the humors that are present in the body' extrinsic parts – head (cap), chest (col), back (pietz), abdomen (ventre), waist (fitge) – resemble those of the members, and seem similar to worms.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	Even as they recommend some remedies for that reasoning and treatment concerning other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When you eat of simple diseases' humors, when the recollection of complex illnesses comes to feasting time at dinner table,
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore say that when pain occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, you consider: if it' extruded stones or cysts, then press on the occipital region immediately thereafter (and do not delay), extract according to the quantity of its volume, provided no reason prohibits drainage; mainly when that swelling contains pus from an abscess present.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	When it is a fracture of the opposite parts affected, and keep watch over the abdomen to prevent its swelling from food and drinks heavy in nature.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If from meticulous observation you find any cause at all, then the pain will be reduced by lessening food intake and not approaching meat or drinks.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When pressure is applied over soft tissue, if you have caused an abscess to harden by applying heat or in the liquid where it becomes firmly seated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure about the application of cauterization (burning or scraping), then pause over the ground, if it is recent and the dust that was recommended has not yet settled down from its place.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed its quality and become damp or unhealthy, then rest in a warm cloth within which it is said to be healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May it be that the child is large or due to insufficient space and appearance, and if their lips are not properly adjusted with pins as recommended for them, then do so accordingly.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the child is discovered within the bone and thighs, but not restrained by you, then proceed with that care for the child which medicine shall provide; direct the malady to feast on foodstuffs in which it grows fond – capsules and forms of cough syrup as well as similacrum (similar substances) until they are restored within their natural place.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If rot festers in the navel and does not stick to the bone, then cut off all this putrefied substance with water (and) apply it as poultice; be careful of it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases an artery or vein from which blood flows is not severed by medicine, then ask about the artery/vein that has been mentioned; and if you cut it (not seceding), make incision there with a sponge/ligature, especially when what we have said should cause discomfort.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pains are simple and small, then the cause of them is phlegma; apply powder to those places until the air changes that which caused it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The purpose of the poultice is: take one part of pressed oil made from flax seeds, two parts each of dragon's blood and unextinguished coal, crush them together thoroughly, filling this mixture into a container for use while lying on it (covering that object), which then solidifies as needed.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	E apply firmness to that undernethy and thereupon the same, and not on slippery surfaces while she is lying down for it cannot be applied nor set up within her by medicine until healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When one lone applies cauterization alone, it is not when you are in their presence with salt and powder of dragon'thy blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation on the major humors is carried out when it has been stopped there and are straightened, which belong to those souls whose air has not yet changed.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has been altered, and especially in summer, you cannot understand their position here, then take care of those thicker ointments we mentioned earlier, or apply pressure on these powders made from flour mixed with water and honey inside which helps heal; also pay attention to that other remedy while it is being cured.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May you treat a broken bone in the body and it is small, then extract fluid with your hands as directed by movement.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	In English line by line translation of the provided medieval medical text could be as follows:
De las plaguas del col.	From "the humors of the colon
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If you have acid in your chest, there is not a difference in medicine either here or at the head when it'sin simple nature; both are treated similarly.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May the nerves of the colon or artery already be inscribed therein (with cautery), if it is a nerve, not in its location but to prevent treatment with blood that causes violent spasm, as when one takes wormwood and sage for them so they do not touch their nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No pressure is placed on any cause of total madness; for the substance of nerves continues in it, which they place at the top of all limbs themselves.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If the water is what heals with medicinal means, then take some warm or cold oil poured into it and stones rubbed while being washed in hot water (and other pebbles used as per this method), along with ointment for moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the patient is large, apply bandaging or press their lips together and take care that they receive pills until healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	May it be that if the child has depth or softness in their lower body portion where they have been punctured with medicine (possibly referring to an injection), then at this location a purple exudate may form, which is indicative of gout as perforated.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the patient there is an inserted artery and blood flow has been achieved, then separate or dry out that one if necessary to prevent it from entering into water (i.dict: getting wet).
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have already immobilized the vertebrae of the gouty or all, and thus preserved the veins in the colon, then adjust your lips on the spinal column with a suture without touching that; otherwise reduce it back to its natural shape, strengthen it through proper alignment, leave it for some days until healing occurs. Take care so as not to displace or excite entry and exit where there is stitching necessary - this will ensure recovery.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May you if the child already hurts in the bone, then strike that place; and if there are fragments of bone within it, remove all those which you can from them; but if no one is present to assist, let the injured part rest so that it may recover on its own.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If it is a newborn lately, then grind over that powder which has been recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If there is an ulcer in the patient'dict (plaga), then heals that part with the water from which memory will recall it here at his head/throat (capitol).
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From pains of the chest or phantom sensations when it falls between the shoulders and is felt in the space between them, or on the shoulder blade or collarbone, or arm, or breastplate (which they wear for protection).
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is from lance or cottle and the depth varthy encountered, sometimes you must gauge how far into the wound when the patient's abdomen swells due to wind ascending within (perhaps indicating a ruptured intestine), be aware that such internal 'pollution' can lead to death.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If in him there is no depth and the humidity was recent upon his sanctum, then you pause in his chest for the first hour after purification, without straining it so that the sanctum does not remain deep within its cavity and returns to the heart, possibly with a wax-coated pause applied therein; similarly, recline him gently throughout the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at hand, then pause in the bathhouse where water washes away whatever moisture there may be for that which comes out of your body; and make sure gouty fluid rests on the bed to allow it to flow as adjusted within you.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May it be that even from the foulness three days or more have passed without worsening of pain in the waist, nor spasm and ill restlessness of spirit nor rigidity of body; then take the other means available to you, as long as sick person is saved. Now attend carefully both treatments inside that heal him while still suffering.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the sickness of him/her is alleviated and it has been so for some time, then you know that a fistula (an abnormal connection between two body parts) already exists; therefore attend to this issue with your care.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the swelling is due to a gap or tear in skin or cartilage and it's simple on the surface of the chest or thigh, then treat that with water (if large) previously applied after stitching, or powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there is pain before the eye and if your teeth are set apart (separated), then use forceps to extract those teeth now.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them enter that the swab be drawn out from them, as their extraction is expedited.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other unexpected illnesses in the other body parts, their healing is provided by the fluid we have mentioned before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From abdominal illnesses or troubles.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfallibility in your belly is either great or small, or it varies.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great number of movements made by the nerve or spinal cord within it, so that there is an invasion and forceful/subtle union (suture) among them.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When a small disruption occurs due to another'dictory action of them in their place, if you do not remove these individuals from there promptly, then both breast and belly become engorged making it difficult for them to be expelled.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the best resolution is that it becomes easy in this place, although difficult to reduce the hernia here as with those special organs elsewhere mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You understand that there are four methods of treating the abdomen wound, and these stitches may also be used for other ulcers on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other self-made stitches communicate with each other and/already those made within the abdomen'thy purpose is understood hereby:
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you are recommended each one of your explanations and declarations.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So when the child is small and suffers from any cause of the intestine (hernia), it becomes difficult to reduce that, either due to diminutive size at birth or because the herniated intestine swells with cold air:
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when the fluid ascends (or rises), then you must cut that which has been submerged in water alone, or moistened with water while being squirted out, and cloves, pepper, and bandages into the cavity where inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	When certain measures have been taken in which has the stoppage of bleeding occurred, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation is resolved, then you wet the intestine in the water where it was swolthy and bloated; thus drawing out its interior with a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If you release the intestine back into its cavity for this treatment, then divide the rupture with a small instrument to which sutures have been applied (sewn in).
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial translation of this medieval medical text line by line into English would be:
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the tool, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp portion of the body, and another non-sharp portion, as well as the delicate part that is not like bone fragility—these are bluntly pointed by one instrument alone.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the vermin is augmented and comes out of the intestine, it is best that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place if possible over there, which would be better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide open and in the lower part of the abdomen; when you lay down the hernia on your patient's back, placing cushions under their buttocks, holding their head with pillows – if it is below the abdomen, then place the person’dictorially (head holder) and stuffing pieces that are placed at its sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Here comes the first source sentence translation into English: If disruption occurs in one of the lower parts (possibly referring to organs) of the belly, then pause your understanding and consideration immediately so that whatever is inside can be pushed out without delay.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	When it is necessary that you administer this in large and small boils, here's the translation for each line of your source sentence:
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In minor pains, pause what you have prepared for treatment, and make it your servant between your own fingers which holds the entire disruption in its mouth and adjusts the lips of yours accordingly; additionally fix to where there is suture due to some other cause by that same agent.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "They are fine needles moving within flesh and subtlety; small ones penetrate movement of body tissue, large ones find it difficult in the spine, hence why they move through delicacy and bulk.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	Even if the needle is fixed in any of the patient'se extremities (down to their crotch), so that the flesh does not become dislocated and the wound remains healed,
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Ensure they are not sewn for too long so that flesh does not become unable to heal properly.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Return the fingers of your needles so that they do not pierce through the patient'se sleep, and pause over the sewn up pus expanded parts throughout the entire wound area; place those there where you know the putrefied matter has been settled.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These small sewing needles are placed carefully in the wounds with great care, and for their closure either an individual pinch or two pins suffice to close those very stitches of them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	May the second stitch be common: and it is that you gently apply a needle to one of the four extremities—from wrist to toe along both legs, using an implement with fine and coarse points where the thread (suture) wraps around undernegy.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle of that surgeon' extricates these four limbs, reduce it from which piece you cut off, in order for the wound to be lowered into its subdivided portion below ground level, such that suturing with linen as part of this cloth becomes secure.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch is the amount of thickness for that part.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch heals men (or it has medicinal properties for treating men).
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	Et has made stitches where the child was inside his belly, who had been sick on her abdomen (inside), a large part of which affected one palm' extrusion from two fingers away from that point within the membrane; and disruption in the membrane itself, so you have reduced what caused it to come out for xxx hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And when the patient is stabilized in their spaces within fifteen days or thereabouts, and healing occurs for them, apply moisture with motion to expedite recovery; over time, they will adjust accordingly.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E the other physicians had not healed; and by a miracle fire, they could not cure that wound in the place where no ointment was applied nor any medicine, but perhaps some relief came after two applications of mud poultice during daytime bathing in honey water within which the focus became healing.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two types of stitches according to what is said in Parayl.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with needlework on the chest and insert the cutting needle into the wound' extrinses.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters into the navel and that portion of the body where it was previously inserted, reach its full depth throughout all parts of the body, grasping with the end of the syringe; then pierce through the other extreme part which you have entered in on another extremity.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have pain in that portion of the body from above to below or vice versa, then make an incision at both ends thereof; and remove what is outside this wound area with forceps, making penetration into the other end of the same part where it began.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When fluid enters through your entry point into the cistern at the limb' extrémity, where it is already within you that all of this enters.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Here begins the treatment on this side of the patient's chest and places it at that extremity which is from the navel in the other, and thrusts the needle inserted into the waistband there to where you have reached; then withdrawing that same one again upwards along with its current position within said abdomen.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And here are other kinds of rubs and restorations, which apply another kind within what you have already done so that it becomes as much needed according to this example only.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum total of this suture is that you sew the skin with a thread in which you stitch hairs, so as to make one bandage around the extremity part of the coda (tail/anus), leaving it until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second type of suture that Gualia dictates, and which is spoken about herein for recommendation by him, you shall tie this half-life body part as the one treated by the healer ties it; thus adding all parts to their proper division according to nature. Apply another'dictated extremity from nowhere (or elsewhere) and link its tip with each other's respective tips in such a way that what is done at your recommendation comes into effect,
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you keep the needle at your own appointed place on the parting of flesh, and make that pierce into the partition below it therein, then turn over (or rotate) the needle so as to have its point enter again through two extremities of the calf; here is how:
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	When those joints are revolved, and their cavities enter the divided parts inside each other at the lower ends of these limbs opposite to one another in two directions.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than ordinary sewing and it's the kind of which memory recalls.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is called "Guaiac" speech/discussion (assuming that 'sermo' refers to a
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	This may be called the "diagnostic procedure," whereby one rectifies the belly's seam using two needles, so that you insert a thread into these at several points and begin to pull out this thread as if inserting an awl through those same sutures which join their chests together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And when there is a rupture in the stomach area (belly), then sewing it becomes difficult as compared to other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the method of medicine for peasant be judged by other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause occurs when you continue the recent labor by your body'dict self after being exposed to altered air that affects this humoral balance; return and adjust the intestine (budel) and hernia, placing attention on these areas until they are properly cared for.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the humors and they have entered that area where you are currently inside, making hard leather shoes and bandages for these fields; take care of this ailment as if it is any other disease within which healing occurs while in your presence.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	May you not have the medicines present at this moment; if that is the case, pause over that which has just come up now, apply a poultice of linen and honey here for several hours today while I teach you how to do it yourself, so that you may heal without needing other medical treatments when these pains subside.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin may communicate in injury to the main limbs, then when you submerge wool in warm or scented oil (or ointment), apply it there and pause for a while until it reaches between the angles of joints where bones meet.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, they will gradually come out; and if the protrusion has entered into its cavity, it becomes blackish through contact with stool (which means fecal matter), mainly when coming out of the body.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Be aware that what is of larger intestine (budele) healing is better than when it's in the smaller ones, as with those things which are within the delicate budes.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult for the prolapse of which he calls "gegunu" to receive cure from mud in his body; and this condition arises due to: (1) the great number of veins present within it, and (2) its considerable size at those locations where they are found, as well as (3) the subtlety of that part, and (4) proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	May it be that the process you follow in preparing fabric is as follows: achieve this recently and reduce those according to your straightened thread on which you shorten the swellings (buboes) locally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If space has been occupied and black or dark substance (pus) was placed there, then you should tighten that faithful hand over the location where it is discolored, in order to make the flow of blood exit from those veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when you have inflammation in the intestine (budel).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When you have disrupted the intestine and it is small (possibly), it can be restored in a clean place within your body; thus come here who was lodged painfully deep inside your abdomen, consisting of seven parts of the stomach, an old worm-hole filled with pus/abscess fluid, which causes distress and movement.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And now you apply the treatment of him that was not confirmed in his healing and where health is being established, may it cease subtly within that focus which nurtures wellness.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	E you have already secured the place firmly, hover over the groin where an evil event occurs within their belly; and not allowing any such misfortim to occur in their arranged intestines or feeding vessels, but placing them between baths and exercises for your body.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And experienced practitioners who when the patient is in the hernia and it's time for this treatment: take large cauteries; adjust the lips of the subject on their body, holding a plug from these cautions over the lips of the subject; so that when you grasp them with those plugs, they adhere to place without dissolving.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And as for pause or restoration of the first formation placed therein (the cavity), it does not cease until another formation is made according to the quantity of all humors present in the body.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Return that to the ground and let them out of those chaff, into the cavity within the belly wherein it shall heal itself; and not cause harm to anyone by means thereof (the intestine).
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced by something delicate from within its own body, pushed in with a needle; and you hold onto this extremity of these intestinal threads, wrap them up tightly around your finger, insert your fingertubule into those holes surrounding the organ itself, reducing it therein during disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This infection of sewing is not our only way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	May it be if the child is large and wide, mostly when in one of the delicate intestines, then not an incision but a subtle intervention will suffice, and not healing for all at once.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You understand that when all children and apostema become weakened (and suffer ulcers), they do not heal completely or lose their entire armor over time; rather everywhere in any part, universally it is called a fistula, which we call an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	E fistula according to truth is a tightly woven, hard, white fabric of which there is no pain and in which it aches like the torture of suffering; therefore they address that matter with gentle rubbing (ouching), i.dict "pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is a moist home where it rests upon its bracelet (i.thyroid gland), and the wetness has dissipated in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved here, and it's scant, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here comes the translation:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes and their symptoms are treated by medicine in the division/separation.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	When you know how to treat an opening (fistula) caused by operation, it is necessary for healing.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus this one among these fistulas is from the diseases that are hard to heal and do not receive care, it demands work and ignorance on my part.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth in the ulcer that does not reach these locations mentioned herein and you hope for its healing, and wish to understand it better, take either mercury or iron, and if the ulcer proceeds further according to your inquiry, seek advice from this person.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that subtle lead under which its body' extruded and curvature caused by this condition.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an obstruction of horror within it (possibly referring to a blockage or serious issue), then it is not in your power that you should attempt upon it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now rub the ointment on yourself with your own ointments; through this moisture which you apply for cleansing, it will pass to and be absorbed by other such preparations from theirs.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood upon all these causes and see them clearly, then according to your confidence: here consider whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or far from the joint union, nerve, artery, vein, or one of those places where something has entered into you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry out the fistula as directed by its nature, and maintain what is present in that filtration, which originates from decayed or corrupted flesh, either within the body itself (body tissue) or a part thereof (part of the body), take care so it may heal.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May it be if the fistula is deep within and secondarily sealed off; then ensure that you insert that into the belly button as far as your reach allows, cleanse all of its corrupt flesh thoroughly with hot medicines encased in wrappings, and introduce those wrapped treatments inside the cavity of the fistula which you have understood to be iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And if it is necessary for the medicine to act within a few days that which has broken through in the cavity of the ulcer, then so be it with urgency and care.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Return that which remains in wax (the extracted material), as it produces healthy flesh within while being healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this means, then you shall perform caustic treatment on that second which we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the cause of fistula is from within and you must certify it, then inquire about that very thing as recommended, if you do not forbid any possible venous or nervus issue, nor a primary member'se dysfunction according to what we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is discovered and there'thy any decay or blackness, then immediately remove it wherein that rot be entirely contained within: care must also for what has entered into you since time immemorial to ensure its healing inside while outside remains untouched by such affliction.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If the patient is not healthy and sickly in their habits, then you will realize that you have not yet reached the cure for all corruption; therefore, observe carefully over them both with precision and delicacy to restore balance within and cleansing of the body as a whole, and maintain what has already been restored.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, eat; but if not, understand that the decay is deep within the cavity of the body, which has not yet been achieved, and therefore take action to address that issue as well.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bones are decayed or could be extracted with ease, then it is within your power to extract them using delicate forceps which I have deemed appropriate for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have a stone in the body, then very carefully extract all of them without causing any damage to your strength or health.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May there be any cause of dampness within them and in their ignorance they fear neither danger nor mistake; hereby you shall inspect those ligaments or bones that are present herein, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	May you not prepare the bones of your hour for cutting them away, then place a cushion on which they can rest and prevent it from solidifying until those same bones are brought back into their cavity by others who handle heavy loads like stones or ropes, ensuring that these elements do not harden but maintain flexibility as needed during surgical procedures.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having feared that the poultice is soaked over on top due to oil from Egypt or any of their liniments used undernezymy body parts are separated by these bandsages, and when they apply those liniments, bones start being apart from them – it means doctors must be warned.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	May it be that there is a large bone in the knee or thighs like those here (referring to their own), and when from here something has damaged your face just enough, then you should let someone else hold onto them for as long as possible until they can no longer bear this darkness and corruption; at that point restore the body.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	May it be that what has been ruptured from you is a great part of the body and already damage to the bone marrow (medulla del os), which makes its repair necessary; thus when this breakdown caused by corruption reaches where it got, one must completely insert everything inside into this place so that healing can occur.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you should apply whatsoendo the patient's hollow (coxae) to ensure that it restrains and assists with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Foc an young man for about xxx years old, to which pain comes in his groin, and the discharge from these inflamed parts is of gross putrefaction nature; it has not originated externally at this location.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the focus extended upon it due to errors made by doctors within which materials were dragged along and its healing focused while a fistula was opened, where sparks are formed in them that all patients apply externally with pouring or moistening of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many months of treatment by doctors and not in their own humors but within the arts (i.dict medicine), they are called back for further care.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And here is the cushion of him and the materials that flow through it all along, and his body was completely saturated with lemon yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then introduce the thread into one of those instruments, and through it reach the mouthpiece to enter it therein.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Return and examine quickly those instruments, guiding them throughout all parts of the groin area.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I groped and inspected one of the orifices within which I had dug out a piece of bone, and crushed that corrupted body, it was already rotten and decayed, degenerated; and also there was rot in another part located inside where something had penetrated into the womb.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	When it is necessary for me to extract what I previously found and prepared from the bone,
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And if it is that what was supposedly in the bone has already broken and separated itself (crushed or fractured), then you have seen this happening.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And place your hand over it for long-term restoration of health by means consistent with medical consolidatives, which is not yet accomplished.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Return and explore further on the second bone of the body above where the initial discovery was made, and continue to work upon it in terms related to the bones themselves.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And when I apply the remedy that appears from this corruption, and with gentle force it is performed on you for healing and restoration, but not restored yet.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discover another examination and proceed with the restoration of it piece by piece until all is inserted within an inch of its origin, taking out what comes from the spinal cord itself, and restore that extracted part using medicine, thus consolidating the fracture.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	Not necessary repetition in the operation of limbs and joints is needed only for the disposition of body fluids and reduction of tolerance to pain and fear of death, as they are occupied throughout all hours with superfluous elimination through syncopal purgation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so heals the whole body, and nothing remains in the hard flesh of bone; good fortune is with him for his disposition within his own body, which returns its vitality to itself; it converses (or interacts) harmoniously according to these dispositions without causing injury during walking or any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May if the limb is protruding in that place where you have already tamponed: then take hold of it with a strong thread and command someone to stretch it out at its extremity; pull apart (or interlace) those thick threads one after another, placing each subsequent stronger than the previous on the flesh therein. Extend this part over the body tissue where you want to cut, thereby lifting away the surrounding fatty tissue so that cutting can occur without damaging deeper layers of tissue.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When you elevate or use a table for positioning when it'thy not forbidden to cut the decayed flesh with the saw that does not damage healthy tissue,
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	When the screw is placed over the damaged spot little by little, if it remains within the cavity of decay and does not appear when feeling at once, then another turn of the screw will suffice for treatment.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decayed and not prominent, it is one continuous division of flesh here; wherein you will find all the body'se meat throughout these parts; then pause firmly at this place, and take up that which belongs to the first divided portion for continuing the cutting tool used in the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if it is necessary at this location of decay a small instrument be inserted, as we have said before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If decay is in the joint, cut out that corruptive joint itself, and saw off the bone from where it continues elsewhere.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If there is a decay in joint connections, it'thy not due to chance but rather design/plan (ingen).
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or breastbone, it's difficult; however, if you seek out and discover where this corruption appears on your body, and when removed according to any possible arrangement that lies within your capacity, then for each of them restore as follows:
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Be aware of the instruments and saws used for cutting these bones according to their situation, as well as the thickness and softness/hardness and size (smallness) of those materials; so that whatever tool you prepare is suitable for this operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	When you understand that this operation concerns the specific tool with which you are dealing; when you have great study and length of mind in relation to these instruments, as well as witnesses knowledgeable about diseases, then you already possess what is necessary for your intervention on behthyroid matters.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.
Forma de serra:	Form of Serr: (This line appears incomplete or unclear as it lacks
Forma de autra serra:	The provided text suggests a discussion on medical practices related to joint pain, commonly referred to in the past
Forma de autra serra:	Apparently there is an attempt here at providing guidance for treating conditions using tools or methods that
Forma de autra serra gran:	The text seems to be instructing on the use of a larger cautery instrument, possibly used by medical
Forma de ray:	In this context, "ray" might refer back to an earlier tool
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The mention of the head shape being like a star-shaped key and points resembling stiletto implies that these tools should be crafted in specific shapes for medical procedures, possibly to address joint pain with precision as per medieval treatise guidelines: The point or cautery tool's head ought to mimic the design of a celestencyve star (star-shaped key),
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	Instead of merely inserting the tool with force into compromised joints or using a wide mouth for an incision (which could imply aggressive treatment), it's important to gently scrape away any degraded material where necessary, suggesting restraint and precision in medical intervention: The practitioner should carefully remove damaged tissue from the articulations when they are compromised rather
Forma de razori major dels autres:	This phrase indicates that there is a superior or more significant cutting tool among others being referenced, which may relate to
Forma de razori menor:	Here the text contrasts this primary cutting instrument with smaller ones. This implies consideration must be
Forma de razori lat:	The term "form of razer" in Latin suggests a specific type or designation of
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The instruction is about a cutting tool other than the primary one; it's made of metal and can be sharpened with flint to maintain edge sharpness for precise cuts on limbs using: This refers to an alternate blade, likely crafted from steel (or iron), that requires regular honing or stropping against a harder stone like flintstone. The use here suggests detailed work possibly needed in surgical procedures where metal tools are being employed with precision and care as was customary in
Forma de lu:	Shape of his body (or Forma del suo corpo)
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape in which he has concave curvature. This phrase describes a particular physical characteristic, likely related to the form or structure that is cur
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 The alternate subtle contour of his body (or Shape with an alternative subtle detail). Here "autra
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Other curved shapes or curves on the limbs. This line from the text is referring to different physical attributes, possibly describing unique contours found elsewhere
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 The small shape resembling an attempt (or Small form appearing as though it's trying). Here 'rasori', which might be related or
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 Shape of the cutting instruments with which bones were cut into. This line indicates that there are specific tools mentioned earlier, possibly for surgery or another medical procedure involving bone manipulation.—the
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Other smaller shapes/forms (or Different forms of cutting instruments). The text seems to refer back to various sizes and
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 Another cutting tool of different shape (or This other instrument resembles a saw), and his body is being cut here at the bone'dictions; it appears on top in various places along the bones. Here, 'ray' could be an old or regional term for what we might think of as surgical blades—possibly referring to instruments like knives used during medieval medical procedures.—the
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 The saw-like instrument which he uses for cutting through the bones. In this context, 'ray' is likely describing one type of surgical tool used by physicians to cut or remove parts of the skeleton—perhaps related to trepanation (dr
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 His body partens are being trisected and have an acute angle. Here 'trigonat' suggests that the physician is altering certain parts of his patient’s physical form
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and somewhat resembling the causes we have mentioned of rheumatic diseases and fractures.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the joints of limbs and bone fissures.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened or due to internal/external causes, or when you treat that corruption with these medicines and the treatment does not comfort it, sometimes the corruption moves away from a limb of which you do not touch; thus, insert your hand into that limb so that humidity escapes through there, preventing its escape due to death or malice. This being greater harm than damage caused by moisture loss in the body part itself.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the name of that person, it is because their limb has been crushed so much as to ignite its focus where the puncture was made or if you apply pressure inside where darkness (the blackness representing ill-humor) enters into that part within which this injury occurred; thus, your knowledge will become apparent in relation to him.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If it is caused by the disruption of certain causes, as with sea serpent bite or worm infestation or syphilis and likeness, then...
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the decay or rupture is in the said limb, then you will incise the said and not leave spaces for it to enter into its cavity.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if you manage to enter the cavity, then invade that part of it from where fire is emanating inside the brazier'dictor (possibly referring to an incendiary device or hearth), and do not give space for corruption within there.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that occurs within your arm inside the cleft at the joint, then you should insert it into the elbow area therein.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another passage occurs and I send the thighs along with it, in that case it is the death of the humors; administering other causes for cure depends on a certain amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When part of the body (presumably a limb or organ) appears to have decayed within it itself, then you should examine that area and place something inside one of its nodes/cavities.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you climb up on the leg, then cut it all over the leg.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If you enter into the hollow (or abdomen), then cut through the cushion within its junction with the cavity.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If decay has already reached the sinews, then it is not inward sickness but expulsion from life, and remove the malady to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	When it comes to inserting the limb or sawing, you tighten one lash on the part where you wish to insert/saw, and another lash over the location; extend the minister's (likely referring to an assistant) a lash to the parts as needed, another extending in their direction; separate the meat between two lashes until all is exposed within that space defined by them spine-like thin ropes. Then securely fix or saw inserted/processed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is placed over all parts of the body in such a way that it does not touch the affected area and draws fluid from the inflamed site with pressure:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	May you also cool the wound when working on it, and cauterize its location carefully, or place some powder to restrict bleeding from the wound; return your hand within until treatment is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that injured limb attached by sinew to its proper place and take care of it so that it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And advise him to enter his home through his foot, this measure that you recommend here is what has happened to him; it was darkness in his foot due to overheating caused by the fireplace's blaze.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When that disorder occurs initially within her body and you must attend to the entirety of the limb, do so with care for all parts of the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that home prepares for the patient to go towards their limb where they feel pain and hardness there, insert into the joint, and heal it will be done quickly.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Once in time that doctor showed signs of decay here indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now it has come to me, and so I am compelled to reflect the excess water that rests above my medicine'dictum; restore the purity of my body’s humors; there is no further repercussion or progression into another realm within which this surplus resides.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And I call for placing my hand on your body, and do not want any hope of that overflow above its place, because the movement of the humors is related to suppression (or constriction).
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When he has stood up from me and returned back to his own place, having prepared himself completely in my sight, and thus becomes healthy again.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	Here the account has not been muzzled but to assist with what comes of this sickness and as a signifier for its meaning and nature in order that it may be understood properly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of treatment of the belly and quality of enema administration with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess forms in the patient's flesh and bone joint spaces, its spread is prolonged until it becomes a collection of disease; at this point, you break open and perforate (it), thus draining out the disease fluid, using whatever material was available previously as drainage. You wrap your hand around to apply pressure without damaging nerves or ligaments inside the bone joints – there is no fistula formation here because of this careful handling.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Even if there is a space extended before the decay affects any part of the body, it does not call itself a fistula and cannot spread further.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of him is that you insert his entire catheter there while turning it around and mostly when it feels like a drape, ensuring it does not stick to the site because of its decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the intestine will stick and not have suffered any damage due to previous actions, attend carefully in the area of the anus; then treat it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And extract that which there is inside it, and apply pressure for so many days until the cavity becomes purified and the shame (pudor) regains its moisture/softness.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the malady does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then cleanse that with a mixture of water and honey/mel; whereby the sweetness purifies and makes it adhere to the tongue, mainly when excessive dryness and stiffness have occurred.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have taken some waters and find that the swelling has gone down in your belly, then perform a cleansing of whatever is causing discomfort within the body.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And when wax drippings dissolve that oil and spirits, or you cleanse it with some medicines and oils which already have properties in their flow within the tract of the ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the fluid of the intestine is not flowing through where it should be (not receiving its catheter), then gradually increase that small amount, pausing in intervals covered by Egyptian oil or wax-based ointment until increased as needed.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	When the suppository is large, then you should attach it to his lips and insert a quantity into where he takes in his medicine (enema).
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifices of which the braces are elevated to above their parts in it (the body), they dry that out at the base part where it is located, so when the brace compresses within the curve of the flesh created by the body, then this occurs.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to suction the sinus within the patient' extrinsic os, then puncture that which prepares for the limb amputation as per your arrangement and ensure there remains in place no cause of distress from the bracelet (limb support).
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take cohesive medicines that are properly applied along the suitable curve for drawing out what wants to rise from there, onto the cloth of it.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	E the cloth is so much that it communicates with all parts of the body; and cuts are made on both sides in the middle of the entrance to the bladder, large enough for what goes into the entryway of the bladder—the urethra—to protrude through. And extend over another piece of his linen as per its quantity at the site where urine enters long-term; pause there so that treatment can be administers and does not touch the cloth excessively, once a week for recovery time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When someone is above the chest area, it rubs all over at once due to what fits inside their waistband of clothing.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	For that you know whether what flows from the bowels is moist or dry, or indigested remains therein:
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	When you have thus considered the location of that painful spot in him/her, and whether he feels it or not therein (apestume), take note accordingly:
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical care is prolonged in this manner, and the material that has been applied on the orifice of the sinus sticks to it, indicating adhesion, then you should apply heat or bandage for three days, and when applying the dressing, change the cloth.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be possible to expand the space within and below where subtle viruses dwell; do not despair of their adherence because healing occurs therein in those bodies with mature flesh, which are prone to fevers during times when illness manifests itself. Here is the translation line by line:
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the fluid in its course is indigested for days and does not adhere; if there's delayed attachment of the fluid, adjust with medicines, and if these medicines are moist both in their substance and condition, then apply them externally along with linseed oil when they become superfluous due to excess addition.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when it seems like that position at which one is not braced yet the enguent drips down, and uses oil; or frankincense and myrrh and spirits are used herein as well, all mixed together upon the oil while resting on this bedding (presumably a treatment surface), applying ointment to where it was previously applied that is now engorged.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, you will understand that decay is in its early stages within him/her, and already examined bones or hard limbs (or ligaments), then attend to it as a fistula; just as told by those above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatments for blisters caused by shoes and sore nails, addition of incision and cutting (sectioning).
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you apply treatment for which no time has passed since its application on either the sole or the foot, and it continues even in other parts of the body, as well-being is appreciated when healing occurs properly with such an applied cauterization (or if not corrupted), then insert a brace within what rots out from the nail's flesh, so that both are consumed completely. And once this intervention happens while there remains rot in the smell of the foot odour and manifestation occurs at the extremity of said limb, turning it blackish.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have obtained that water we spoke about in the division and do not hinder your care, then return what has been washed out from under the skin with iron (to remove excess fluid), after which apply cauterization to this extracted fluid, so healing is promoted.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May the bone be and the ulcer heal, and their additions are carried to the parts divided by wounds, where you begin with purging them using your knife/lance; as soon as you pause that delicate part of the ulcer' extruding flesh (bleeding), press it down gently therewith while pushing it inwardly and make sure not to break what is left intact. Carefully monitor this action until all remnants are removed from within, taking into account those corrosive medicines inside that cause destruction; ensure the wound's covering (bandage) remains untouched for healing purposes only when it becomes fully healthy/healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If decay has already affected the bone, it is necessary that you insert and extract your tool from there, for no time will heal a bone once ruined in this place.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the liver and spleen are moving in this way, then you should incise that part according to its memory (recurrence), and take care of it so that it may heal.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May you percuss or prick the tongue' extrinsic parts (the "ungla endeve"), and when there is intense pain in that area, it may indicate swollen tonsils requiring removal through incision ("fleubotomes le malaute"). Then dry out the wound with salt on the skin above the transverse abdominal muscle ("spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus"), and ensure that it does not extend into the body's flesh, for this could cause severe throat pain due to excess tissue congested in that place; moreover, take care of this spot where fluid gives way (indicating a rupture or abscess), as such an occurrence will lead directly back to natural causes related to misplaced abdominal fat.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May adjust it herein among the humors of healthy men, for when it is in flesh entirely or bones fully or skin, where its veins are located.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When it is a bubbling in the joint area or when such fluid comes from their natural pores of skin (nuts), these are signs that could indicate the presence within them.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not he born of hard nuts from this place and they who are born at the joints will be arthritic.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	From those who are overly fatty (nervous), their section is weak, and it is necessary that you insert the end of a splint into their spleen.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May those born at the junction find healing difficult; therefore keep yourself protected from them.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May he who is born in this place eat these nuts as part of the meal; insert them into his flesh within the bone and use one from among those knives that are appropriate for him so that what goes inside may be cured.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Mighty convalescence that occurs between their movements or due to birth defects of the home they were born into, or because of child labor and fire exposure; thus allowing them time for this healing within which those very same spaces return to normal form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here you apply pressure between their sheets of linen to prevent them from congealing together and separate those spaces with a thin layer of pitch inside so that it is solidified according as covered.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If there is congestion in the chest and it appears as though sweating on your palm, then wipe off that congestion once it has been prepared and conform to the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From weakness of joints, they become swollen.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Variations in size are ill-shaped veins filled with melancholalgy that come from the limbs of the body and primarily occur in beds or carriages, especially for travelers and workers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now administer purge of the bowel caused by black cholera for several times, and apply pressure to the patient'dict vein of Basilisk.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Medicinal treatment of them is provided through two methods: one where it's made clear and drawn out that black bile (a concept in humoral theory representing a cold humor), and the other method involves raising the vein and extracting it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Here is the translation of each sentence line by line:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return that one (likely referring to something specific previously mentioned), and command it/her so they refrain from consuming black bile-producing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cauterization when veins are filled and blood flows upward in the malady.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation according to this method: you who raise the cushion for the thighs (camba del malaute), if in water they are moved by legs, place them in bath and bind the cushion of it underwater while swelling subsides and veins expand; or when exercised vigorously without being present in a pool, injury occurs to the limb.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Then secure the cord at the end of the vein for a section either long or near its lower part in the patient'dict body (leg), you must bind it there.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Return the intestine or hernia within its cavity; cleanse and excoriate (scrape off) the vein up to where you perceive it, which complaint descends into blackness at intervals.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you remove it from under the belly button (bellybutton), take that white thread back for their string/cord again.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Return your tool now that it has entered and is positioned above the navel, and hold that one in your hand for no more than an ounce of gold.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Return another section of that same section and scrape the pubic bone from below where it enters the vein until three days have passed.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Elevate that and incise it on the lower part of one foot arch, and elevate/raise that up to where there is healing in the second foot arch, and raise that from over which it sits (is situated).
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence: E fay aquo entro che extraes aquella da secciona che è posposta sobirana o posta auta di tutte le seczioni, entro che tutta es yssida; ed allora incidevi.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey and extract and elevate (presumably referring to the removal of blood or pus), then insert a double-pointed needle firmly, tie it with strong thread, remove it carefully, and turn your hand over throughout the entire area where infection is present.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that entire atmosphere has been drained away, then rest upon the location where wool is submerged in wine and oil rotted or not rotten; thus cure whatsothy are ill within them.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein has contracted and caused twisting within the parts, which we have not mentioned before, then you must cut along that contraction throughout all areas of twist and envelope, holding it tightly so as not to raise it again once lifted.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And guard your limb that it does not pierce or damage the vein and disturb that part of yours, for which raising is difficult; serve diligence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient who is suffering from dryness hereby appears:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of anointing oil:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not admitted into the body with needles or incisions as they are acute extremities that do not harm veins, and it has a large flexibility like leon; even if subtle, its vessel can be inserted therein due to its inherent delicateness. We have too much bulk here within us.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein in the leg (or groin area). This line is a direct reference likely related to
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 From the extraction of veins in the lower body areas, which according to al-Ateghi on Arabic lands and dry regions with little vegetation where there is neither grass nor any form of plant life (translation may require additional context for accuracy). The line refers likely to a medical practice concerning venipuncture or phlebotomy. Here's an attempt at translation:
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And when it is caused in other parts of the body by these humors (the clogs), then they come into place within those areas, specifically on the legs through their positioning with and without use as
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And during childbirth, it is a decay that comes quickly with poisons from the snake and worms entering through the navel area into the body's flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when that extremity appears, cover it with one of the patient'thy legs', which is made from lead and insert into its cavity; do not smell or touch that metal hanging on the bedding.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Whenever there are evidences of illness from above in any parts down below, enclose them within lead and spices that thing for protection.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it prolongs, then you cut a part of the patient and wrap their wound; do not insert that into which exits pus therein until inserted such as has been retracted so that it is outwardly externalized (and if once inserted, contracted within the body causing abscess formation and bleeding at the location).
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that which is treated gently and extracted little by little should be drawn out of the body'dictly without causing any bumps or lumps on the legs.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein, it has entered into men whose length of arms and feet have reached me by twenty palms; I have felt one entering here.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If inserted during the time of his medical treatment, then insert a sharp instrument into its cavity and penetrate that long lesion in the limb until all accumulated fluid is evacuated from it, administer putrefaction to this location for several days as part of the medicinal process; taking care also of these abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has occasionally become obstructed, and mainly when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and comes from some other formations here present; these blockages are caused by calcifications within them.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, take care of that pain as we have discussed in division and water which is being withhidered/neglected.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the removal of worms generated under the skin and it is called beefy disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in no land but by our ailment from cattle four times recurrently occurring within the belly and liver, where there are few such as arise between the navel and flesh; they move throughout the entire body causing injury to each limb inside until breaking through the naval and escaping.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of him is due to the putrefaction of some humors with worms and snakes, and lice and maggots in his belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you aim to heal and remove it, do not act without the use of your walking device and appearance beforehand, so that as soon as you strengthen yourself on top of it and above its ligaments and tighten strongly, and then dry over it and extract what is there.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it strikes the flesh and is not bound tightly, then stop cautery at the spot where it lives within its location; moreover, this becomes fear due to which that very place comes out together with what has been said hereinabove (the cause of deterioration).
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May if that being reaches the head of the hull (hips), it becomes very strong over the upper part above tightness, and on top of him/her, extract that; and ensure that the malady's humors impurities are expelled through medicines evacuation methods, guarded against foodstuffs producing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From suffering above it worsens (or) intensifies.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is well-known in our land and its pain appears in the limbs; it can be transferred from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	Here you are shown what is recommended by you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called upon a sick woman to a village, and uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the brachial vein of the arm; you pressed it for an hour, seeing that thing move along with him when he went from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And now it enters that place and settles in the muscle there, apply here for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Correct in the other body part within which it has reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And recommend that I turn around on my body as much as possible, and it is greatly influenced by the exchange of one with another and the speed of limbs within limbs.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not there be fluid in the vessels of a woman?
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Even if one does not consider it water, but because the woman was of weak constitution from her fair body and exposed veins, here appears that mixed air sensation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have congested veins of the body during this back treatment.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to heal the patient and they feel that pain, at this time it is not apparent to me as we have discussed before; now stand firmly over them, drain away any residual moisture causing agitation within him, and cauterize the affected area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Mays if you do not time your pills correctly, then immediately treat the pain in that area and take out what exits through it, as well as foul-smelling tablets and medicine pods of beneficial substances and resembling ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of sinew/tendon.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sayings are diverse according to species and by the parts of the body where they apply their lance (cane), for which diversity is that from those with large points, small ones, convex/concave shapes, hollow sounds; as well as those having three angles, tongues, and astroliths.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here is the translation line by line:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the patient's senchels (joints) are touched in them or undergo pressure on the bones and it affects the skull over which it becomes severe due to strong drink, causing blindness, dizziness, moaning from pain in their joints/head, inflammation of the tongue with requests for help therefrom, spasms and confusion mixing understanding along with vomiting resembling that of cholera, a complete withdrawal occurs whereby words disappear and being destroyed.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	So if there appears on these limbs, do not attempt treatment or extraction of the stone unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	May the joints of the body when they are sick in the chest so that it is close to the left breastbone and have a hardness set there for cause which is not fever, resembling movements of the limbs like crawling pests or black mud animals; accompanied by sore throat, tight hands, numbness, fidgeting, and syncope; hence you understand that death has taken hold throughout.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lungs are suffocated by sanctified foam from insects and the vessels connected to the chest have been pierced, the color of the malady changes, a great spirit exhales, and it demands an air purifier device.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the swelling is in the belly where it' extrudes into the waist and causes pain therein, which are severe pains accompanied by bouts of coughing such that not all the members of the body feel relief from these symptoms;
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is gas in the stomach, it will cause vomiting of some improperly digested food by nature'thy (nature).
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If there is a case in the belly and it has been fixed within you, some opening of dirt or fabric may be found through which something extricated can now escape; there'se no hope for its recovery from extraction at this time.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the satiety is in the bladder and there'dict be an effluvion of urine (indicating possible urinary retention or obstruction), processes may occur within any remaining parts below, causing pain above the lower abdomen; all these signs suggest mortality.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May other members also be with you as the face, back, and groin; shoulders and hands of your body, including spine in two places, shoulder blade, chest, hip joints, cushions for their limbs, are preserved according to major guidelines when no vein or artery is harmed by the saw nor any venomous action.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And if you recommend water that has been seen from these remedies, so as to indicate the treatment for cure-it is through it.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that within the patient' extramission home casket in their tear duct located at the nose bridge, and from there extract it with other parts of its body; then heals, so as not to harm the eye socket itself.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extracted from another Jew the which was in his hip joint and hidden therein; examined briefly by touch with quick glances, it too was small but attached to his sword hilt—a great saga of sharp Jewish blades forged like lions without any flints.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Senate is present, it does not happen in its own hall due to some unfortunate incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extracted from another home in Carrara where it was found (in the quarry), and that's an Arabic stone; you will then pierce this between your knees, which is already immersed there, delicately insert into that space, remove her completely, and thus heal the man from Carrara.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extracted from another home where the patient had been suffering (in their belly), and considered that they died because of it; therefore, I kept them at the foray for XXX days without any change in cause related to their dispositions, attended to the extracted item/sickness, and thus healed, not falling victim to further accidents.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And in this house where you catch a fly between the two of him, and secure it there with dung or manure spread over it, place a fire above for an hour until the flies are caught on its wings.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And here comes a woman to which chastity has been imposed on her belly and the offspring is held firm within it; she does not harm herself in any of her natural openings.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man comes to whose face has been scratched and whom the vermin have settled on, not causing pain here but making them seem ill.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted the pus from the head of the king'thy body that was located in their nostrils and had already descended into the seventh section (which could refer to a specific area or cavity within), where it remained completely hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	When called upon for its healing in three days, it is referred to as curative intervention with the application of bandaging.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you grasp the child from behind by their waist tightly strapped; and then inquire about that subtle touch they may feel there – if not felt at all, it is because of the extreme part (the tailbone). Hereby confirming through a gentle pinch with your finger on the spine.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Amplify this location where action and digestion take place; thus I can see that it is also the site of discharge (likely referring to a symptom or process within), so they appear there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it did not happen at the significant location that the thread achieved this place; and you continued to hold on top of it for days without incident, until one day I felt my nose pressed against it, grasping what came out from there.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And now you restrain the patient'dict medical acute corrosive for a few days until they burst out (express their pain or symptoms), and then attempt to drain that, and atrophy the tip of the fine thorn beneath which it adheres to the metal.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here the text translates into English line by line as follows:
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and they provided restoration for it; thus, we consolidated its flesh, healing the ulcer completely so that nothing remains in him due to any cause at all.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The skilled craftsman compares few over much, and the water that is here present to what is not here; a new operation and tool must be used for removing external causes when sickness sets in.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And thus it is said that the scrapings are not removed from the parts where they are fixed, but according to two methods: either by withdrawal of the location in which they are entwined, or contrary to the other divided portion.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When someone enters through that place or descends into it in fleshly manner and is dragged out again:
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not heed the medicine at the time it is taken, then when days pass and flesh flows to its environment here below, administer treatment for that body'dictly (the) connection of your patient and their departure from said place.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Here comes the translation:
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not observe the patient'sectional healing for several days, then continue piercing within that circuit of flesh in that bone until it is subtly enlarged by the sectioning and extracted from there.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the stone is lodged in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the chambsin of the brain, it appears now as these accidents that you have mentioned; therefore do not attempt its removal therefrom lest death should be prolonged if done within the skull. If the stone perforates the dura mater (the tough outer membrane surrounding the brain and spinal cord), then such an intervention may extend life, but it is a risky procedure that must only be attempted by someone highly competent in this field of medicine.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the stone is not fixed in the bone of the limb only and does not enter into the joint capsule, but moves freely within it over several days without being affected by any cause from these accidents, then your engineering must be done both on the stone itself and at this location.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If there is not an immediate need for removal and you do not obey the extraction commandment (presumably referring to some form of surgical intervention), then apply poultices along the healing circuit inside the sac, taking care that the area within remains healthy/clean.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the therape extricated into its place of origin and is afflicted with emotion; then inquire about this troubled matter, if you feel it too, pull that which has been touched to the sharp instrument as needed for your aid.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot cover it due to the contraction of the flesh and lengthening of the veins, here are neither nerves nor vessels; then proceed over the flesh where it has been expanded making extraction easier.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you find blood at the ends of those nails where they are fixed in all parts, and your engine is to remove flesh from that part which has been injured by pulling; and if you cannot over the detachment of flesh on that area affected by bone fracture or protrusion through them, then:
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any location, then use your hand and forceps to remove it completely; subtly ensure that the pus is not broken apart and remains difficult for you as well as during its removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot observe that one of your own times has come around, then lie down for several days until the parts in their cycle become visible again, and repeat this action as long as necessary when they are released.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May you if there is contrary flow of blood in your body, then apply the remedy we have mentioned for healing at this place (the clinic).
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Guard your intellect of knowledge regarding veins or nerves, or sinews, and apply the appropriate remedy throughout all manners possible to aid in escape from sedation; thus make ease and tranquility as well as slowness and firmness present when you administer it.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	So that you make the swelling subside in such a way that the patient'thy thighs adhere to their shape as per where your lighter must strike for relief (which may bring joy).
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	May it not be within your power, then take what is within your power for the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the tools that are taken out due to the opposing parts of another division, or which have already progressed some part from outside into those divisions themselves and thus expand them beyond their natural size (and so you cover it), then place your hand on that; and this action corresponds with the quantity in terms required for using forceps. And once done so accordingly to its amount – now she suffers lesser pain, as if healed by medicine itself.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then turn your lance according to contrary movements so that the sword penetrates into the bone and expands within you (the patient).
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, let that go for some days, and apply it again until you return (to normal).
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is from the gallbladder, then push that into where it belongs there.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May it be that the wood has been struck and you wish to administer inpulsion; then place it there if it is sound, firmly pressing so as to push it back into the cavity of its socket in the hip joint and press upon it with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the seat is concave, then you will push that substance strong into it, whereby the seat becomes elevated by that forceful entry.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the saddle is inflamed, then you must gently bend all of the flesh where it truly exists if at all possible; and carefully apply that which seems appropriate to use therein when needed.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or ribcage and it presses against you when you touch that area, then gently rest on that part which may possibly seize up; hold there to guard oneself from injury to veins or nerves, remove carefully if necessary, and apply cold compress (if the patient desires) and treat that portion until healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which ligatures are drawn:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	They are like saw blades when they take hold of the bed, that they do not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those humors are various pains, large and small, drops and swellings, according to the magnitude of the excess in the saddle seat and weakness of its paucity, as well as the breadth of the body cavity and constriction therein.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of the push caused by this constricted part in it causes pain like that of a dagger thrust into it, and its exertion is as silent as that.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pushing out sound limb part:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	aychemy when it is that his internal organ has been drawn out into the hollow of the seat and pushed by this force;
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The blood vessels of which it is customary to cauterize, where the arteries are located in the sixth place from above (the neck), and these pulsing veins that supply the fingers, said hereafter; herbs found on both platforms; venous ones present in two tear ducts formed by two gills called aspirants; and those prepared at mercury heat within front positioning area as well as those located at extremity of nose; guides to which are situated at the chest, labia below (under); labia above (above), these referred to hereafter as algic veins; and vessels present in tongue sections.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that have been incised in the breasts be: one is cephalic and must be cleaned with wild garlic; this people call it "the vein of all limbs," whereof artery (artery) is named, which when pierced by vulgars they name “vein of belly,” its branching vessels are incised near the hearth's focus—that vessel being in which bloodletting takes place and that one appearing visibly on the chest; woollen floss (hemostatic thread) is used, pierced between the small auricular pulse point and little groin pit, existing here as two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of these is that which follows the curve of the popliteal artery, and another (the saphenous vein) is in the region of the knee'dictus domestic, while the sciatic vein also lies along this curved part; furthermore, other like veins accompany those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of veins in the hands is ancient and migratory, causing ulcers and sores on old wounds to heal or fester (heal slowly with decay).
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: For that which you have recommended for him is as follows - make sure his malady'sup chest (brachial plexus) and its head at the back of the neck in the location where veins are abundant, large drape; strengthen the brachial with a bandage around there so that fingers appear underneath it. And if you feel their pulse through those hands they have, here is your signal to attempt (or try).
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take up the cautery lance now that you are prepared to insert it into the vein within which [the] phlebotomist withdraws blood from the patient'thy thigh, and introduce it there accordingly.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	In English line by line, this would be translated as follows:
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the intestine is equal to two fingers' adjustment or enclosure, and it seeks as much fluid as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength in pulses and ease that which has been healed inside.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the meal of this free person, there were their examinations and cautioning with these things.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Major veins and arteries in the limbs are ancient and harmful, flowing swiftly from wounds; diligent palpation is required for their assessment.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of cauterizing those joints, as you should recommend: compress the patient'dict thigh within which their veins will appear and become visible through touch, indicating pulse rhythm - at this point your duty begins.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E propriam tu levati il conduttus sopra la vena al parti inferiori, ponendo immantinente l'infuso inciso nei partiti sottostanti; e inseris quell'affluenza che già hai fatto nelle altre vene del petto. Et facci affluire quella quantità secondo le tue necessita.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return the area of inflammation to its joint and apply pressure there for an hour; pause over that spot where blood clots or purulent exudates are present, tightening up your hand if necessary until healing occurs.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And it is already followed by their memory recalling them and that of the accompanythy in the free space (of movement or action).
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	So the vigor of phlebotomy from the vein of the forehead is applied to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, in ancient head diseases and migradictions and putrid sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate, line by line into English:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the emerging point at which you are on that vein and strike upon it, whether tilted up or for another cause in their madness; apply pressure to this opening of the hernia until healed as much as you wish.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the strength of the two veins in the eyes cause bleeding from both holes due to obstruction and discharge within the same eye, contributing to facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the cauterization is that it tightens the patient'sup chest with one bandage, and apply such treatment to them; you stand on their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And when the sanctus urgently needs to run away from that place where it is contained (the sickness), rest on those areas, tighten them quickly for another day, and move those parts accordingly.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bloodletting of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent sweating, as well as facial illnesses and migrade, which worsen on the face, mainly when old age comes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And as for the quality of this patient' extrication (flebectomy), it tightens their chest and places you in your left hand to hold them there while doing so; here at the neck base where veins are not felt, yet blood begins to flow gently.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you finally release your hand over the small bladder and make it flow downwards as needed according to necessity; at this point, apply that which has been restored by nature (presumably referring back to interventions performed earlier in restoring body functions).
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of foot amputation lead to contraction and healing of wounds, treatment of leprosy, management of diseases, and intervention against harmful sores that fester like a boil together with pus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	When the quality of that particular trepanation (a surgical procedure to open the skull) is such that the malady hardens at its joint within their neck due to ligament attachment; and it'thy master surgeon remains on top, while the patient himself lies down.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Here the blood is drawn from the long vein gradually, and taken out as needed when times require it; similarly to another of its own small veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Here the ligaments and tendons are tightened to prevent the malady from focusing on itself within the womb where it is healed by its own child (the fetus).
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The venous puncture of veins alleviates small boils and mouth ulcers, decaying gums, and sores that are in the nose and around the body (mouth).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt about which one it is among those that come out, then you understand the greater of them and their visible discharge, thus meaning what should be addressed first in treatment.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears as if veins are in the lips below (suggesting that there may be issues with blood flow or blockages in these areas),
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May it be customary for some days to insert needles into the veins that are in the groin area.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May veins that come from the tongue and increase its vitality be properly prepared for phlebotomy of the cephalic to access points located in the soft palate (uvula), mouth illnesses, etc.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And now apply pressure with one hand on those areas where blood vessels have been opened by the bleb (fluid-filled bubble), which soon afterward supply these places.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And for that purpose, they gather and collect these subtle species according to the extent of their veins and according to the narrowness thereof.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of silver foot-clinic:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	If their veins are swolthy and full as seen visibly entering the cavity, it is decided to open them repeatedly, aiming at those that contain thick blood inside.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs an olive incision:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This instrument is of lesser length and subtlety in extension, and it's suitable for the surgery on small veins that contain delicate blood flow.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of phlebotomy on the basilic vein (which is one of three veins), extract diseases that come from above and below the waist—the chest and belly—through this procedure, for these illnesses are extracted with it.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When convened with the bloodletting practitioner, when that happens and he/she takes care of it there as a matter of concern because every time they do so an artery will be pricked through which bleeding occurs for ensuring not to accidentally pierce that very same artery while performing phlebotomy again with the needle in hand.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear upon manifestation, then you should lay down that and change to another (e.g., apply a different remedy), or brace one of its branches; where this appears at the end of your arm, perform bleeding therein, and if necessary, continue with bloodletting as directed here.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the operation on your patient's chest, then at the tightened area of the arm where you are familiar with the location of the elbows; and secure his hand over that vein which is concave in shape as part of the procedure for bloodletting. Secure also his arm so it does not bend outwards, pay attention to percussion sounds within the spaces around the artery'im lest you cause harm or miss signs indicating issues with circulation; and ensure your own safety during this process.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you tighten the bandage that you have applied to the place where it was sutured, at this time inflammation occurs there due to blood vessel expansion and therefore causes discomfort/pain.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see the sanction flowing during flebectomy with infant'dictorine (likely referring to a substance like mercury used in ancient medicine), then understand that it is of sanguine nature; and your cuff and pause lie over this area for long space. Apply your cuff, if the sanction has detached itself, frequently moving will cause reattachment, so hold tight with hand and arm strength to keep it attached.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard their navel for the humors within them and ensure they have greater fear of it than on other days until healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the sanction has not withdradicted and you do not present medicine to it, then infiltrate its artery; whenever that extremity contracts and becomes detached (the sanc), grasp tightly for fistic action therein, which will relieve pain from constriction of blood vessels near the attachment point or ligament and within tendons.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the sanction has detached itself, then it is done; otherwise, take care of that which came before its separation for recollection at the place where dust particles have separated from their location on the sanction.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the puncture of the black vein is conveniently used to lance upwards from the lowered part of the head and downward from the limb; for this reason it consists of branches of basilisk and calf, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then make it in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of treating the cranial vein is to extract the blood from the head and alleviate the humors' illnesses.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Herein lies the particular place for puncturing with a barbed needle made of either olives or myrtle; here is where blood vessels and nerves are not present at all.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Mayhaps you need to perform the procedure that keeps your cautery from piercing the head of the lancet too much, and ensure its position with pressure points below it so as not to harm or wake up the patient unless a primary percussion is necessary over that area which may require some adjustments on the cautery.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Even if an incision is made in the patient'dict chest at this moment without performing a pus aspiration during the first touch, there may be no signs of that abscess then.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Must be considered due to this surgery and the accidents of him/her for correction (in them).
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first source sentence translates to: The one from whom you know that bleeding is not performed but for the conservation of health and hope, with caution towards disease management; wherein bloodletting should be done on a vein located in the groin area – namely, the cephalic, femoral, and basilica veins; it shall take place at dawn during breakfast time or afternoon tea, as well as being supplemented by food intake when significant signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When it is necessary to perform an incision and also on the third day or at first use following three hours of today,
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May incision that is administered may also occur when necessary and at any time of day or night, always ready for action.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	When it has been twelve years since the woman was not operated on for bleeding (febo), and when she is pregnant, operation should occur within seven months from conception, and women who have already undergthy operations should not be operated upon again until after these seventy days.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to be subjected to clysters for any reason, provided that there are holes retained in the areas treated with bloodletting through leeches, so that veins do not spill out during the treatment of these vessels, which are purified and should not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider carefully in the subtlety of humors since if the sickness is great due to meat and drinks, or if it's from what can return intoxication, consider these factors as well.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Return inside if any cause does not prevent it, or due to some exercise for that matter, such treatment makes the sanction subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the bleeding from patient'dict is stopped in his chest, it becomes time for third hour since we have spoken of this matter.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And if the patient' extrication of that day is due to illnesses from animals or all bodily accidents occurring simultaneously with anxiety, anger, fear, and excess movement as well as additional hernias and effusions they carry within them:
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in its essence, these causes are what customarily guide men towards the use of fragrances and scents as well as balms and remedies according to their capacity for possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the lancet over a thigh that has been pricked or where such action was intended to occur for lancing (or bloodletting).
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Extract his arm, and rub that with its lubricating oil three times; tighten the bandage around the joint and wrap it again thrice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	When the stricture is fresh and not engulfed by fluid (blood), or when it's superfluous, do not allow blood flow; otherwise, prevent movement of body parts:
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply pressure on the stricture, which that person who underwthy cautery has caused his implements between them inside where veins become inflated and are revealed by feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here is the line by line translation of this medieval medical text:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Thus, for that reason, let the surgeon remain firm and diligently engaged in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Return the pulse (febrismus), even if a vein is distended in one place, then do so at another swelling of short duration there or above it quickly; and hasten to your next stop if that spot does not have an ulceration present.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is punctured or the swelling of the limb occurs, let it be for a day or two without straining the ligament; rather strengthen immediately with an aspiring catgut treatment and do not immerse in water baths.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	When arterial ligation is necessary, then perform bleeding cauterization if required.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and subtle, and you fear that it will expand, repeat lithotripsy in this second rectum session, adjusting a few stones within the stone (where) therein; where once was an apendicectomy site now only slight openings.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If you see that point already made upon it, do not attempt to go over it again, for there is no excuse on your side; pause above any division of the crack in the oil, thus relieving the limb from pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place than where others are located.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If there is a great suppuration at the site of cauterization, continue to apply warm compresses for several days, mostly directed towards that which does not bleed but rather worsens afterward (such as in an open vein), and if you have applied pressure with your hand over this spot using a wet sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalding it briefly for about an hour; then the suppuration dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up that fluid from that vein of said patient or another, it complements them (or provides necessary aid).
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is any darkness or greenish hue in the location for a few days, do not worry; and if you wish to pause it over that cause of inflammation or dissolution due to myrrh solution, or from the sap of mint or chamomile or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically applies scrapings and excisions of injections from beneath the arch (of the foot)
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore rest your hand on that area, and if you find the swelling musty (mustiness), then place your compression there; for that protrusion is evil and bad – indeed once it flows strongly from any of the causes we have mentioned above, wherein blood comes through an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When arsenic is placed in the amount required for fixation, so that the location becomes hardened and this substance takes care of the other remedy inside until it heals,
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	When you extract from the sanctum as much as the soul dictates, and according to its vitality and hue, pull out accordingly with the sanctum.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black, then you let it flow out when possible; and if it appears thick, likewise allow its release when feasible; similarly, if there's an attack (gout), enter so that the heat of the condition can be alleviated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	When someone is suffering from excess (freuling), their opposite conditions will arise as well, and those who extract it in deliberate movements cause its disruption or scattering.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best that is administered through a venipuncture (of vein) is not the deep section; it should be superficial or small cuts only.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This incision made for surgery is saved from blood flow and nerve incompetence; it was placed well and serves as a safe haven according to the tradition and length of time recommended.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is inflammation of the complexion, then bleeding during phlebotomy should be done in an infusion of myrrh or spiced wine with cloves, cinnamzym, ginger, and similar herbs, or a fragranced and odorous poultice.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you experience sudden fainting spells, it is due to the evil breath of illness spirits, and these demons are expelled through sweating in water mixed with fragrant herbs; use aromaticity as applied herein, apply some parts directly to the patient'se skin.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When it is necessary from among those causes mentioned in Part II regarding constipation for expulsion, use them accordingly here at the head of syncope to facilitate defecation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wishes to remove their arm and dissolve their sancus following the vection of which liposuction is performed by means of motive expulsion, its fluid movement evacuates the small sanc gradually according to the quantity present over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May those who wish to heal their arm use gentle strokes and apply pressure on the forearm where it is strongest; do so for seven hours or nine from the first incision of surgery.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May those who wish to withdraw the sanction from their body' extraneous portion as decreed by appointment will occur on the second day or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May this body part in which you have cut and inflicted pain be feverish due to the blood coming from it during a period of excessive menstruation, causing abundance within that leads to syncopes (loss of consciousness). Thus, ensuring all conditions for cauterization are maintained; place your hand over its pulse so as not to cause death where syncope occurs. This may happen when the practitioner is ignorant or negligent during menstruation bleeding periods.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you intend to unclasp the arms and evacuate the bladder after due consideration, once its valve has been anointed with oil from the vessel, and when pain is difficult in that part of the sank (bladder), press firmly under such urgency to contain the stretching thereof; for it'thy condition worsens.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the catheter inserted inside at this time; or remove any coagulation present in the purple vein within its infusion chamber; pause over that which is tarantula-like, either on the tawny furnace or sapphire bench, and compress that area to prevent said clot from being expelled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is swolthy or thrombosed (apostemat), do not touch it lest the clotting worsen.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to induce defecation and there' extraneous reason not present, then prompt the anus above that place or in another vein as required.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the referred "arm funnel" is punctured in the place of darkness or base (probably referring to a vein), when it isn'thy not lanced or burned, and it consists of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting that he does is such that the humour enters his body in a waterfall manner into where the flame reaches, and veins become visible therein clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And tighten it over that which is loose at the narrowed part of the navel; and place the poultice according to its transverse small dimension, neither longitudinally nor laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Whenever you perform a broad incision and your finger-incision, which is where this action takes place at the joint' extrinsic part of it (a small one), then proceed as follows:
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeatedly move your hand in the tail end and make the blood circulate within until you meet your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would be excused from bathing in the tail of water and your feet are rested there during times when one wakes up (likely referring to morning).
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The surgical opening of this vein is placed so that from all other veins, none have pulsing blood vessels or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	E from the extraction of the swelling in the fourth chamber is conferred upon the illnesses of the womb.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	When the quality of the bleeding during the procedure is that you squeeze it in or with your own blood, place it on an ash tail (a type of cloth), and let the vein become swollen until demonstration; then perform that transverse cauterization. And if inserted thereafter without leaving any trace,
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the femur bone, for before long it will affect their nerves which are stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And apply the poultice in the tail vein and allow the blood to flow there; if you do not apply it in the tail vein, then the blood will clot in the vessel of the venous system, which is forbidden from circulation.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the sanction is extracted according to necessity, pause over the vein or salt so that it is not congealed solidly; and seemingly perform in all parts of the body continuously.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the vigor of that surgery on her left side be assigned to diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	In surgery of his bedside, it seems like you have done as with your other actions.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The strength of the veins resulting from varicose comes in diseases present at nighttime on parts of the body similar to those affected by menstrual issues and retained periods (menstruation), as well as old hernia symptoms, their appearances resembling illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply antiseptic paste or poultice on the foot' extrusion site and toes area; it is better for prevention and care of infection.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If there are facial boils on the face, then guard your nerves from those spots directly on the face and pause your incision at which point you wish to insert it; this is similar when desiring an injection or other procedures in that manner.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Whereas it is now necessary for you (the physician) to perform a procedure with forceps or similar instrumentation
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Whereas you are not allowed to issue a sanction, then rub the patient'se skin in the tail end of their colon and let the sickness run its course while inside what has been expelled (presumably indicating that some form of purgation or bowel cleansing is being prescribed). 
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the surgeon makes a mistake during the first session of cauterization, repeat it on their fifth attempt until they find relief (the location), and do not fear ill omens; just be careful of your nerves as we have mentioned before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Based on my understanding of Latin roots that overlap with Italian, Spanish, French and English vocabulthyne (though this text does not strictly adhere to these languages), here is the attempted
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	Interpreting this line from a medieval medical text with elements of Latin and Romance languages can be challenging due to the archaic language usage, but here's an attempt at translating it into modern English:
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The strength of Ludo'sin flesh incision is the duty of his thigh when cut with sanctioned tool.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the bleeding patient is that their blood flows in and festines (thickens or congeals) within the thighs below due to sitting on a long bandage undernethy beneath them; it does not appear unless water comes up into view.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you apply the poultice to each limb in turn and alternately along its length, which is better: immersed or spread out depending on where applied, for that location becomes clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let them run as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return those slips and stoppages back over the location of the incision cut and tightened therein; through this intervention healing occurs.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From wind-chill and those qualities of use for that which belongs therein.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	When it is caused by air (or frogs), or wool, these symptoms appear in the chest area – ventilations of cots, or rheumatism and/thyroid
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is pain according to these guidelines: one of them is cutting and extracting pus from the sanction (surgical intervention), and the other is wounding after extraction – this could imply cauterization or further treatment post-extraction. Here, 'ventosa' refers commonly in historical medical texts as pleurisy where air accumulates underneath layers of tissue lining outside the lungs (pleura) causing chest pain and breath
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This type of ventilation that is cut or wound after extraction – it may be a pleuritic inflammation (which could refer to an abscess within the chest cavity related to thoracic infections), and/or pus formation, which might suggest loculated empyema requiring inc
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	For the ventosities that are administered for cutting and pus extraction – these abscess sites within the body include: one in which cauterization is paused at a certain point (likely referring to stopping before reaching vital structures, like possibly near or into organs), located towards the head; this area overlaps with both jaws of two mandibles (teeth); and ventosities from mouth rills are placed above these teeth, then on top of the tongue where there is pus formation next to it in the pharynx. Additionally: Ventosities at two spatulas' locations which might refer to distinct spaces between orifices; over the chest cavity (thoracic space); ventosities from both bridges, possibly referring to metal instruments used for cauterization such as forceps; and finally, ventosities of a cuoyza/cubitus – which refers historically either to wrists or elbows. These procedures likely involve drainage through incision ('scarificacio' implying cutting) into these abscess sites for treatment (‘extraccio de sanc’). This detailed line by ancient medical practitioner outlines a complex, multi-site infection and its management involving cautery or other interventions to alleviate the accumulated pus.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May it be necessary to provoke windiness due to illness or continuous occurrence; administer that immediately at the mealtime of each day and during sex, as well as throughout the nighttime in its place and any time else when needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it occurs at any cause of those things, especially on the third or fourth day after sunrthy, they command that air is to be considered as a pain that has passed through during the previous three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And when the vitality of the head is due to wind rising and sinking under gravity, it may be that this body expulsion occurs throughout the entire corporeal form.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This is in the location of trepanation for the skull (cranial). The text describes medical procedures related to cranial trepanation, which was a common practice during medieval times when this treatise originated
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not unknown that they also use the one complete with infiltration or where there are cysts; this gives a great harm to him. The passage suggests awarenfalent and potentially hazardous medical practices involving full humoral imbalance (infections, such as those seen within cystic formations) that could cause significant damage according to
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason I do not use the one with those wounds on them (the feet), and in which there are frequent illnesses or infirmities (suggesting chronic conditions of these areas). The statement indicates a cautious approach to treating pre-existing injuries
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And for this reason I use that which is on them (referring to areas affected by trepanation or similar procedures), where the illness continues there; consequently, when you command the ventoscope (instrument possibly used in medieval medical practices) and ask it gently not too much pressure over their parts of entry points with a light touch using air movement. The practitioners fear generating amnesia because applying excessive force could potentially cause forgetfulness or memory loss as an adverse effect during treatment involving the ventoscope for delicate areas where illness is present and healing requires careful handling to prevent further harm, possibly including cognitive damage due
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The place of the vascular window is in the location of cranial trepanation and basilica: hence I confer these conditions—asthma (likely referring broadly here as 'breath'), constriction of airways ('ale' possibly denoting breath or lung function), spasm, chest rupture/fracture, and resuscitation. This sentence suggests that the medical practitioner aims to address various respiratory issues in connection with cranial trepanation (possibly referring herein to procedures involving treatment of airways) through specific interventions tailored for these purposes; it outlines potential therapies or treatments focused on breathing difficulties and chest injuries associated with such
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When poison enters and is pacified slowly, it weakens the body and the belly.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	E the wind of Allah's anointment causes pains in the head and eyes, moves away, and prioritizes them over toothaches; it is at the location for dental extraction (tooth pulling).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the suction device not to press on your hand so that it does not cut an artery and cause blood flow,
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Evening coolness of the mind comforts in the mouth (perhaps feeling relaxed or calming as night approaches), and corruption of the gums; appearance related to diseases present within the mouth, located where dental extractions are performed on those who have them there.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the heat that is felt on the sinews be provided for strengthening, which occurs due to warming of warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the cauterizer not to proceed in incision, for where there is fleshlessness, immediately attend thereto with care your nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E it is through this wind that they blow over the arse and heal open sores on the anus, which contain putrid exhalations (pus).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the windlass to create a great breeze and that it be of earth material, then in places where there is strong continuation of airflow; strongly through delicate vibrations make them scraped off with a scraper.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May slight breezes from the cushions for gradual manifestation, which draw out all illnesses of old rheumatism and/or feverish condition in body, bladder; causing menstrual pains, abdominal pain (dysmenorrhea), and inflammation at genital region. They also arrive to sites for cure by the hands of skilled physicians or apothecaries, where they are wound up with wire loops/needles (flebectomy) and sewn shut (ligature).
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In spite of everything, they injure all parts of the body and cause fainting spells within them.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From these breezes flows his strength, from the breath of those very cushions he rests upon;
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this action and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, whereupon anger (suffering) of the sanctus will appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you scrape and suck repeatedly on each part of the body, pay attention in its disposition (the position or condition).
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that house (body) has rare flesh of tender parts and you do not scrape it with a sponge without applying pressure, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When directed by the bellows, increase the incision and press a poultice on for ease of suction.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is swolthy, then cover it with warm applications; in the first application of heat and humidity to the affected area.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May occur in the second phase of acquiring knowledge about removing the large stone (presumably referring to gallstones or stones within some bodily cavity).
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is due to faecal matter, then it requires a sharp incision on the clean surface so that healing can proceed.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Translation line by line into English:
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract the sanctus (essence), then cut it with a sharp instrument called mota; and if you inform us that the sanctus is thick, let' extrication be done beforehand by means of cutting.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	In the depth of incision where surgery is conducted only at this point.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the intestine is thick, hard, blackened, and its pores are streaked, such that the places of fomentation become lubricated, softened, opened up; if in summer time, apply oil from aloe or castor bean plant, honeydew jelly, wine vinegar, chamomile decoction, to these likenesses.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is great and foul, then apply honey, or oil of roses, or oil of aloe, or juniper oil; according to their appearance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be that the bellows is made of large leather straps for tendons, and those which are prohibited from oil should not use them here; these must have water or wine vinegar (or weak acidulated water) prepared with solar rays or copper vessels, similar to what they would apply.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And it is from that which the illness comes due to moisture, washing their breath with water of juniper and sumac, or similar substances for them.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that which the superfluous are gross, wash their breaths with vinegar from ancient times or water of honeyed saints' spring, such as myrrh, frankincense, cuminum, and aloe; according to their likeness.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	E cover that the wound be kept wet from bathing; have some covering applied over it for an hour or two after washing, and allow the wound to rest in its moisture.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is required for that bloodletting should take place before wind agitation (ventosis).
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the diet: if the wind stopper or that which is from the liver and chest burning upwardly hot with inflammation, these causes of coldness within, such as white wine vinegar, honeydew grapes (which are green), endive greens, lettuce, mustard seeds, juniper berries, and garlic cloves.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And their food with pepper and boiled meats is consumed as it pleases them, along with breads made from grain; likewise for the appearance of these patients.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that from which the complexion is reddened and sweats occur in mouth or on almonds/alcohol, or wine with a strong odor between Christmas and Epiphany; it is recommended for them to use little of beer/food, pause meals containing legumes (peas), cabbage, peppers, pigeon liver, and drink plenty of water.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in feverish or bloody daytime it is necessary for them (likely a patient) to drink more than food, here comes the first source sentence:
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the wind blowings that are made during their incision be breezes they rest upon their feet and on gout and hernias in the loci of joints, and also on the abdomen'thy size}, for these limbs do not suffer cutting there.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E no is it for those but the connection of a member's sinews, and with puffy pauses on their chest in sickness caused by an abnormal flow of body fluids from one joint to another; they use that which dissolves windy inflammation when applied both above the belly and breast (belly button), rarely diminishing the member size and relieving pain where vapors cause discomfort.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And rests upon their bruises or boils for some time until the heavy humors are drawn out and absorbed into them through attraction by means of water, which is strong enough to draw it away from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When it appears that there is a breeze blowing through those closed places, such as on the belly and breastbone:
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These breezes are administered with suction alone, and some of them even by the fire's heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When water purification measures are fully administered for the illnesses of the mouth,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	Here comes the source sentence to translate:  
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of windblown medicine administered at the focus: It is two drops from each dripper as we have formed them; and the quantity of powder is the width of one palm, in this place where it is within its circuit, that amount which enters into our space with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Its pain is of bone or sour citrus, large thorns and fine ones; thus it does not allow the body part to maintain its position on itself.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And whether it is a wax or iron torch crossing over his flame, there the burning cautery light remains at the focus of heat.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the greater wind that we have recommended for that which has been described herein, and its weak pulse according to those illnesses and states of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When liver and kidney fumes rise higher than those of youths and heavy bodies,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of keeping this flame above the body is to gradually light a candle wax with fire from below using a small piece of tinder, and hold it over the spot where windiness occurs so that the flame can be maintained before igniting any partisan onset at once. This prevents the patient'thy thighs being burnt by an unexpected flash-fire caused due to sudden increase in body temperature from painful experience.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Elevate its position on the member of the thigh, and place it over the tumor we have mentioned, ensuring that when they breatimize (blow into) and do not digest what is placed therein, thus preventing vapor from rising onto this swelling.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And with fire according to its nature, and repeat that if there are digestive issues from that,
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May a vapor be administered in the melancholy feverish state, filled with water but without transverse or disruption flowing within it and is only supplied to such extent that there remains no excess on the body part limited solely for this purpose.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it works: The larger the windscreen, the better, so that more water can be received and retained.
Capitol .xcvii.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual textual excerpt but
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	When hemorrhages are not applied to the arms where it is impossible to place droppers due to their small size, they should be administer each with a cup and mouth for those who can hold them; or on naked flesh such as in cases involving ears (ears), nose (nose), nasopharynx area when blood comes out during sneezing.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those found in the arteries and veins within our bodies, where bloodsuckers reside:
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	E apply their salve at day and night in water within which they are warm, so that no cause remains inside the belly of those; and cleanse the bowels through enema or by catheterization, and inflame the limb affected with gout until it turns reddened. And set them up on their places where indicated for treatment today (using leeches/bloodletting apparatus if necessary).
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are full and if it occurs (when there is congestion or overfilling in
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If suction of the area can occur through airflow, one may improve circulation and thus provide relief (this translation assumes that 'succion' refers to a form of therapy or technique aimed at increasing blood flow). However,
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	But if not possible through airflow, then moisten the area with water and apply heat therapy (this implies that by using wet compresses or warm baths accompanied possibly by gentle massage). The goal here is to provide comfort ('exprimenti') for inflammation or pain.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the foot wounds are kept clean and fresh water seeps out (indicating a need for ongoing care to prevent infection), then drape your cloth with cooler, damp linen over it, allowing that which exudes moisture from within to be absorbed away. This procedure suggests gentle management of the wound area by maintaining cleanlin0495; however, ensure proper dryness and hygiene (the translation here is suggesting a method for dressing potentially infected or weeping sores with care).
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the foot is multiplied (meaning there are multiple lesions or blisters), then powder it with trisilver iodine solution three times over its surface to address potential sources of infection quickly and effectively, allowing that which seeps out; alternatively place mustard seeds on their causes directly above where the seed attaches itself (this implies a home remedy or poultice treatment). By doing so, one may ensure healing as these materials adhere while treating sores caused by irritation and potentially relieve pain associated with skin lesions. The aim here seems to be immediate intervention for wound care using available household items in medieval times (such remedies would have been a practical approach without access to modern medicine). This interpretation focuses on the use of simple, yet effective methods documented within historical medical practice to manage common health issues at that time.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, repeated injections of bloodletting, when possible, changing those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the bloodletting is prohibited for suspension, then it should be performed on fresh venous sites or with an inserted needle in those places where there may still occur a flow; and they are to have their pauses when I feel any such current occurring now.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice, sprinkle some ash or salt on that area, and apply it quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Ayssi begins the process of restoration: from recovery.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is frequently necessary in the practice of medicine; it concerns restoration and treatment for broken bones and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, understand that the learned doctors and wise ones here speak of ancient texts they read among themselves about free people outside these walls who may not have studied their letters at all.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason we are denied the knowledge of these sciences on our land; and it has never been forgotten for any time in the past; nor have I neglected to apply after studying their books from Antiquity, until today when extracting that science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Return adjustment for experiments and studies throughout one'se lifetime.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol primier.	Capital First. (This line appears as an introductory phrase
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures are required before we begin to recall the details about the broken bones themselves, whether it concerns one or several at a time.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cover then, in the forehead of this book, the essence of the speech; and these capitols understood herein are where our craft is forged upon the truths contained within them—here we both stand as those who know or can learn this noble art from us.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	So that when you harden a bone or dislocation or twist and cast it, then coil yourself as if preparing for cauterization of that very fragment or any other individual piece thereof, provided no obstacle prevents such action, act accordingly to relieve pain, which is what hurts at the moment, or when intense heat rises within you causing fever and inflammation.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Whenever he returns his bowels back to their initial place in which they are customary, it is important for him/her to do so promptly. (Here "he" could refer either to a male patient or practitioner and the text can be interpreted
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	So when the bone is broken and begins to heal, it's important that one consumes nutrient-rich foods with a thick consistency, such as cooked wheat flour stews in water, rice, pork chops, fresh fish, goat cheese (or milk), veal liver or heart, and young peas similar to those for their diet. Here the focus is on providing dense nutrition that can support bone repair with substances like coagulated blood poultice mixed with honey applied as a healing dressing afterward in addition to these foods which are part of one's regular dietary intake, possibly for this specific purpose.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When bones crack when they are in the bodies of those who have aged or become weak, it is not possible for them to continue being and becoming firm according to their nature due to drying out (loss of moisture) from their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	Evenly and steadily they continue according to their nature for as long as necessary for the purification of those members, just like how bones are formed by young pets.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature may adjust and strengthen over the broken bones of any part caused by excessive consumption that adheres inside where bodies are conglutinated together internally; there is not a cause within which you cannot perform these tasks, just like focusing on an oven' extrinsic heat.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason it is necessary that we pause the foods of malady (the ones with gravity and thickness/viscosity), as we have mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motion varies according to the variation of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Here is the line by line translation:
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When one recalls all types of fracture, separated into their own chapter as well in this text.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion different kinds of breakage in themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The whole specialty is in curing one' extrication from the patient, as remembered specifically at their respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motor of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	Through this I've come to know the bone fracture of yours: its twisted state and where it stands out distinctly in feeling, which becomes apparent when you touch it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when it is not in the twisted position nor does touching the bone and groin cause great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Having it possible that there is curvature or small crack, which you must feel with your hand and compression of the whole body at once; having pause over them in terms of medicine whereby one remembers what time convened to this location for treatment; apply pressure tightly due to slight constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	E understand that the place where it bends and does not divide into two or another which do not meet in this space, when the entire part of your patient is inflamed due to an abscess coming upon them at their appointed time for treatment have you started rectification with what they come bearing.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an abscess occurs and must be drained, leave it open for as many days until the abscess stops flowing; afterward apply warmth to that area using any method you can manage (such as heat application or massage).
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You understand that I have placed a lubricating and anesthetic substance on the area where you are experiencing discomfort, as if from your bones.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Return that limber second one when it arrives as memory of him/her.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	May it be so that the bone is satagated (heavy or compressed), if this part of the broken body member, whether it'm the leg or arm, requires extension: then use your hand; or if the limb itself is small, also apply here. If instead it's a joint affected by tendons or one tendon and its attachment point (ligament): again, apply with hands as needed.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When you touch it at this time beneficially with your hand and if herein you perceive any other cause different from the present one, correct that issue according to the amount of your intention or willpower.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive extension and compression, as doctors who have long used these movements may accidentally cause abscess formation through their operation or may induce contraction in the limb where they'sever seen fluid accumulation due to their repeated actions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of a relaxed limb is what I recommend, so that you understand how members are various in their smallness and largeness, as well as in their shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	Of those who are small in stature like the arm and hand with it, as they say to these people: "Let its covering be a thin but refined cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Mighty ones who are with the thigh or calf, wrapped up tightly and hardily, whereby ligaments connect strong limbs everywhere along their entire body, preventing them from entering (or hiding) in there at all.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the treatment, take care of your patient'dict bowel movement at a convenient time for them, over the location of that fracture they have three to four wraps on their limb; and tightly hold onto one end of the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	When applying warmth around the location of the fracture with a small pad, it softens and gradually relaxes the tightness therein until you take away most of your hands from that area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And space is left between the bones of stopage or cloth wherein lies the twistiness of the fracture if there it exists; else, in none does a cause remain within.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Return the pillow or bandage to this area, and place your hand over these wrappings gently so as not to cause inflammation or suppuration if present therein, do it for a few days; and keep yourself tense on that dressing during those days.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Here come the splints of canna lata's bark, and they are formed carefully; or made from wood; or branches of palm; each having its size according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, if the splint placed over that fracture is large and a small one has been added to other such supports, adjusting its length according to where it rests on the limb—towards greatness or littleness in both height and breadth; place strength upon those supporting structures as per your first bandaging technique; position yourself accordingly over the area of fracture congruent with strictures discussed earlier. And so, extend the splint proportionally to how much further you have lengthened from the point of injury until such time that it aligns perfectly with where the original restriction (or limitation) occurred in relation to the site of bone breakage as your measurement extends along the fracture line.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And when fine points are not conveniently suitable, you will not bind them with such moisture as those which wish to be bound; nor where there is a day' extricable between stones and stones does one find space enough for it.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the malady is led by the extremities of the bones to a constriction in your places, then quickly cease those movements that would cause harm, so as not to inflict injury on yourself.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some injuries are due to childhood (plagiarism), and there is a rupture in the spine; hence comes memory recall at that spot on the second instance of distinctiveness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: You understand that when all parts of the body are broken on the first day; this causes one part not to lie upon it but rather set down over time, according to your knowledge of the arrival of ulceration healing.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how these masters treat it when the thigh bones are broken or displaced and twisted.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of splint due to cold restoration after a break is beneficial and mainly for the legs and breasts; it does not produce heat or fever: gloves made of flour dust, which helps move the mill' extrication in the joints of the limbs.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When it is comforted with this same as before, but if that which was inside the book of humors has been opened up by him, then do not make his comfort soft or subtle again, and use what you have used previously.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Autotherapy for fractures and dislocations: recipe of saffron, leadwort (ladanum), acacia, myrrh, greek yew bark; frankincense berries and leaves from all parts of the dragon's tree. Twenty times each herb is collected in quantities equal to the entirety of the Dragon Tree: thorn pricks and dried fruits are gathered into water or wine made with honey, when necessary for complex malady involving a cracked malaute; use this remedy as it provides good composition and restores broken bones.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other than the splint that provides comfort for a fracture and twist: take equal parts of white henbane, myrrh, frankincense, and myrtle resin (specific measurements not provided). From Arabian dragon essence x; from Indian myrrh essence v; from acacia gum vi.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are crushed in the mortar for mixing contrast (or) and administered with water or an albumen-based solution.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of the splints and bones apart at these places, causing pain in them which are cracks or fractures: a wound stitched with thread is immersed in oil and wine, fixed on that spot.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this cast (it is not for restoration), it serves as a poultice applied and pains are removed properly by themselves.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other cauterization methods to restore the cuts: ash from fig tree branches and shielded poppy seeds make an ointment, which when applied it heals.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of the emplastrum applied by doctors aids in bone fracture recovery: mixture of althea root, clove leaves and rose petals, wheat flour taken from each part divided into three parts; they are crushed and formed into cakes for when there is no damage to the limb.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut, comfort that part with warm water or the same liquid and use of hand on top.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Autre application of plaster poured in for healing that the first when you have to treat a chronic ulcer must restore the limb: mixture of rhubarb root and flaxseed, honey, mint leaves, greater celandine, violet flowers, chamomile petals; all chopped up and mixed with water from rosehip or nettle broths, according to the quality of the member and resting time.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras does not prescribe for him anything to be placed on the limbs that have been stretched out, but rather pains treated with wax and oil, nor any other cause; he recommends travel between coarse and subtle matters.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia have seen that there are stops (pauses) on the broken part of him for his restoration and about those causes in which evaporation due to warmth is recommended using myrrh, seeds, and substances related to them concerning these causes.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manipulative treatment for wound and pain: made from the bark of birch or juniper, thorns, pitch, finely ground parts; three times sieved and pulverized into powder form - this is the poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you break and separate what lies between them be considered if not there occurs pain or bleeding nor is the bone broken from its place; henceforthy shouldst thou have cause for concern, but on no day of weeks shall ye proceed with such actions.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you experience severe pain or a hardening and swelling at the location, then bend that area in time, and apply your plaster on it now (emphasizing immediate action).
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If you see that the abscess and swelling and pain and inflammation have already spread throughout the body and internal blockages occur with plasters and strictures, then repeat this treatment on the patient' extrinsically (i.e., externally).
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of those causes we have mentioned, then wait three to four days or seven at most; and some measures may be taken for up to twenty days as long as the dislocation heals, following what has been said above until the fracture adheres, and the meat coagulates on it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	When adjusted in the area where it may be as much as in your primary constriction entirely, and placed within the girth of what belongs to the malady (illness), following its memory recall (reflection upon previous symptoms).
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May you find the fracture site and dry it out so much that nothing remains thereafter, understand that food is prohibited to prevent such; therefore feed on this water daily until those signs disappear entirely for three days, loosen the tightness with a small amount of liquid, through which nourishment reaches the limb, allowing healing of the body.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May those who repair the fracture of another limb patient not yet fully healed during meal times do so according to their methods, as they believe it's right for certain angles and curves; great fear arises among them when water is applied incorrectly. If done correctly, however, applying water may enlarge the tendons freely while exergying them with fluid motion.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	Yet they have not seen any water from them for that it is reasonable why they do not fill (the humors).
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Second capital (referring to a case of bone fracture in the head): When you suffer from a break in the skull,
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The spices of breaks are motes (points), and their figures are various, with distinct causes: for any break caused by impact on an opening is that which enters the cistern where it rests; if such impact also affects other parts of bone and prevents passage within its dorsal side, this type of fracture is called elevation (or displacement).
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	E from these diseases the child has either a great or little crack (fracture), and it is due to impact or cramming on stone, causing their appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when there is a bone breakage (fracture), it heals in the subtlety of the little hair rooted in the bone, for which reason this particular kind of vascnelary crack is named.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it hurts in the bones of our joints when they are covered with phlegm (or effluvia), thus:
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So for all these broken bones that are splinted, they have been placed as separate supports like pins.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this fluid returns to its place in the body.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	With all these spices for detection, to find out about those and their intentions of decaying flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special vessel is known when it's discovered on the bone, and kept off of it until there appears a black fracture.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	May in the treatment of fracture consider bodily accidents (the patient's injuries), and if through those accidents signs or symptoms indicate distress as vomiting from cholera, expansion/extension, loss of understanding, abscesses, syncopes, acute fever, and examination and relief for these concerns by the humors and prayers (the doctor's interventions), they do not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If by chance you witness an illness that is not in order (misfortune or a health issue occurr extraneous to the current context), then begin its treatment on yourself/the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that when the swelling comes into your meal with you on days of cold and in winter, it' extricates itself as soon as possible from under your skull throughout all day XIIth positioning (Tuesday).
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, then you should cover your mouth with a cloth from morning to evening, as long as what comes out of your nose has damaged the nasal mucosa and causes diseases that have been recommended by doctors.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already reached the brain'dictum and is made of small parts and roughness, then cover it with fine partitions (or splints) as advised by you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	When you raise the head of the thigh and examine it over the bone according to what is customary for your observation based on how the patient lies down (as a child), ensuring that they are lying straight with their leg elevated.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you have to detect bone fracture or put on an antiseptic poultice and apply it above the wound where is covered with linen soaked in wine vinegar, allowing rest for the swelling inside while ensuring that there are no leaks of pus; begin at the site of the injury and incision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it is one of two methods for operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One manifestation is that you insert your instrument into the sinew such way and this is how it should be done. Here, place another sharp implement slightly less than the first one used herein; this also represents its manner of application.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Whenever it is necessary to insert instruments into the second one (likely referring to an additional treatment or procedure), proceed with caution.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "And those named various instruments of cutting that you have placed in your hands and others; sharp ones they are from their laths, which belong at the end of attention for the limbs' extremities.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	When using them for gentle palpation over the joints, in order not to cause pain on the head and lead that away from it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are hard and painful, then cut through its circulatory system before you administer medicinal incisions at the tables (not deeply), which we call tablets here.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	Even though they are not named as such, these do so that the bone of the thigh comes down to where it meets with water undernethyre (the area around which is rounded or at its edge), similar to a small margin or circle on top thereof; this prevents them from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these many trays according to the amount of each required for any part of your body inside wherein lies the extremity which sharpens, with quantity in length and shortness as per the requirement of this limb' extrémité.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three types of therapy: The quality that perforates through the broken bone structure it halts the splinter over the bone and turns those pieces inside where you know the bone has been fractured; moreover, it allows for relocation of the splinter to another place, while avoiding all disturbance caused by the size of the fragment or shard.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And when you keep watch with total caution that the incision does not touch any cause of cholera,
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone penetrates through it and if it continues along its path within you, extract that outwardly; for it is like inscriptions cut into water driven by humors elsewhere in your body—may they also be expelled (though some may require more force or subtlety than others).
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If there is any loose or satiety in the small bones, take that which makes it easy for you to remove from your joints; and care for these with ointments and liniments as we have discussed.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other aspect of the operation is painful and far-redicted, which Gualia and Lause pursue with great praise; this is what I speak to you about. It's necessary for you in your attendance that you begin discovering the part of the bone where a severe break was forcefully imposed, pausing only when you have located that specific area slow and cheerful as described by these instruments (referring to medical tools used):
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E it is that the flatulent (lenticular) part is like a lion and does not admit any cause, the sharp (aguda) portion lies in two parts beforehand along its length; such that the flatulent (lenticular) part aligns with the facet wherein agony enters into bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E make strikes upon the joints of one part and a small malady hidden within that makes movement easier when turned over, you are secure in your panniculus (fatty tissue layer under the skin), even if ignorant to this among all men; assuredly so long as he is sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When there is any additional cause related to the patient'se bone marrow in their joints (bones), take that from them at the extremity of the instrument used for cutting it out and remove it with ease, as once removed they will no longer suffer harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what is fractured or remains of the bone is its face, it experiences roughness and subtle cracks; when you recognize that hardness and fine splits, for which you have prepared various quantities according to your needs so as to be able to administer them at any convenient place on their body where they are positioned by yours hands.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	When you administer in your ratio that which allows the bones to come together for mastication, and apply what is used from below those points, do not cease until reaching where treatment of both thick and subtle pus can be done throughout all these areas.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any small breaks in the vessels or delicate fractures, where you must administer care as needed for correction of your patient'dict:
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all have been managed in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	When we have shown in great breaks.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is swolthy when you remove the bone, then take hold of his second cloth with as much dirt as therein and immerse that in oil roasted; submerge it over the ground whereof dirty things are scattered about, which treatment shall prevent him from bleeding severely. Apply another folded or tripled piece of fabric to this area, immersing again into water and olive oil (while holding his hand), administering thereupon such medication as you may over it; do not tighten that organ but only so much as the ground dirt can clutch with its fingers.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Here comes the sentence: E es que tu fasses de aquestes medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plaga, ayssi cum son secas; universalmente, administra en aquel tota medicina de propriedad de la qual és cierto absterger e non mordecer.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here is the translation line by line:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When pain occurs in the skull and bone is hardened as treatment approaches, causing discomfort on the surface; therefore consider if you experience accidents related to this condition, understand that your entire body has been affected.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not cure the blackness with medicine that is being used above (not specified what 'desus' refers to), but rather through medical treatment, then take honey and oil cut into parts three; apply them on these lines with a cloth, place it over the navel area: hold this part in your hand for curing. Also ensure proper application of healing spices as required within that which is meant to be cured (the blackness).
Capitol .iii.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately clear in context
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When a nail breaks, it's time for the restaurant repair (assuming 'restauratio' here refers to fixing
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	When it is not broken (the nail), but rather disjointed pieces from the body that have been positioned sideways as if to heal, each of those fractured bones has its own jagged edges like cartilage; they do not break or crack within you and instead show crookedness and a straightening effect.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the bones is broken in part, then insert a small object into your nose and grasp that fracture with it as indicated by its position outside (the mouth), until you return it to its normal shape through the nostril again.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if it is for your ease (to alleviate pain), be careful that you do not harm the patient'thy thighs during this operation on them.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper chest portion of the ribcage and cannot be moved towards that area, then make an effort to align it with the tip of the bone where there is significant swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the bone is broken into parts, then you make it seem like that (it refers back to the previous mention of a condition or injury).
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if it is possible to restore the bone in the first day of the fracture, then otherwise apply rest for seven or eight days as per the healing period after applying pressure treatment.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	E when the old restorers have bound and dressed their calves for today, even if I haven'thy seen them myself; they possess covers wherein leather stuffed with honey is spread on top of ointment made from molasses in a booklet – hereby placing it within so that the bone may be fixed firmly and cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some times they enter the nose, in a place of nostril, punishment imposed with cloth wrapped around their neck like a lion; and when there is violent fracture of the nose that cannot be breathed through.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do so and make cauterizations accordingly.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you have a different form of cautery applied externally, then plaster the nose or wound with honey and rose water (or oil), this will provide healing through absorption by external application.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	May it not be infected if you do not apply antiseptic caution, then take that which is made from the flour of sifflants and pollen mixed with albumen (egg white), place a pause over this spot on your leg bone, and ensure there' extraneous cause remains.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If bones of the nose are slightly broken or fractured, then you must separate them and extract those parts with instruments designed for that purpose; also apply wax to the incision, which contains life essence and strengthens it, and place dressings suitable for this fluid.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you crush worms in the nose, then take care of that with some warm iron and insert tubes inside so that it may heal completely.
Capitol .iiii.	Capitol III: (Note that "III" may also refer to an
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	During a jaw fracture repair, it is referred to as the treatment or restoration of the lower jawbone when broken. Here's
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone breaks and there is only one break without displacement (i.e., not broken into two pieces or deviated towards different directions), then its learning should be gentle as well since it's a simple fracture, suggesting that less invasive treatment might suffice for such cases:
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is broken into two pieces, then provide extension of parts according to proper alignment so that it can be possible for its restoration (equilibrium).
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you have concomitant pain from the teeth that is disruptive, harden those of which you hope will break through the tooth'dictor or silver wire or metal alloy; and place your pause on the broken mandible waxed dressing, as well as a linchpin pin placed along its length (extending beyond), with pauses also over duplicated cloth garments and substantial lace trimmed gently applied—and apply that device according to how you are dressed in it so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When commanded by the humerus (which refers here metaphorically or due to a misunderstanding of terminology) for rest and calmness, they halt their food intake through swallowing lambs (this may not be accurate translation as "vianda de lu sorbicios" does not clearly refer to eating
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If the figure has already been distorted due to inflammation (or swelling), then you should apply heat and massage that part on the third day; rectify what is altered by applying warmth, perhaps using a heated poultice made of lamb's wool felt or wheat bran flour. This will help control edema in the affected area while also providing relief from swelling-related discomfort.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is applied and the position of the bone remains unchanged, so that it does not slip inside where it has been healed and strengthened; this fracture will be fixed in three days.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another vengeance comes as an aspic treatment, then apply what we have mentioned earlier for these ailments within the patient' extranet until it is healed and that wound also recedes.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is in bone, consider whether it' extruded or displaced, then take care of those fragments with what flows to them for their return during that part of treatment dealing with these parts of the skeleton.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the patient'se infusion is dry, then increase it according to your need at the place of the fumigation (likely referring to a form of steam bath or similar treatment).
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed those satagias (likely referring to medicinal concoctions or substances), and there is no residue left behind, then if the area is broad, anoint it with mud from the field; otherwise, rest on one of the therapedicts that are meant for this purpose, until healed.
Capitol .v.	In order to accurately interpret this medieval medical text with its mixed lingu
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When lifting, return the sternum (the breastbone) and shoulder blades to their natural position, as in resting at your side or naturally aligned without stra
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 When moving excessively during a game or activity, the sternum (the breastbone) is broken from force applied to it by one of its supporting muscles; this type of injury results in three possible types of breaks: simple fracture where the bone cracks but remains aligned, partial complex fracture with multiple fragments still joined together at some points, and complete comminuted fracture when the bone is shattered into several
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the sternum is broken into two or more pieces that are not in contact with each other—essentially separate segments of bone have come apart, and this severity prevents its own restoration at home; it requires medical attention if you can't align them yourself (implying professional intervention), which may be difficult to achieve on your own due to the nature of such a fracture or because they are juxtaposed with other injuries—it often necessitates surgical treatment. In some cases, where fragments have been displaced far enough apart that manual realignment is not possible (far fragmented), reconstruction may need open reduction and internal fixation by an orthopedic surgeon; this situation can pose a challenge for repair due to the complexity of misalignment or severe injury—or it might even require more extensive procedures if bone
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In situations where the sternum is severely broken into fragments—meaning that two surgeons are required for a procedure; one holds and stabilizes the fractured sternum while another extends or manipulates the vertebra, which might be relevant in securing spine alignment during surgery. The involvement of multiple specialists indicates this is likely an intricate orthopedic case requiring expert attention to correctly repair both bone structures affected by such trauma—emphasizing a multidisciplinary approach for proper healing and restoration, possibly involving not just the sternum but also other associated skeletal injuries. This scenario underscores complex surgical
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the broken bone into its sockets where it broke and make sure there is neither a little height nor depth left in these places of breakage as per how much they have fractured according to what has been seen by us, doctor.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion occurs from excess, then stop pressing the abdomen with cloth or wool according to your need; and raise and contract the chest as much as you feel necessary within yourself so that it reduces discomfort in accordance with what I have observed:
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the clavicle to the parts outside, through which it will arrive at the sternum, and rests on the chest muscle over a limb joint moving in size, then:
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel hardness in the shoulder and neck area, it is advisable that you break through these areas to ease them off easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, you will invent a form of cautery that has been applied to one of these instruments used for curing arsenic, placing them where breaks have occurred at the sternum' extrinsic instrument; this device takes on its shape from iron or bronze:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It appears that the text is an ancient medical treatise discussing remedies and diagnoses in a blend of Old Occitan (which could be considered similar to medieval French), Italianate dialects due to some lexical choices, and potentially Latin given certain terminologies used for medicine. Here's my attempt at translating each line:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of him be as far as you can make it for the operation; that he has two limbs with which to assist and one is broad while the other is straightened out.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the wound you made when extracting the splint is wide open and at risk for infection (apostema), then adjust the lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the rupture is small or you fear atrophia cutis (skin hardening), then apply moist linen and powder according to the extent of the wound'sup>. Here, "E si" means "If," indicating a conditional situation; "la disrupcio es pauca" refers to a minor rupture or tear; "temes apostema cutis" is fearing skin hardening (atrophia), which might occur as healing progresses
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you suspect atrophy cutis (skin hardening), then apply soft linen and oil on it, and place your hand over that area to maintain moisture and support healing. Here "E si" introduces a conditional situation; "accideys apostema caut" refers to observing signs of skin atrophy or concern about
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the bone is broken or cracked (indicated by "quan es ses plaga"), then apply wet bandages and ointment on it, placing your hand over that spot to maintain moisture; afterward pause with a poultice made of flour paste mixed in egg white. Place this pulpotice above the bone fracture (stopa leon), as well as place gentle touches or titillations there if they are needed due to numbness from that area, and take care; holding it firmly with your hands which have become like a crutch for support ("que sia mot longua"). The pressure should be of such nature (latitud de) three fingers' breadth wide along its length. Wrap this bandage tightly around the bone fracture using cloth, secured by another thin wooden barrel-like stake; positioned underne0the wound area for compression ("en lo loc"). Continue pressure with your hands while you elevate it above heart level (revault over el coto). Keep doing this until movement in the bone fracture returns to normal and is no longer limited, ensuring that there are still signs of healing visible.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here is the line-by extralanguage translation:
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Here comes the translation for each line:
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Not until you have tightened the suture if not healing properly within two days is safe and securely done so in this location (referring to where an incision has been made).
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if you have seen the patient'se face turned towards water, adjust the bandage in the narrow space and restore and solidify the fracture of the collarbone while inside it is healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Strict and comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some ailments occur among healthy people during that time of year.
Capitol .vi.	In translating this text line by line into English while maintaining its
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Spatula break is in its place and not from it but at its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the location of it—and that is where bone breaks occur—it can only be handled by touch, and according to the figure of the fracture, prepare yourself for its reduction following nature'supreme course you are able:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And apply pressure over the spot covered with powdered honey and flax, as well as applying pressure on doubled cloth layers undernethy or tablet (as much as possible using a whole slab of it), according to what is indicated by the size of the spatula.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the stone is concave in some parts of the scalpel, then you grasp that convexity with your thumb and fingers to level it out, ensuring that the blade remains even throughout its length.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from above, away from contracture and the tightness of the stone within its place so that it is not exhausted in this location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, apply another application of oil or rub vigorish on its joints if swollen in their location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When you lay down your thighs upon your back (or lap),
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The text in question appears as a translation or paraphrase of traditional medical terminology into English line by line, possibly from an ancient Latin-based language with influences similar to Italian
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Therefore when this number is completed, you will break the bandage (ligament), and be aware that it's safe from those bones which are where one begins to fear or worry about breaking them.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed from the bone of the shoulder and pinch down on the collarbone, then divide over it, hold it firmly in place, as we have discussed regarding the fracture of the sternum due to apatite welding if necessary here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (This line does not contain enough context for
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	La recuperación de la rotura de hueso." can be translated to English as: "The healing of the bone fract
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The translation of your provided line from the medieval medical treatise could be: "Some bones are broken in their own bed and tossed about wildly, perhaps the limbs that have been crushed or splintered." Here is a breakdown by phrase for clarity:  
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When accidents happen and the patient's bones are broken into pieces and cause great pain in them as well, making it difficult to breatse, cough, turn quickly or walk with a limp; this is declared by its appearance inside the fractured bone and not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the translation:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke expulsion of that which causes corrosion or prickling pain in the area, and if you feel such decay or discomfort requiring treatment here on Earth—then take out the plaster and correct what has caused this ailment; apply the remedy according to its nature. And reduce/adjust the bandage as needed (if necessary), applying it where your face is exposed so that healing can occur properly within these constraints.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The provided line does not contain enough context
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When coastal restaurants are affected by storms, the translation into English would be: "When coastal restaurant is hit by a storm." Here
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You understand that a fracture of the coast does not occur in large masses, but rather through those limbs belonging to them; and from their extremities during departure they are carried towards these jets (likely referring to sea currents or powerful water movements), due to the cartilaginous nature. This sentence suggests an understanding that injuries related to storms on coastal areas often involve fractures, particularly of limbs as people might be thrown by strong waves and wind during a catastrophe at these locations which are prone not only because they directly face environmental elements but also due to their physical properties. Here is the
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	I understand that there's a concern about what I know concerning your investigation of it all; this line indicates empathy and awareness towards someone else’thy interest or involvement with some inquiry, suggesting the speaker is attentive to their
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	I realize that the restaurant must address fractures as they occur according to their ability and then wrap or bandage the broken bones at sea if necessary (presumably by someone on board who is skilled in first aid). The statement acknowledges both a practical response approach, depending upon what resources are available ("enguales" - meaning with whatever materials one can find), as well as an urgent and potentially improvised medical intervention for injuries sustained during the storm at sea. Here's another translation:
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the backbone fracture is declining towards the parts of detachment, sharp pain and puncturing sensation occur fiercely as if piercing that which has bled out, similarly causing difficulty in breathing (asthma), cough, vomiting up phlegm; this condition requires difficult treatment.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	E already the Ants are working in that place of action with great effort.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	From them they say: Cover where the intestines of the malady cause inflammation and movement so that the stomach is expanded and inflated, causing separation at joints far from it.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we consume this water to prevent it from causing the formation of apoplectic pus if not boiled; and if already consumed, help with the medicine.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	E command them: cover the place where it is submerged in oil cauterization, and let some soft padding be placed between their backs until fully saturated; when this second layer envelopes that area of inflammation (pleurisy), attend to the ulcer with care for pleural effusions from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the groin (belly area) is forcefully contracted and does not suffer, pinch it with a needle for puncture; fear over the belly region occurs when they tear above where there's broken ground visible, then pause to place your hand on that tool which preserves life force energy of what preceded this action (likely referring to an instrument used by healers), remembering it allows hands more ease in removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	When we adjust the sores on the lips if they are large, apply compression and treat them until healed within that space where it is applied.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an abscess that requires drainage, then apply pressure with your fingers on the spot and keep it over the location so that healing can occur using the fluid applied to the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When it is placed over the back where they sleep so that it heals.
Capitol .ix.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating medieval Latin-like
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Regarding the treatment of a fracture in the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (in modern medical terminology, these would be referred to as "thoracic
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some time ago after a vertebral fracture in the thoracic and lumbar regions (meaning what we now call "thoracic" and "lumbar"), they would immobilize it, resembling our intervertebral discs of the lower back.  
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When you have poured vinegar into the abdomen and belly to know if it will heal or not, consider that when your own masses are already softened, stupefied, and dead; they cannot be extended nor strengthened by those around them. When these putrefy further contracting therein with a needle (or thorn), you feel no pain in those places—this means it is not healing, and at the times of dispositions [it] are mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If there are pains in those places and they feel constrained with piercing sensations, then you know that the bone of the body is saved, and these humors guard against illness.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see how the vertebrae of his back appear in water and wish to know if they will heal or not, then pay attention to the patient' extraterrestrial body (referring possibly to an unusual condition).
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you find that it is already soothed, apply to those waters where the matter has occurred and when on your two legs rests (lying down), breathes in deepness/indigestion as per his wish, some adjustments may happen over its backside leading him to urinate or not being able to hold urine, which indicates that he is near death; therefore, it's no longer treatable.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May it not be that any cause of those things is worse and so I put them aside lightly.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of the patient is that you perform ablations with a cautery that rests on the spondyl arthritic or eroded, perhaps moistened by sweats from standing too long; let it rest for some hours until the inflammation subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And when one of the comfortable supports is present, and rests on that which limbs suffer from pain; commanding the humors to take a pause and tranquillity, not sleep in the place where it causes suffering until healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you have decreased the bone of the skull or any cause that has already separated from it (head injury), then push on the spine and touch that bone; and if there is a large wound, suture it now; and take care for that which was encumbered by bandages until healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the bone of the hips breaks and it is the time of the womb's flow (menstruation), then you intervene with your hand on the left thigh near the groin where the hip joint ends, and gently press downwards until possible by cuddle; apply pressure to that area if needed from these interventions, and strengthen this.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel sharp pains in your body, attend to that area and apply it; heal the wounds with care as has been provided before so they can be restored when health is regained.
Capitol .x.	In translation from this medieval medical context into modern English line by line could
De restauracio de la ancha.	From "restauracio" (restoration/repair), and considering the historical use of
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The large bones are broken or shattered (implying the need for restoration), and if they do break, it is not a simple injury but rather communication along those extremities; these fragments fall into length and decline to their divisions - this indicates how fractured parts may separate further. Moreover, pain occurs in that location where there's penetration/injury (indicating the point of trauma), causing stupor upon breakage.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of him/her is that you stretch your hand over where there may be a bone break, the figure of them.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the break is in just that limb of yours, then you should wrap it up with cloth soaked from an armor garment until it forms back to its normal shape for you.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May it be that the break is long or already descending to the divisions of time, then speak to the malady within your abdomen while you prepare its restoration.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have applied the plaster to it, take pause over that beam of wood or bone, and stretch tightly across the point where there is no fear of a chiseling incision for fracture nor extraction of the spine.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	E places the convexity wherein that fluid fills it within which constriction occurs, and commands the hump to lie on its back or over its chest so;
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you apply an incision cut (cautery), then stop the bleeding and restoration begins until such time that this second application of incising ends; at which point return to healing within it, applying pressure with a hand bandage tightly while accompanying.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you fracture in your shins or are crushed, then treat them (the injuries).
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The translation might not be precise as
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Capitol .xi." likely refers to a specific passage or section within the medieval medical treatise being discussed, similar to how "ii.",
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Translation: The adjutary is between the shoulders at the top of the shoulder blade (scapula). This line appears to describe a specific anatomical location relevant in medical practice, possibly relating to issues with bone healing
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken (likely referring to the adjutary bone mentioned earlier), then its restoration involves one of two manipulative methods; here, use your fingers as a means for guiding gentle correction according to this form. This suggests that ancient medical practice may have employed manual adjustments and body positioning techniques using bare hands rather than instruments or tools like metal wedges which are often used in modern orthopedics. The text implies an intimate knowledge of the patient'sin bodily structure, as well as a skilled touch for
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	This line indicates that two ligaments are placed on their fingers and they have them suspended in an elevated position (possibly referencing some form of traction or stabilization technique). This detail suggests methods for immobilizing certain body parts to aid healing, which was a common practice before the
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	This line suggests continuing the movement of what seems to be a malady (possibly referring again to some internal condition) along one limb; and with it, take away your arm that is broken within which they hope for warmth from their touch - indicating perhaps therapeutic heat application on or near an injured bone. It reflects practices of applying direct physical interventions such as warming affected areas to promote healing in the pre-modern medical context, where understanding and manipulating body temperature could be seen as a form of treatment. The passage illustrates ancient medicine's approach that combined
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	E the other manifestation is that the hump lies upon the patient'thy chest and suspends its hand from their collarbone, ordering two servants to take hold of it with their mouths (through the hands), one immediately after another; each servant extends as far as his part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish the extension to be firm, then stretch over the break in the ligaments and on those other ligaments as well; let both of these servants spread out their parts equally.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	So if the fracture is close to the limb'supremacy (extremity), then let it be immobilized on both sides of this joint, and at times also along with its approach towards the wound.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If it seems that the bone is broken in the groin area, then make sure to place a bandage over that spot and on the hip joint itself.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you cauterize the ulceration (apostema), let it heal within seven days and pause over it with fine sutures on Saturday evening in preparation for resting again until the wound has completely healed, then tightly bind your hand to maintain pressure.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for this fracture wound, apply an external splint over it, and ensure proper wrapping of a linen bandage around it; also adjust your arm on that assistant'supositing supportive role above their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the drape and strength over the assistant'sup arm to ensure that it remains in place, provided there is no cause from water for bone fracture.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	When they use pincers (or tweezers).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Here comes the sentence for translation: When breaks that were pushed and forced by other stones are placed upon each stone'dict (a reference, possibly, to bone structures), pauses between them follow their direction of breakage, which according to tradition is three finger-widths in length.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength over the stones at which I have mentioned for constriction of the colon,
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	It is that your tightness over the place of the fracture has spread out.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When I extended the length of the fracture or slight strain (decrease in size), it means that bone breakage was made smaller, likely as part of a he
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	So if you find the condition of the stars and strain as we have discussed at the time when restoring your limb to its proper state, then do so accordingly (perform or take action).
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear scab formation, then today at day seven apply the restriction and stones within to it.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May if you are above the knee that there is not any cause of this fluid accumulation, then do not release the bandage for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his malady of the thighs lie on their backs, and their hands above their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the helper who cooks with wool completely, and consider throughout the day or night that there is no disintegration of the broken limb'dictorate its softened bandage; accordingly adjust your intention as needed.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the food of the malady according to the order we have today, so that the food is subtle during consumption until it'dictates (the time for), and watch closely if there are any rough parts in the food provided by him/her.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As per the custom of the assistant and the pillow they are strong for forty days, and when weakened they take baths and oil anointed hands which correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the bone is cracked and inflamed, do not attempt to remove that from which it has adhered; rather leave the splint in place for days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise that
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Regarding arm bone fracture treatment, here is the translation:
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	When either the large or small hearth (chest/heart) is broken only once and then snaps shut again by itself:
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire below (possibly referring to a localized heat source for treatment), then its restoration is lighting (easing or making better) and healing will be easily achieved (the illness or pain will resolve quickly).
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the patient's fire (often referring metaphorically to their vitality or digestive flame) is extingubated for a long time after injury, then healing becomes difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that thorn from it appeared when they were broken two bones,
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is fractured is the smaller one above (presumably referring to a specific part of the skeletal structure), it is convenient for the doctor, and you must restore it so easily within as long as this allows until such time when said bone can be repositioned.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that if a great fire is what causes us to crack or fracture, the one who applied pressure did so with vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two fires burn together intensely, then it is necessary for you to pause their removal forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of your hand must be rested and extended over a pillow, place it on their legs' parts, as well as all others have done, putting those ears at the base of the other hands, and put the malady under an inverted cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	When a hernia is present under or in front of the patient at that time, to prevent the sickness from worsening further.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Extend the minister' extrends his arm from the starting position placed downward or upwards along his side or chest; another minister extends out in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Return the doctor (or physician) adjusts the bone within that reduces it according to its best shape, which they can possibly achieve.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone fracture you are causing total pain throughout the body at your location and within your willpower,
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in the patient separate symptoms that push down the spine and you do not hope for its restoration elsewhere, then attend to these issues according to our previously stated method.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May it be that if there is a bone breakage (fracture), you have noticed swelling in the area alone (plagued with fluid accumulation), and therefore take care of that very spot specifically.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you harden the cautery on your patient' extrication site, then take linen dipped in oil and white wax for treatment; stretch that cloth over where tightening is present so that the cautery softens there; afterwards remove the cloth and apply a plaster of paris prepared with powdered moly sulphur mixed into clay. Keep pressure on, allowing it to set while applying stitches at both ends until they are firmly in place – this has been done where fracture was found and fixed securely.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Be aware that the name of the bones in the arm is found within its major structures or a fracture occurs at one focus or two foci simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the line to translate: Apply pressure firmly and strongly on the fracture site, pressing until possibly when you manage to release tension from above or below the fractured bone parts, apply only a little moistened pressure following its recall in the course of treatment.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb as it is today.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If any cause requires correction and you apply it to the limb, holding that part in water until the pressure subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	When you leave it inside until there is respite, return the tightness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If extraction has been softened and the bone appears to have returned to its usual state alongside them, then you must straighten all of it with your vigilance.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if nourishment is prohibited to prevent the member from excessive tightness; in such cases, ease that little and strengthen it for as many days as needed until they obtain their nourishment again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	May if there is no cause within the thighs that we have mentioned for those reasons, do not let it be dislodged from its position over the next twenty days or so among them.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And thus he secures his waist from the womb'sup and its restless motion, so that it may sleep on their backs.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You understand that this fracture will be healed in either xxx days or xxxii days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the injuries and the positioning of the body (note: "xxx", "xxxii" and "xxviii" should represent specific numbers which are not provided).
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii. (The provided text does not contain enough information
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	In the context of a restaurant, it seems like there might be some confusion in your question or perhaps typographical errors as "pinche" and "ditz" don't clearly refer to common culinary
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	The text appears to be in Spanish and seems related to the care of chicken thighs (pinche de la ma) during cooking without causing them harm ("accideys"). It suggests that there should not just be a passive approach but active, careful handling throughout the process. Here is an English translation:
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you experience the pain of a fracture or dislocation, then watch how long it lasts for up to an hour and place your hand over that extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Extend the minister' extricates broken bones and, for this purpose, he uses those bound together by good conjunctions (i.e., properly aligned or fixed with materials like splints).
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And when you apply plaster and lint (for bandaging), if there is no suppuration (infection formation), then secure the dressing according to the size of the area covered by it; already have wrapped that in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	May it be the case if the injury is in the parts of detention and appears like cloth drape, then command the humors to contract that portion with your hand tightened on the injured part; make its fibers long as a cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it is necessary for the body's head to be wrapped in cloth wherein it rests, tighten that second one as well.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the extremities (ends), then stop pressing below and above those parts of the break on the palm so that it heals properly; furthermore, release any sprain in between these two points where they are tied together with ligaments as you turn.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break the bones of either foot or leg, and it is where the limb breaks, then bind it as tightly as possible using your palm's strength; if you wish to pause for a moment, rest on the small stone at their ankle four times so that the fracture rises and does not become deformed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be so that if the fracture is in those other places mentioned here (in this context), just as with one of these specific spots, we must apply pressure there where such spot lies; or let them rest on that small stone they are currently standing on (their footrest). Continuing like this will be better. Or pause over that little pillar/stone place now and then in the same way you would here at their feet.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration and apply that proper position of applied incision care—that which is necessary when you encounter any cause related to those mentioned earlier, as per the account provided by him/her.
Capitol .xiv.	The provided text seems to be attempting an early modern interpretation of medical termin
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	In repairing a hip fracture, it might refer to the following steps or considerations in English:
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are worn down and it is declared according to what has been converted into the departure from home towards bed rest.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of him is done so that the sinew is taut over the fracture and another bandage shortly afterward, with the humidity lying upon his abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Whenever the minister extends it fully according to its quality where the bone is broken in place,
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is necessary for the ligament to be placed near the knee joint'dictly on this portion of the leg bone, thus extending its reach and preventing further injury by immediately applying another bandage afterward (the second one).
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	When the joint is prone to dislocation, it hurts when stretched across various parts of time (implying different times or seasons), and that's where we apply the ligament proper for this condition.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Now place the doctor' extricates his hands inside their so that he reduces that second part down according to its natural appearance and joints are joined together by good conjunction; once you pause emplastre (a type of binding or splint used in medieval medicine) and stricture, do not injure the affected limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If there is an ulcer present and you wish to heal it within the days that bleeding stops from the ulcer, then return to your care routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strictness of the limb is suffering: cover that which encases the fracture with hard bandages, and fold them twice or thrice over time; remove excess covering until it reaches up to the ankle and knee joints of the thigh bone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	E introduce long iron between the thigh and knee joints as provided by their parts, and tighten the extremities of that part with the pin attached to the excess length of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return your hand pressure over the area of that fracture on their knee and apply pressure to one stone placed upon the bone of the thigh; this is how it should be done for such a breakage.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return and fill the empty spaces between the sheet and thighs with woolen cloths to ensure that bleeding stops (the extraction).
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here begins the constriction of strong heat above the location of the three-layered or four-layered fracture; and as you get closer to the site of the fracture with your ligament, the tightness is lessened and cooler moisture is applied.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return (E aprop) their limbs from the hands and feet of others, back into where they originally entered inside the body'dictum, stretching them out so that its sinew will not be pulled away from its place again.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	May if there is pressure in the bone where it puts on, then you must cauterize that second one which can be done; otherwise, press over it and remove what has come out, taking care of its healing as remembered before being treated again.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And when some strains are tight on the hip joint other than those that have been discussed earlier today in this consultation and with our arm, it is necessary to address them as well.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even in the act of restoring him/her like this, you will not heal the leg that has become immobile; and if it is restored alone, another cushion must be applied thereafter, making necessary for them to walk again from which they were bedridden.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	E understand that the thigh is tightened in about forty days or a few months, and all this depends on the complexity of the condition and other available means.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV. (The Roman numeral "XV" corresponds to the
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Regaining function after a dislocated shoulder:
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Understand that a dislocated kneecap may be rubbed away daily movements.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If you have caused a break in it (the body), then what happens is simply a crack or dislocation of its parts, and this entire situation constitutes the patient'thy feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of him is to be done with water that has been broken up from the parts inside where it can be added and conjoined as necessary for horseback riding ease and fabrication purposes.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Return an application of plaster and pressure on that round stone, if it is impure from it; tightly press downward below to prevent the flow (of harmful substances or fluids).
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	In English, this line translates as "About the treatment of the patella fracture." Here is how you might translate it more naturally:
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	The provided line from the medieval Latin-influenced medical text translates to: "You understand that in the patella there are two bones for which it is called 'the kneecap'; and the other one is small, known as the meniscus." Here'dictating a more English phrasing could look like this while preserving context from medieval times when specific anatomical terminology was used differently:
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	When you apply vinegar to the bones of your arm and shoulders (which are broken), it also aids in healing those parts along with the healing of the arms themselves, making this treatment an operation for me.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If you grind two bones together, then the cushion becomes all parts of it.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the bone is cracked subtly, then the cushion becomes parts of Dent (referring possibly to dental work or localized treatment in this context).
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If your bone is fractured and must be set immediately, it's due to reasons beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	When administering extension and balance exercises according to that posture, proceed as follows:
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Mayhaps even if the crack in the joint is caused by sharp movements causing sprain and pain increases, then apply pressure with your own virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is any cause for operation on the arms, and when you engage in performing all of this work with iron nails that have been stopped at times to pause the causes already paused in solitude (painful episodes), these are tools used extensively as splints; apply them where cramps occur. Do not use hands from behind or directly on those areas, and adjust according to how long they need based upon their length within a short time frame after entering pus.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Envelop a cloth around each garment according to the length of it, pause one over the joint between the thigh cushion and either leg' extrusion (pus), ensuring that they stay within the base part of the foot where the swelling is located.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Return the limbs' pains to three points of pain and at nighttime here is this structure that should not be leaned against in either right or left side; it serves well for good reason.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a steel breast-piece is administered according to the length of the cushion, and it is held in place on the patient's body so that their mobility may be preserved.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you make this in a fracture, and at that moment it is done properly by itself.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	In each day consider the condition of every part and study it according to yesterday'thy observations herein described, keeping watch for signs of decay or inflammation as well as other causes that seem similar; when you encounter any cause from among these aforementioned ones, then apply therapy within what is entered into so that said thing may heal.
Capitol .xvii.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise written in Rom
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Translation of the given line: "From the breakdown of the calcaneus and bones of the foot, and the tootsies."  
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Although the toe does not break entirely; some bones of the foot may crack or suffer breaks occasionally; and when it comes to the fingers (toes), they do not actually fracture but rather dislocate in their joints.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot are broken and sometimes these bones rise above them among themselves, then heal their toe over it on earth prepared with antidotes as necessary.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Return pressure with an application of bandage and halt bleeding from below (presumably the abdomen), in which there are two small containers placed within:
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that part of the body at its structure and extension, which you have wrapped in cloths and other things due to hunger or lack thereof (translation: And fortify this area of the body according to its form and extent, for it has been enveloped with fabrics because of starvation or insufficient nourishment).
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then you unlace the bandage, and by force remove any fractured bones in their joints, or if they are displaced (dislocated), that operation is completed with these procedures.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If you find your joints are tender, restore them as they come back to health and massage these areas with what I advise for their healing restoration in recovery.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May it be that if the patient' extricated from their joints are two or three in number at most, then rest on any one of his body parts encased within a woolen cover; and press firmly upon the abdomen just below the chest where he holds onto with both hands to maintain good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not overlook all the causes which are mentioned to you in other accidents we have described here, and apply yourself fully to this one as well.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (This line appears to be an annotation or reference
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Broken collarbone of the woman and the patella (kneecap) of the man, as well as the ligament of the hip joint.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman'thy bone is broken, let it rest in that which has been cut out for her pelvis; and incline it towards the midline of the chest slightly, holding its tendons behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Here you apply pressure with pillows on the two of them (referring to patients), and when urinating becomes difficult due to discomfort or facilitation issues, reduce it as directed by their willpower; return everything back according to how they wish for initially.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	When applied for seven days or brought back by others, that person is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take once of sheep's wool and stretch it over the patient's abdomen using a hollow reed; insert all the bladder into its cavity, then inflate it through the reed so that the bladder expands inside the cavity. Once this is done, the fracture will return to normal positioning.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Return it is filled with bandages and rests for up to two days since they were applied, until healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of either man or woman are broken, administer in their restoration and healing what we have recommended for the joints of the thighbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	When the root of these particular fractures is not hidden and only rarely occurs, it mainly pertains to whom I have devoted my study and use; that fracture indicates its direct pathway in restoration and limitation within you, hence understood clearly.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the wound on the body heals in the bedcloth (drap), place gauze therein and cover it with this; keep pressure over it for three days or send them here, where they will be cured.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.: This line appears to be an ancient Roman law
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When a bone breaks in children (who are more flexible and whose bones can heal faster), the treatment approach often differs from that of adults due to their capacity for rem
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	At that place where the fracture occurs in children (who have more flexible bones and can heal quicker), treatment is usually directed to it, mostly if the broken bone extends along with or substitutes for nearby joints like hips or shoulders, similar as how you're positioned there. If your body conditions allow casting at that location similarly done by others here (doctors using cast immobilization techniques), then we proceed and apply a splint to maintain the current posture until further evaluation occurs nowhere else but this immediate area.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the child wets themselves (likely referring to bedwetting or incontinence), then you must tighten them at their waist so that they soil over there where it has seeped out, provided there is not another cause for this issue.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When it is time to begin healing the fracture on that day, do not extend beyond today unless an abscess has formed.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you apply cauterization if there is an ulcer, then restore it inside the patient within one day until it recedes, but do not treat them on the third and fourth days in total; otherwise, bad accidents may occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	May it be that if the bone is fractured and protrudes above the neck (the part where the skull meets the spine), then you should try to reduce that, applying pressure with your hands for ease of treatment and a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be extension out of preparation and the patient's position are in their throats, then reduce that part with your own means; this is made of iron, whose length ranges from seven or eight digits (inches), and its width according to the amount of grains (the size). Therefore, a physician must pry it out depending on what quantity you demand for use during healing in all cases of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And should it be granted (or provided), and in a small amount of discomfort for that the comprehension does not spread over there during the operation time, here we have:
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it should be done:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E it is named in Greek "Labra Volantis Atelerem," hence, it is a small cushion/pad.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that which is paused at its extension should stand raised on the bone' extrusion.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When that returns the bone within a period when it is resting (guarantia), and has applied an ointment to any of its joints, this serves as well for some sort of cushion or bedding on them.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	So then you should grasp the limbs of the fracture and if one leg is broken in a subtle way that does not require immediate tightening for good healing, it's best to insert there what instrument has such power (possibly referring to some form of splint or fixation tool).
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Mayhaps if you cannot reduce the bone of all that we have recommended, then proceed to extract and remove whatever comes out from those abscesses which we advise upon; otherwise, saw away at least one piece with any available saws in your possession.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Return that which is rough in the bone of hardness and sharp small pieces,
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced (set back into place), and its reduction causes intense pain, you know that it will not return to its original position on its own; therefore, provide great care for the swolthy (swelling or inflammation).
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and the cloth draped tightly over it, especially in summer, ensuring that you do not place it on wet earth or any other cause where oil might be present to prevent falling ill with inflammation and decay undernezymouthfuls.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	E arrange the stones in the hour of meat'suprema recovery from bone, and place the foundlings discovered within to be immersed according to their quantity into cleansing waters as per customs using wrappings based on how many are present.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be very careful not to strain the child where there is a crack, as doctors frequently say they might get hurt or illness due to these fractures, and it'm sickening for them.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a looseness or softness in the thigh joint that differs from the rigidity of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the patient is large or ill-formed and you are concerned about those harmful accidents they have had upon that table, causing pain in that area, do not pause over those tables; perhaps wrap them up tightly with hard sheets at the place of standing and strain on their body.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once or twice a day the patient begins to sweat in that place where you have left the cloth paused over them (perhaps for comfort), then apply cold poultices, as per our custom we treat wounds with these ointments and similitude remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Here is the translation line by line:
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the child passes wind for days and it is not solidified nor separated from them at their bra, then you understand that small parts are seeking to escape within them through attempts (of expulsion).
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (cold humors) that have been separated and extracted from them, the ones whose separation has not occurred yet and place their limbs resulting in pain – you must insert each according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you touch the patient's belly or groin and it hurts, they will scream out in pain, which is another form of corruption and decomposition, so that even if you pause one of those fluids necessary for their healing as described earlier in this chapter, there may be a reaction.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	From the fluid in which my speech and presence are: when large limbs bend downward towards those of your thighs and assistants/helpers (coyssa), and you do not think to attach yourself or remove from it, fearing that excessive moisture over time due to this liquid will lead to death; live as long as possible therein for up to 20 days or 30, if observed by you—and if not lived through these periods, then take care of the young ones.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx. (The provided text does not contain enough
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	From the wound care you apply to any signs of a bone breakage/fracture:  
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Moved deliberately in the healing of this connection within the site of fracture repair, mostly at joints, and it is shaped by the figure of the limb; firmly restrained are its own movements during recovery.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	And consider if the nodulation is recent and administer those medicines that have applied arsenite to it (arsenious), quicksilver (mercury), sulfur ("mirage"), colloquium, crust, as applicable to these; so that some of them take hold on this node or all of them comfortably absorb the mixture made with such ingredients in paper (alumen) and apply it over the nodulation wrapped in linen. Then tightly bind those parts together for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that the wedding has converted and tightened therein, which is necessary to provoke opening of that hernia whereabouts in such a way as to divide its excessive and protruding part; cut out what overflows from within so much so that things are brought back into order for healing.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitolo XXI. (The term "Capitol" likely refers
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the bone is healed and set according to its natural laws, as directed by Roman medical principles:
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the fragile parts of the limb are supported: at this time it's not pain due to these causes - which include multiple uses of ligament/tendon beyond its natural course; or because excessive constriction prohibits nutrition from reaching the member (limb); or too much padding, allowing no movement necessary for healing; or spinal rigidity in lumbar region and dislocation.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Cure for the excess involves draining it from the body and making the patient'thy heart tender within, administering baths, and applying poultices and leeches on him/her.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Return the pause over the limb so that it draws nourishment into itself again and returns to its normal shape within wherein food enters, until the sustenance circulates back naturally.
Capitol .xxii.	In order to provide an accurate translation for "Capitol .xxii.,
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the bones that are set together, it is forbidden to perform any operation on them nowhere else but here (implying in a medical or surgical context). This line suggests an emphasis on restraint and possibly refers to times when intervention might be medically contrainddicted. The translation maintains the medieval text's reference to
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When pain is felt in the limb that has been healed from misalignment and elevation of bone fragments (indicating a post-fracture scenario), it indicates injury to the affected part, yet there's no prohibition against natural use of the body. However, you are protected now by this measure; hence nobody else can bring forth any issues that concern such injured members—especially concerning new fractures which may occur despite current measures in place for protection and care.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	May also stand as witnesses among the doctors and innkeepers who have performed this procedure, which is considered lost due to great fear for its reputation.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	May joint stiffness and nodules be recent developments; if they are encased in fluid where your thighs press together (the area of intersection), apply a poultice made from the ashes of high heat or razor blades, along with honey and spirits that resemble these substances. Apply this dressing repeatedly until mollification occurs naturally; alternatively, use putty extracted from raisin ash and grease from lard (tallow), applying it to this area; if they are fat droplets compressed between the legs in a cushion or on the chest with hands held together, these represent medicines of consolidation named after themselves.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some liquids are dissolved by the persistent cold sweats that affect even the moist parts of the body and should be administered motion throughout the entire day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May it be that the twisting is coming down now and has become a stone and therefore necessitates care with iron as such; because its pus beneath the cessations (abscesses) bursts forth, dissolving continuously of excess fluid from those abscess cavities which irritate delicate bones below them, so that it is administered easily under these circumstances.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii. (The reference "Capitol" followed
De sermo en dislocacio.	It seems you've provided a Latin phrase which roughly translates to, "From the speech on
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	The provided Latin sentence appears to discuss a medical condition related to dislocation and its consequences:
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when you bend the patient with a dislocation, forcefully straighten it so that it is reduced, and do not delay doing this; if there'supersedesa delay, then the place becomes an obstacle to reduction, making it difficult for the fluid (humors) to flow back.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so that there is not an outflow or stretching in the hour of application, frequent movements make coming pains and cramps come about.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When you have cleansed the wound with water and oil (or when), then cover it up so that there is time for recovery from putrefaction; place your limb in immersion of bathwater and olive oil, and reduce its size to make easier movement.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And in each of its parts it will receive water from which memory brings back here.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And when the displacement caused by the break has occurred, it enters from one portion into another already entered (the parts of broken bone).
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii. (The ".xxiiii." likely refers to
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Regarding the luxation or displacement of the jawbone, here is a translation:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the jaws if not set; and dislocation of both is according to one of two methods: because it originates from their places with a little removal, and they are slightly mollified in part, or due to entire dislocation and compound fracture—until those parts have been made softer at the joint'supreme where saliva comes out; until that patient cannot hold on such object nor close his mouth, tongue being wrapped around its own speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	May it be when the detachment of them is slight, they return themselves back through their major positions with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If there is a complete and total dislocation, then promptly administer reduction (manipulation), and do not delay in doing so for the entire duration.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The minister holds the chin of the patient, and the doctor inserts one of his fingers from the heel of his hand into the joint dislocation of the jawbone at the mouth'dict location; if the dislocation is in one part, then both thumbs are inserted accordingly for two parts dislocations. They hold all other body parts that were outside and bring them back inside until they return to their original place. The doctor commands the patient’s jawbones to stop moving away from any separation and heals those parts out of displacement; meanwhile, the doctor repositions the jawbone into its correct location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce him/her (the patient), and mostly if both mandibles are dislocated, then apply lavage with water tail or oil inside the rectum without delay; this will facilitate the reduction of both jaws at once, which we have discussed here.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return engaged and the mouth of the malady is closed but not soothed, placing polpills made of cloth dipped in wax on those spots, as well as beeswax and oil rubs; this aids their sore limbs.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	E asleep the thigh of the patient on their two beds, and his head is between two pillows to ensure that it does not strain either towards the right or left; nor do you forcefully massage any cause thereof; having food within reach (probably a feather bed), one will give when pains are relieved and jaws are no longer numb.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is administered easily, and you do not work on the opening of the mouth for consumption and drinking until the jawbone is numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and cannot be converted to their respective places during labor, then continued feverish conditions are followed by constant urination, and strengthening both abdomen (the stomach) due to constipation, as well as purified blood.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you pour it again, then realize that I have lost it; and continue to take care of the part where this liquid was poured every few days.
Capitol .xxv.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of shoulder (furcal) dislocation and the limb's skeletal structure, here is an interpretation in English:  
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fur finally is not dislocated from the joint due to continuous pressure on the hip; and some are dislocated at the lower extremity, which is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of him is that his malady falls upon his two legs and extends their beds.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Return that place with your hand is firmly held back and will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Return your hand over that dressing and apply pressure gently thereon.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that which is between your thighs continue at this, it'thy not dislocated on any day; but if reduced and girded as we have said and according to how you are equipped.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply pressure on that plastering, and friction, and extraction; command the humors to return to quiescency and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	When this healing care is applied, the tendon of the muscle becomes reduced when separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English while considering its mix
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The process of reducing a muscle dislocation involves several steps aimed at carefully realigning the affected muscle back to its proper position within the joint without
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	When it comes to the reduction of a dislocated muscle (in three ways), one way is when such displacement occurs as suddenly or from movement, often referred to here in medieval medical terminology with "titillic" possibly being an old term for twitching or involuntary movements. Here's how we can translate it:
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	Here comes the second sentence to translate: It is that it should be dislocated from its position below the muscle, and it hurts there; nor does it get dislocated at the back parts due to the shoulder joints, nor in front of nerve branches.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is a displacement and falling out of parts to be touched gently, mainly in those where the bones are thin, dislocation occurs; perhaps also there due to movement of the bones, they fall out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	When poultice or fomentation is applied to the affected area for cold application and rubbing of their sore muscles (which are already inflamed), they experience pain due to displacement that has occurred.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now cover where you have entered that which is overly seated upon it (presumably referring to the patient being too sedentary), and proceed with its healing process.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the translation:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is a displacement of the joint or limbs and you must apply touch treatment without fear (without getting hurt yourself), then proceed with gentle manipulation.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation it is felt a light reduction when cool and the malady descends into the abdomen.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of it is for the minister to raise its mass above itself; and place there momentarily light pressures on the pulsing head below, elevating that joint in strength at their location, raising its mass upwards as well; and afterwards apply pressure gradually until they return leugierament.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it does not return, and thus an accident occurs causing the patient's humors to flow downward into their tailbone and be administered with broth made of cumin, fennel, honey, and watermelon in water; this will soften and line the bowels along with its associated intestinal knots.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to reduce that second symptom according to this method: make it present a long home (likely referring to an instrument or substance) longer than the limb, placed on the area of concern belonging to him/her and insert his muscle quickly with the aid tool into where the swelling is inside while drawing out fluid from those parts immediately after its entry.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the thigh is loose, then I shall find out what else causes it to be hanging downward and thus worsen that condition; once identified, this will return quickly after being corrected/repositioned.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another way of reduction is as follows: lay a long staff on which figure can be formed; not thick nor subtle in nature, and place it under their buttocks immediately after raising (the patient'se position). The staff should rest its head upon the back of the staff itself while keeping the abdomen aligned with the length of the staff. Place your hand over each part shortly afterwards from this other body part for strengthening; thus extending one limb at a time, so that joint returns to its proper place quickly due to swift action (as per reduction technique).
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If reduction of him is difficult for all the reasons mentioned beforehand, then use this treatment as follows: take a staff with the length that extends to two arm's lengths and hold it at an angle of four digits from the thumb position on this manner according to what has been stated here.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Elevate the head on pillows such that it does not press down on the abdomen.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Now he has placed his hand on the tightness of the belly immediately and extended it or arms over into the parts quickly, holding the staff above under them.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Return the arm to an inclined plane as per its latitude according to customary rules and stretch your hand over the parts just now; another body is hanging from the other limb at this joint intersection.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the internal substance is completed according to any possible manner you have at your disposal; and as soon as you pause for a while on the sperm of wool with this quantity (perhaps indicating some formulation or treatment), apply an emplastrum prepared from flour made by moisture and egg white over all muscle, so that it is turned upwards above the strictures. And then tighten said application slowly; and bind the ligature to the patient's chest where they are connected (presumably indicating some form of compression or support), ensuring that their breastplate does not sound moan for seven days without discomgy, pain should diminish during this period with proper use.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When food is sparingly consumed by the patient with an obstruction (malady), and their member becomes comfortable, then relief comes to them.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if it is given more substantial food and engaged in some movement, then even if he does not soften or ease up, he will already be cured.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	May it be that if the joint is dislocated by moisture or for another reason, then in that case administer three kinds of treatments according to what has been written about instruments for treatment.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this pain is present and the ligament and joint are not fixed for seven days, then the cast and sprain will be reduced on some occasions; after that, it won'thy been tightened nor can you raise that arm to the parts above, indicating understanding that these tendons which run through the bone at its muscle head (cap), or as extensions/moltenness.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	When joint pain is caused by the dislocation of that which causes it in the knee and chest area, reduction should be performed with force and extension until return to normal position occurs.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it is administered in that other constriction, and its cure occurs while being healed therein.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you harden the body'se health and slow down its movement, then let that heaviness be washed away with frequent baths until such time as this heavy condition returns to its original state of nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii. (Note: This line appears as a Roman numer
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	The phrase "curacio di dislocazione del coccx" translates to English roughly as the treatment of a shoulder dislocation
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated; it appears difficult and seemingly impossible to return; for when it's dislocated anywhere in its entirety, mainly at the juncture between parts forward and backward, and if you attempt to adjust a dislocated arm according to any given figure—it becomes apparent that this condition. At this moment, the joint is concave (bowed out), making impossible bending of the arm or touching its own muscle with your hand because it's in such an injured state.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When you have the legs together and reduce it as much so that a cautery apeste (heals), even if there is an apeste heal on them, difficult it is to completely restore them; most often when they are behind parts of dislocation, pain from all other species of displacement and greater suffering come upon those who apply.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And when restoration is possible for him/her, it means that the body of this person should be stretched out on a mattress (and their arms extended), and they must lie with their legs over the knees or heel positioning—or between them if necessary using support such as pillows undernethylegs. The practitioner presses onto these joint points in his/her hands, aiming to bring it back into its original place (i.e., proper alignment).
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the joints ahead of it, return to where your hand goes under its position until you hear a sound in the area between the knee and the back of their hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the dislocation does not submit to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	When two ministers stretch out their arms and hold that instrument between them so it does not get extended too far,
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	When you turn and raise his arm completely over it (the body), covering with a long cloth or lariat, thus:
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, apply some oil to it so that this helps with the lubrication of the joint and strengthen its connection until returning (the state).
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for its reduction that has been paused over there where it is fixed and protrudes in albumen (a thick white fluid), within which are swelling and extension of strictures, with arm suspended from the collarbone and laid down on pillows.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And so if it is necessary to cut off the joint (probably referring to an amputation or a surgical procedure), then here you should carefully separate and remove that part from its location there, which forms the juncture at this place.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not strengthened, repeat the bandage and lynchet (ligature), leaving it there for several days until it is extended; then remove that as well.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If grief enters and the patient'thy position is in motion, apply moisture with baths both wet and dry lightly, while being observed until he/she recovers; if there is a hernia at that joint movement point (the fatty flesh junction), bind it securely on his body above. Apply the binding during daytime and nighttime over this area to prevent slipping out of place:
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Return that one and immerse the other in the bath; when steaming occurs at the joints moistened by cold water (quickly), perform friction there where it is ronhonal due to movement, once a day for this treatment' extrinsic sentence:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	When translating this medieval medical treatise line by line into English while considering its mix of Latin influence with elements reminiscent of Italian, Spanish
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish to do so, pause over that moist and split furrow along the border and stretch it out there; apply some water, then that becomes dampened again and returns to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The reference number "Capitol .xx
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Regarding the treatment of joint displacement, it concerns the area between the arm and the body (or more specifically could mean "between the shoulder blade/scapula and the torso"). In this line, a medieval medical text is discussing where dislocations or separations in the
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Regarding joints that have become dislocated (within the body), reduction is easier for these than others; however, if it occurs swiftly or in conjunction with an existing fracture locking phenomenon at this location—indicating a situation where bone fragments are firmly joined due to trauma – immediate intervention using specialized techniques may be required. Here the text highlights that speed and circumstances play crucial roles when addressing dislocations, especially if they happen quickly or alongside fractures causing an 'ankylosis' lock condition in joint areas like shoulders (scapulae) where such swift action might prevent further damage through specific procedures known as 'lock reduction'.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of a joint dislocation involves stopping the shoulder (scapula) from falling outward and stretching it back into place; at this moment, either your hand or palm rests on top to prevent movement while applying pressure that returns it to its original position – herein described are delicate steps for realigning what's been dislocated: cease the shoulder’se potential downward displacement by placing something stable beneath (like a table), extend and securely hold this area in place, using your hand or palm against gravity threats; simultaneously exert pressure to guide it back into its natural setting. This procedure underscores maintaining stability during manual reduction while avoiding further injury through controlled external manipulation by the practitioner (doctor).
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Even if it is considered that the palm rests on her stomach and hinders its expansion and contraction upon a table; and if dislocation occurs beforehand, place her body so that her belly sits above this intrinsically beneath the table surface. Thus, the doctor's patient can be safely positioned to prevent joint displacement at the junction of movement.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, good fortune be yours; otherwise, that part will become swollen and difficult to heal thereon unless you intervene immediately with the reduction of its pressure points within these days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Mays the joint according to its curvature; and there is nothing in the belly causing it, but rather that the pain is soothed and not able to cause any other source of discomfort; you understand that the nerves are twisted or stretched, and only when strained by care for treatment here will provide a reason.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when they return uncomfortable (malassem), place the compress that we have prepared on them, and bind it securely for days; also cut off their clothing and exercise with vigor to strengthen themselves.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient' extricates and their body falls due to gravity at any point in time, then apply some water on that joint as cold compressions, until they are lifted (alleujat).
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (The specific content of this line cannot be
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Based on your provided text, which appears to mix elements from different languages and possibly includes medical terminology with a medieval or less formal tone
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Translation: "Sometimes the joints are displaced all over." (This translation attempts to convey that there is an issue where one's joints, possibly due to injury or another
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	Translation: "When a joint of yours is dislocated at either the back or palm side, you will feel pain in your thighs (the area where ligaments are involved), and this pushes the displacement to those knee areas; then return it." (Here I've interpreted that there may be an effort being made by certain body parts referred to as 'dits,' which could denote joint or fingers, experiencing a dislocation. The term "sten le dit" suggests compression on these points of pain leading back towards the thighs and
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Translation: "Support the head of that joint (or finger), suspend it at the point where you have experienced displacement, and leave it in this position for two days." This sentence is instructing on a form of rest or immobilization technique likely meant to treat dislocation. The term 'dits' appears here again as potentially referring either to fingers/joints generally
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Translation: "Suspend that and extend it until right there, in the place where you've ended up for today." This further advice suggests maintaining a specific position to aid recovery from dislocation or strain as part of self-care after an injury. The reference '
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	Translation: "When soreness comes on (the condition or symptom), hold that second part of the narrative there and do not slip away from it during the day, continuing to exercise movement; keep doing this at night until stopped by rest." This line advises persistent care through observation for pain ('soreness') which may indicate an underlying issue such as dislocation. It emphasizes ongoing attention (physical or vigilant) and suggests a routine that balances gentle activity with periods of sleep, implying the need to listen closely to one's body during recovery while keeping tabs on how it responds over
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems like water (implying a fever or internal moisture), and if dislocated within the belly, take that to where the first operation was performed, making contact with water there; this will help in healing until they recover fully.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it seems that fluid (likely referring to blood or body fluids) is displaced to other parts of the body,
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided with further context
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The phrase you've given, “Curacio di distocia dei vertebre dell’osso” appears to be in Italian and translates into English as 
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in your back or neck is dislocated completely and its fragments are scattered around (implying a more severe injury), it'thy not curable here; for then death comes into play due to internal bleeding, commonly referred as "mortal wound." In this translation:  
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Thus she is swolthy at the back parts and not lubricated.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure be that you also consider if the yellow humoral putrefaction of infancy is not a cure for it nor its healing in entirety.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May return to the learned ways of treatment through eloquent speech and thus can be reclaimed; may they also extract from that very place which causes them pain, using various tools provided by it itself, in order to ease their suffering today.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E dic that in humidity caused from below on the chest, it is neither healing nor recovery for that which therein occurs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From that one is not cured but rather healed by what you apply directly on their back in the proper amount as recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	It is that the swelling extends over the patient'dict face above their chest at a slow pace due to wet lumbago being applied from behind, and it does not affect the patient's eyes.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the staff and it is not fixed in a trench; another minister also holds an identical form to that of the other.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here the minister extends the ligature to the part of the sword, ensuring that there are no loose ends between the two swords and their respective locations, though not tightened excessively as we have mentioned.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places their hands on the spine for strength to return it and adjusts their own weight on that same table while they are returning:
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	May it not return through this form; therefore take a table of which the length or breadth is three cubits, and carve into the wall where we have stated that the swelling should be located within the extent of the table' extrusion (the patient has an inflamed area corresponding to the size of the chosen table).
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Return the support of the table to the vertebra and let the doctor rest his feet on the other end; initially start inside so that the spine can become compressed and return to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to work on the area that has been revolved above; and you must remain with your head down at the bottom of the thighs for as long as two sticks, which are each one arm's length in length; and place your cap between them at the end of these two sticks; already there is a staff held firmly on earth so that it does not become gout.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take a staff in which you have turned it on the two halves of both sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a defect where it forms the staff'suponendo that 'staffupona' could refer to something like an instrument used in medieval times, here we interpret this as referring metaphorically to part of the body: "in the limb there is a defect/deformity where [it] takes on the form of a staff," indicating some kind of physical abnormality or structural issue. Additionally, "[the length is like that of one's palm]" suggests this deformation has
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ligaments that have slipped in the groin area of the abdomen where you must hold on to your leg, and those same ligaments stretched between the thighs are where you need to maintain pressure with your weight: "Tighten the hanging (or possibly loose) ligaments around the patient's hip region that one needs to grasp onto their leg below. Likewise, tighten or securely hold on to these strained connections in the area between the thighs; this is where it’s necessary for them not only to bear but actively press down with body weight.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And for each turn and stay of the body part that you are treating, a servant must be present to apply pressure with their hand as directed by the doctor who has already spoken about it.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And when the vertebra is pushed back into place, and the location heals over it, provided that pauses are stuffed with albumen egg white paste, and cotton wool; placed on top of this gypsum plaster cast holding which the limb'supinates length three or four inches above them.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And return its ligaments as we have mentioned before, and place the abdomen'se content inside where it will heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any urgency at the site of healing during restoration time, then it'dict that medicines have been administered to moisten and dress wound care for a long time already, which we recommend; and now in this location, iron plate has been applied.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And when some signs of impending danger appear at the ends of the vertebrae in the back, and it is due to that dislocation; this one from which you already perceive because no more pain will occur with this medicine, if not properly handled, could lead to your death.
Capitol .xxxi.	The provided text appears as if it was written in an archaic form of
De curacio de anca dislocada.	From what you've shared, this line seems like a Latin phrase related to the treatment for a herni
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You understand that the hinge of the hip and the joint between muscles alone are not fractured but dislocated, so do not injure those waters which you would harm to other smaller recesses and concave parts in your body.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	E the joint of the wide is dislocated according to four angles, it may be at the parts divided inside, or on the divisions outside, or in front of the partitions, or behind them.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly they are dislocated at these joints, and only rarely between or behind them.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	When that person'supremacy is displaced from their parts elsewhere, it means the accidents of them are contrary to this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	Even the individual to whom you have caused dislocation of the joints may not double his current pain where it is located now; if he attempts to move and cannot do so thereafter; urine retention occurs, and the bandage around him becomes amputated (or torn), then he must walk on his toe.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	E senhal of that from which dislocation happens at the posterior parts is such that it cannot expand its disc or double its girdle, and the cushion placed on it is short compared to others, making the belt comfortable for them therein.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May the reduction of these spices for this dislocation is what you consider, and indeed if the dislocation is old and ancient, as already administered by your care at hand has been a reduction in accordance with its arrangement; consequently, there will be no need to perform further procedures here. And so it's not necessary that any additional spices or remedies are applied for this condition since the appropriate treatment you have provided is complete and sufficient.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	When the dislocation is recent and it' extrinsic type of dislocation (one that occurs outside), then:
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May it be that if the patient does not return in this manner (referring to their recovery or state), then you must prepare strong medicine and extend the cushion under them slowly at intervals; another prepares a poultice from what is above, applying it where they are held with hands. Meanwhile: stretch out the poultice that comes down there for as long as necessary until the extremities feel ticklish (tingly), then apply lashing linen tightly over their cushion and use another servant to handle the ends of this binding material on either side, holding them firmly in place.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	When extension occurs from this location or the division of the chest region to the division of the shoulder blade, or vice versa between these divisions on either side of the thorax.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it extends for all of them within a while that the humour (meaning body fluid, possibly blood or bile) is lifted up to their thoracic cavity and begins to descend, then they are observed during this period when the malaute rises and falls.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This specific form of extension is common throughout all four (or possibly means across various regions or practices). Here's how I translated each line into English, considering the historical and linguistic context:
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns as we have discussed (reconnecting with previous explanations or treatments), it is so simple that even you can do it; but otherwise, entire care must be considered for this particular treatment. Here'dictated by my understanding of medieval medical texts where Latin heavily influenced vernacular languages and phrasing often follows older classical structures while incorporating specifics unique to the regional context—it seems we are discussing a form or remedy that is widely
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of itself, when dislocated and divided into parts by force (presumably through manipulation or external pressure), wherein lies must be returned above its own place; hold slackness in between the shoulder blade at that location which separates from under the arm's joint. And extend it across all segments down to one side of the chest part divided off with the furcula (forehead bone). Here we have a detailed medieval medical procedure for realigning and managing dislocations, particularly focusing on shoulder blade anatomy based on historical understanding:
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another strong minister presses on their arms, and squeezes hard into the hollow of the patient'se thighs, which then returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular substance is for purifying excess yellow bile, which helps reduce that member compared to other substances.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you are allowed to stay on top of this specific method of treatment and obey the two legs at the bottom of your thighs as they link firmly together like a rope, rest upon both feet and both toes, holding them tightly in place with their hands.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Where each part of his body corresponds in length to four digits (or fingers), and the thigh is extended as much as two other parts for their quantity.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And raise the patient'supra, placing it on the head of the bed and ensure that its length from end to end equals two arm-lengths high above ground level.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And commands a strong youth that decreases the head of the hernia, and it is suspended by another young man; likewise, this other boy decreases the hernia at the strength of the former, so that the protrusion returns quickly to its place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	When performing the reduction properly, when it is dislocated from behind, where the hump of the belly protrudes according to what has been previously recommended in the abdomen; and its ligaments are placed directly on the hollowed part of the belly and over the chest of him.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Every minister extends to his part; the doctor holds their hand for reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if you obey the reversal, it will be greatly relieved; and otherwise, pause over that attentively and so we have what has been said in terms of rubbing for that area.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayhaps the thigh is pressing down upon our knees.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When dislocation occurs in the parts nearby, at that time it is observed by them how much change has occurred; and according to this method of treatment described hereinabove, they press with their right hand on the lower abdomen area affected, while pressing simultaneously another part of themselves onto the changed areas.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the joints behind, it does not occur that the malady has spread to the parts of yesterday and stands above ground; those who cover have been said to do so over a hard cause—and if the patient' extruded limb is dislocated from the joints in front, as we mentioned earlier about their two widths, then it should not be tightened on the face or ligaments which are extended outwards, according to what has been stated.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When compression is applied with a table over the location where the joint joins,
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, as soon as the reduction is complete (and note that this term of "reduction" in your text does not refer to you), extend from below thighs with cushions placed therein; and when those tightened bands are released by them, understand that the limb corresponding to what was constricted returns—adjust scars on hips/hips (and pause pressure) as well as above waistline, ensuring it is not swollen in any of these sections. Keep a bandage applied for three days or four afterward so maintain alignment and healing progress.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the ligaments and bandage back onto themselves, compare one cushion with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those untamed in their state, know that the dislocation has already been closed, and so let it go to its place (the abdomen).
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause for softening, then return and apply that plaster according to your first structure, and leave it on for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Return that part of it and let them walk on crutches for as many days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.: This line appears incomplete or possibly contains an identifier
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of care for displacement of the joint." In English, this could be translated as: "Attention to the treatment of joint disp
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The joint is dislocated according to three movements: it can be dislocated from the parts forward (anteriorly), towards the belly button or navel area, and behind oneself (posteriorly). However, there will not be a dislocation in that direction now. Translated into English:
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the name of loosening him is that you command the humors to apply their cushion at his thighs; be mindful, for it has become a dislocation.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all limbs is that you make the groin tightly fastened so much that your thigh pad extends if possible; attach the legs to the face, and pause the foot between the thighs; apply force with your palms on the skin thereof, intertwining them for strength, while another servant expands the limb inside until the derma returns to its place of power.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it is about restitution for him, his couch stays attached at the hip joint that does not labor.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E prop el plastram aquell y faz adherir la cambra al costumbre, i prop les enmeses amb ell un bandulla pels tres dies o pels quatre, i prop dillansells.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	No use the humoral fluid from walking for more than a few days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of the patient is allowed to be sufficient for you, then administer strong extension on the ligaments that were previously narrated in the treatment of the hip joint.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise written
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Translation of "Curación de la deslización del talón":
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Le heel occasionally becomes swolgy due to slight injury and at times is dislocated either in the joints or in the knee area, which pain it causes affects its parts or limbs.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May the cure for their return (the patient' extrusion from surgery) be light and easy to apply on top or inside where they are returned until restored, so that it is not heavy upon them while healing.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the treatment of him comes according to the second complement and you bind his thigh tightly with a strong hand minister from behind that position in the heat spot on him,
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Return yourself the right thigh to its cleft within the body' extrinsic joint area of the upper limb portion (the shoulder), and your left hand is in that same position on the lower section of this part where it connects with the leg segment at the hip.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Return the leg to your left hand for three times, and adjust it with your left hand twice, extending the leg further away from you; then press the foot of the leg onto the bed where its thigh works.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	When necessary, thrusts are made on the firmness of the chest area and you take your position therein as needed. (Here 'cavity' refers to where one would be situated in this context; it could mean being ready or present at a certain location such as an examination spot.)
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus, if you return in one or two thrusts as per this methodology and at times hold the foot (engulf), then everything is well; but if not, repeat until he returns back where needed to be held/retained by hand positioning during therapeutic intervention. This suggests a hands-on approach that may include manual manipulation or holding of certain body parts for treatment purposes according to the described technique (possibly indicating an early form of chiropractic practice).
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	However if you are prohibited from performing reductions as advised here (implying a restriction on manual adjustments or manipulations), speak to the hernia about its two places upon earth, and then place an anchor firmly in grounded soil; ensuring that it lies between your thighs. Wrap around yourself with cloth so you don'thy disturb the misplaced organ (implying a need for care when handling or attempting treatment of certain conditions without direct intervention). This indicates another method where observation and positioning are advised, suggesting ways to manage an issue indirectly in line with medieval medical thought processes.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Thus the minister of it holds your thighs and another official extends out over his shoulders or where he lays upon them; extend that agent against its extension, with a plow firmly held between those who hold (implying an assistant's role in stabilizing positioning). Keep this device betwixt the thighs restraining what lies therein contained within it. This further elaborates on non-direct intervention techniques where instruments or devices are used to assist with maintaining proper limb positions for treatment, as per traditional medical practices at that time which may have resembled early supportive taping methods in orthopedics and physical therapy contexts today.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The doctor inserts his instrument into their joints, and another minister uses fingers on different parts of time until dyslocation returns home (back), indicating recovery.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Therefore, when the dislocation is returned and it'supra declared to you that she has been restored due to the reduction of her condition, then apply plaster bandaging firmly and extend this around the limb joint; bind the foot to the ligament with a strong thread.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When you fear or protect the tendons located behind on the foot, to ensure that the ligament above it is not violent and leads strength.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return that thing for two or three days, and if the bandage softens, extend it further outwardly.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return those things in the day or at night and prevent moisture from their limbs for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it not happen that if one goes into that space, the dislocation will not be secure and unsoundly treated without care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply a poultice to him with the water in which we have previously described his condition (in this narration), and use it for healing or bandaging purposes until he is well-improved/recuperated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Given that "Capitol" is not directly translatable due to its obsc
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The phrase you've provided, "De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes," appears in Latin and translates roughly into
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The translation to English is: "For the care of that which has been dislocated in one's feet—a little stretching extends it back into place; and if not too difficult, they can be returned." This sentence appears to come from a medical context related to treating joint dislocations. Here’s an interpretation line by line:
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the joints of the two legs, then place your foot over them on the ground or table and stay there as you come up.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	When you are on your feet, and pause the toe over what comes from the joints, and apply cold there that goes back into the toes, so that you see where it has already protruded and does not appear again in the prominent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Here comes the translation line by line:
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of Latin influenced
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	From the spices which are joints or bones, either in children (babies) or adults with a breakage or any kind of displacement:  
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of that occurs and you pierce through the cure in dealing with it and for its restoration, success is guaranteed death prevention.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then force it into its common place of origin so that an abscess develops therefrom.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we wish to lead it back into place with apothecarial regimen that subdues inflammation and heals what is needed from the drying ointments of dressings,
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation is due to a bone fracture and you feel pain in those joints that were previously injured, then perform the splint for them, making sure they have enough fluid (humors) as was present before their injuries at these locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid according to your judgment that of the intestine in its cavities as directed by my teaching; for this is better from you than what God has given you, perhaps permanent for your glory, and possibly healthy living throughout your lifetime within these times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi refine your speech finely as commanded by God, without fail.
Amen.	The given sentences are from an old medical
