Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi begins speaking. (Note that "Albucas" might refer either to a person's name or an entity, and without additional context it
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	So you've filled your children with this book of medical science, which is the last in my understanding before me timewise, and through its explanations, expositions, and declarations I see that you have fully grasped what concerns them within the subject matter we will discuss today about surgery. (Note: The translation above attempts to preserve as much meaning from the original text while converting it into modern English; however, due to ambiguity in medieval texts—especially those written with a mix of Latin and other languages or dialects like Italian or French—multiple translations may be possible.)
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation is secret within our region and time, wherein I have seen your knowledge of the science; yet only small descriptions in ancient books remain to correct these errors—these are their conclusions and assertions which lengthen my understanding and skill as a practitioner (Note: The translation here attempts to convey that operations related to medicine or surgery were kept secret during certain periods, reflecting on the importance of medical knowledge preserved mainly through texts like those by ancient schols. Here again ambiguity may arise due to archaic language use.)
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	You have shown me that you bring this book back to life as dictated by the passage of exposition and declaration herein; therefore I am repairing your surgical tools according to these instructions—this is required in order for preparation (Note: Here, it appears a medieval practitioner or teacher discusses rejuvenating knowledge found within texts through detailed study. This phrase further elaborates on the necessity of practical application and understanding.)
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May be the reason why no skilled artisan refuses to aid you here, for medicine is an old science and it behooves its practitioner now more than ever in our times; understanding of body parts' functions and their forms within which Guillia knows as much about bones, nerves, and joints—and the union and separation between them. Additionally, they understand muscles (bones), tendons (nerves), ligaments (joints), names of these components, vascgy circulation sites/resting places in their locations; plus blood vessels pulsating with flow, rest spots for it within those structures.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through the advice of Hippocrates who speaks the truth, it may be done in small measures and mainly through the skill of the hand (artes medicinae).
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we already have informed you of that within the entrance to this free; who do not understand what has been told them about anatomy, will fall into error and die because they lacked seeing much of these things themselves, which are formed in this science and extracted from its knowledge and experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the translation of each line into English:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	Here comes another doctor who ordered that the patient drink an herb from which had been processed in his state; this stone was large and came to him via a vessel of water, so that by the third day, that man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have called it out for removal here because of the greatness of the stone and due to its position in relation with the bladder, wherein they believe that one shall die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another doctor takes his pay from our land'dictor and brings in blackened metal that was broken inside of him; he prepares himself for ignorance, breaks the fracture on the ground using strong force upon pillows and bedposts, without allowing breath.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here is the line-bydependent translation of each sentence from medieval medical treatise:
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And they called upon him, and provided means to untie the ligament, thereby achthy rest was achieved and their pains were alleviated.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even though decay has been confirmed in the limb, it cannot be restrained and will not cease to spread within the body while under a malady'thy influence (or humoral imbalance).
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And here comes another doctor who pierced an abscess and it became ulcerated within days, until its evil intelligence was fully revealed to the Lord of that person.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the head is chilled by melancholalgy; not all will come to him, but only his suffering member where he has been held captive for so long.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, boys, it is necessary that the operation be planned in two parts: one related to health and another where there are significant dangers involved.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore, take up your arms in solicitation and for the protection of God, and handle your illness with firmness and strengthening.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Whenever gout strikes some of its patients:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Not a physician of disease can name it," for such doctors cannot know its name.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you already have descended this second chapter three times.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the free body; first from the primary partitioned section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the feet, in terms of instruments and metal tools for cauteries, what is needed therein.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter on probes and punctures, cauterizations using belladonna (and other plants), extractions of herbs for those purposes, all are ordered according to the forms of these instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the pure portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter of restoration and displacement, as well as the healing and management of twists and forms for these matters; ordered within the head encased by bone, and concerning the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of pointed instruments for fire (cauterization) and acute medicine as well as memory of obstruction.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that time begins the treatment of all parts free from disease.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When you determine the quality of that cauterization and its forbidden complexity,  
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore say that the discourse of cautery and its obscurity is long and elaborate, requiring subtlety in science; they discuss at length about such things, and are often disagreeing among themselves, which suffices for me as a small part of their speeches.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus it is said that the cautery comforts all of the body universally, except for two kinds of parts which are tail ends of his matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complexity of a dry and coarse matter; those who use cautery are beneficial to that part which is affected by it, while others apply contrary methods for that very same purpose wherein water-based healing (cures) are inappropriate due to its quality and aridity. Essentially, the nature of focus on dryness consists both of being coarse and lacking moisture; thus making cautery treatment suitable as it removes excess water while treating such conditions.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Through that speech of his, I have discovered some truths for myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Mays when not covered that which has already been drained and exercised in the capital of cauterization tools for yesterday's practice, we understand the complexity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within them, as well as their causes and accidents; moreover, taking into account the time span of these events.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May occur in other complexities as well; it's not out of fear but mainly due to cold and damp humors, which is why all physicians agree on treating these conditions with cautery therein.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And those who understand the secret of healing by fire and its benevolence towards you will realize that only the focus is simple, as the part to which it was applied cannot harm other members but may slightly affect them incidentally.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine burn to that in the body which it has touched, and forcefully enter into the diseased member, causing difficult healing and forcing itself out.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the focus (which refers to a specific point of interest or treatment), due to its sublimity and beneficial nature, does not cause excess unless it exceeds what is necessary. And now we are acquainted with you through experimentation and long study in service at this art concerning truth about causes; therefore, for lengthy discourse (sermo), he/she excuses such duration because during the pause herein afforded to us today'dictated by your generosity, I shall secretly meditate upon my thoughts regarding the focus, demonstrating through our discussion a philosophical argument that would clarify doubts in your mind.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And wise men know that it is best at times in the beginning of summer to perform cauterizations and rest periods.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Even says that cautery is convenient at all times, in order for the harm caused by water retained due to cautery not be submerged into it again and mainly if used for pains or necessary instruments like knives and forceps which do not suffer delay because of fears associated with their treatment; this greater harm entering over time far exceeds small inconvenience.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aysso non castez in vostre pesci, o filhos, che non stimano ma le popolo vulgare e i foli medici; per questo la cura con cauterie non può essere completata in un solo tempo, ed è necessario riposare il risultato.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	E the cause is not due to drinking as they say, but rather it's in a place of medicine that changes complexity and removes the dampness which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	May therefore, excessive use of instruments in medicine is driven by the patient'dict interest and the grandeur of their lord/master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	Here comes the sentence to translate: It is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the disease and its location within him; also considering what has been prepared on his body'dictions for excesses present therein as causes—if cautery applied therapy or subtil malady in small amounts of superfluous flesh and humidity at these places is possible that, with tooth-related cautions for pain and resemblances associated herewith; perhaps the illness will not return.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Even though it is vulgar speech that the healers use for their remedies and treatments herein described, these do not apply to those who understand them in this way; they believe that no further proficiency can be achieved through medicine or other causes related therapies.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when such instruments used for treatment in medicine are reached hereabouts (in this place), according to what is commonly understood by both common people and physicians, they refer to these as cautery tools or devices of medical heat application.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And those made of gold are better than those made of iron for caulters (instruments used in cauterization), and they were not chosen except for their equality with gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through it is necessary, we must apply iron hooks both for the operation and afterwards to reconstruct our patient'dictorate:
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have ordered this in the art of cautery according to these orders within the head (presumably referring to specific instructions for treatment), and those inside the feet, so that whoever requests it from him can obtain what they need.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cold and moisture for headache relief using points of cautery.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers moisture and cold upon the accident that is your cause; it arises from sodium and various flows of rheumatic fluid, called urgently from head to limb joints and fingers downward, as well as due to prolonged sleeping, dental pain, gout (joint inflammation), general malaise caused by frigidity, paralysis, apoplexy (stroke), and semblance in these diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the malady to be expelled through medicine-cleansing (as it's called), three or four times, according to how much urges the malady and the patient'thy age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E procura il che fece la sua testa con la razza, ed impone quella mano tra i suoi avambracia su una banca caduta; e tiene quelle anche sulle spalle sue sul petto suo.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Return your hand'softhepalmtothechestandplaceyourfeetonetheneardlecheekbysofthebodiesknees and thighs, using the spaces between them as guides for positioning.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Whenever the patient' extruded heat from that location comes forth, it indicates an attempt of that spot, and with fire applied to the purifying ointment (which is this remedy), hereby.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place it above that which is strained, and where muscle has contracted from excessive effort, turn that over there.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Here's the line-by extricated translation:
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Return (restore) some salt and dissolve that over the location, letting it act for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand over its place on his body, where that which has been destroyed in the focus is placed above it.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the area where the snake'dictor is inside until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when a child is restrained and has their bra bands tightened as much as possible, it may be better for them and more beneficial to ease the discomfort or pain they are experiencing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And when it is necessary to burn or sear the navel inside the body, and apply the caustics within where any portion of the bone has been cut.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Return its moisture that is lost from the bone, and attend to its healing.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Here come others to bring the cautery into contact with the bone inside where it enters and stays within until it penetrates deeply into the strong bone. This is how small healing takes place (alphabetization).
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	From that location exhale the breaths of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If the swelling has been present for a long time and it is cured within that period of being solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see all these types of cautery for everything, but only in the wise homes through fear; and this one, I will be better off if you give it to me, as my head is lifted by reason of continuity with our breathing when we have testified among the other members, especially when the head at the groin swells naturally.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And if it is possible that the primary tool for cautery may save and improve more than I, even from this water they are saved by their work towards health.
Capitol segon.	Capitol second. (This translates literally as "Second capit
Del cauteri del cap.	And with regards to treating or using pointed cautery on the head,
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain due to an extended malady within the belly; doctors use knives and cups and leeches and bloodlettings, as well as various other treatments such as liniments and poultices. Most importantly if already cauterized with a tool that reflects its purpose—that is not further harmful to any part of the body under consideration; moreover when this treatment does nothing more than what was initially done for these causes, then consider it unnecessary: perhaps because there's great calcification in the nature of belly pain itself.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And apply pointed cautery to that region over where the vein within their head has been split, as an additional form of treatment if needed when dealing with belly pain due to extensive calcification in its nature; particularly indicating a situation requiring specific attention because there is already existing damage or separation (perhaps
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the vein and have it discovered within your head to which we refer; this is where you apply another form of cautery in case there'thy a need for additional treatment—a specific location that also serves as an upper chamber (likely referring to blood vessels), here identified by suction cups, indicating not only the site but potentially how and why interventions are focused at these points. This suggests precise medical actions taken where veins or arteries have been intentionally incised for diagnostic reasons like measuring pulse rate with a sphygmomanometer (using "descuberta") while applying localized suction to control bleeding and ensure proper healing
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And press your hand down firmly without feeling the bone, for that which is causing great pain different from pains caused by other cuts on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Here the lancet is applied in its place, and so that this instrument has already been used for treating corns on the head and undernethy (likely a typographical error or regional term), which are treated with subtle cauterization instruments here; thus forms the method.
Capitol ters.	Capital termini. (Assuming "Capitol" refers
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	The phrase you've provided seems like it could be in Latin or a mixture of ancient Romance languages, which include classical Latin and its descendants such as medieval Latin
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain in the head occurs during a game (potentially indicating an event like sudden intense discomfort or possibly even seizure), it enters into suffering within the skull—this is where medicine intervenes to relieve pressure and provide other treatments, as mentioned herein; without proper treatment, cauterization in two ways should be considered: either immediate (acute) combustion by medication or using a sharp iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May you use a medicine flame as an instrument to grasp one and remove the limbs of both; thus performing cauterization with this tool.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And you shall impinge the location of pain on one'thy jaw with a sharp lance lying within it when hidden from view.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return therein (or back) that which has been treated with wax, for its cure.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you come, take some of the hot medicines that have been written about in this book on burning remedies.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the use of a hot iron for cautery be according to this method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and they call it a clenching of the thighs, for there appears to be some form resembling a rose in which their legs are prominent during orgasm.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Return the pause over the location of pain, and hold your hand—so that it is not drawn out by force from where it has already been pushed (which may be at will), rotate slowly with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity of blood that has been collected through the speculum inserted into the urethra reaches its measure, then your hand is placed there to ensure that the artery does not become compressed, in order that it does not cause a flow of pus (or urine).
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line-by extralined translation of this medieval medical treatise:
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, then cauterize the end of the lancet according to salts as needed, and be careful not to cut into this vessel that is actively flowing in its course naturally.
Capitol quart.	Capital Fourth (This likely refers to an order or
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	The phrase "cauterize of migraine ancient" appears to be a mix of Latin and English, which may not form a coherent sentence in either
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	The provided text appears to be a complex medical treatise in Latin, possibly from an antiquarian perspective on the cauterization of migraine or other maladies as understood by ancient physicians:
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuous jaw movement that makes your mouth drool and ensure that there's no grinding of teeth (bruxism), nor should nervousness occur in those who possess such a condition, so as not to provoke spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of blood flow from an artery that bursts, there is fear within them, mostly for those who do not know what causes it and does not study or investigate; thus perform the operation on him/her with care.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When you come for recall of the sanitation flow according to our medical guideline in this place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If the disease does not supply this instrument and if it overwhubs the patient's chest as we have described, then cauterize there at the place of the head ache with what we have mentioned beforehand, and take care that whatever is inside be healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you want to apply the points we have mentioned in this chapter of heat treatment with hot iron needles and doing so is better for these two heating treatments that are already applied on both coats, even more effective cauterization will be achieved.
Capitol .v.	Capital (I) - This line appears to be an abbreviation
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	For the cautery of joint pains in fingers." The sentence is referring to using heat or thermal treatment as a method for alleviating pain, specifically within
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the finger there is pain due to cold and it's caused by blockages or other causes that have been mentioned previously, and this does not resolve on its own; heat treatments with cautery are used for relief, which I describe here as a puncture form." This line discusses using localized thermal treatment (cauterization) to relieve pain in the finger caused by potential blockages or other underlying conditions. The author explains that this method does not self-resolve and introduces it further with specific details about its delivery, namely through puncturing techniques which allow for direct application of heat at the site requiring attention.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And apply punctures with heat herein and administer it throughout the entire length of the finger joints as if spinning a wheel or circulating in any segments where pain occurs." The author instructs to perform targeted thermal therapy through puncturing, which should cover all sections along the digit'dicto. This technique simulates either rotational motion like that of a spindle (a common instrument used for fine manipulation) or ensures thorough distribution in areas experiencing discomfort as part of comprehensive treatment to alleviate pain caused by cold-
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Take care with the caulteries of your finger joints, one at a time as you attempt them." Here, the author advises meticulous handling when performing cautery on each individual segment or 'joint' within someone else’s fingers ('am tenta'). This suggests that either they are being instructed by another person (possibly their master)
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points of pain in the entire body need treatment with these instruments (cauterizing tools), and afterward take care that healing has occurred within those areas where it is supposed to be cured.
Capitol .vi.	Since I do not have access to specific medieval medical texts or know how
De cauterizacio de turtura.	The provided text snippet in a mixture of languages seems related to ancient medicine, possibly from Roman times given the Latin influence and
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	In English: It is only through the use of spices that come in via mercury (suggesting a metap0phorsical analogy as 'flecmas' could mean channels or pores), which we discussed earlier about diseases, where healing occurs. The text suggests using certain beneficial substances—implied to be herbs and spices delivered through mercury (perhaps referring to an ancient method of treatment involving metals)—to
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	In English: Avoid using the remedy derived from dryness or a kind of neural constriction for these purposes (implying that some methods may not be suitable if they lead to desiccation effects or impact nerves adversely). The text advises caution when choosing treat
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat the remedy of that particular shellfish (which likely refers to seafood used for medicinal purposes in historical times), and bloodletting or purgation is involved as part of its cure, ensure not to overuse it; three cauldrons are required: one with silver thorns must be employed ('the razor'), the second should use small doses at intervals determined by a temple (a possible metaphor for regularity and precision), while from two kissed lips shall you extract its essence. The text outlines specific measures to prepare or administer this remedy with particular tools, emphasizing moderation ('no comfereys la tua curacio') using three methods: a silver thorn (for extraction/application of the treatment), measured small doses at regular intervals as guided by religious practices ('le sieu templar'), and obtaining essence from kissed lips, which might symbolize purity or sacredness in this context. The mention suggests that rituals played a part even beyond medicinal practice (with
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When you stop using the pointed cautery for the diseased part of the body, only relief is found in the healthy parts that have appeared since then.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is to apply the caustic on the tip of the knife at the end of the erect penis, and in the temple where its length corresponds to that of the pubic bone; keep your hand inside until the amount required for cauterizing has been used.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cautery, and it belongs specifically to those who practice cutting (surgeons). Now presenting this tool before you.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Even if there is still a little breeze, and because the excess flesh in that place requires removal of some, do so gently under control.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	When taking care of the place where fluid is flowing currently within it as part of healing,
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The seventh chapter of the title)
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	From Latin, "Cauteirzaci di Apoplessie Antea": The old method for cauterizing haemorrhoids.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When hemorrhoids are ancient and the remedies we have mentioned do not confer with your physician's care, nor does it cause fever to use these four cautions: over all parts of their head; in applying treatment at the location on top (of the head); like what has been discussed today by us both; and when used internally.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The action of the cautery is said to be caused as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the stomach'dictorium, and perhaps today as well; place your hand over its content that you are processing.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The translation is not provided due to lack
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Caustic treatment of forgetful pains caused by cold." - This line suggests a medieval medical practice where physicians used caustic or irritating substances to treat what they perce
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover that is given to the patient in their feasting, large and potent pills." - This implies a medieval treatment where physicians would administer strong medicinal pills or capsules (likely made of various herbs and ingredienses) during meals for therapeutic purposes. The use
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Press the head of hernia back into its place, and keep it secure with a waxed cloth tightly bound around." - Here, physicians would manually apply pressure to reduce or correct an inguinal (hernial) protrusion in the abdomen. They then used a piece of fabric coated in beeswax for support during healing after such intervention was performed, likely
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And allow some days to pass before using caustic methods." - This indicates a waiting period is recommended after an initial treatment with beeswax or similar material (perhaps bandaging) and suggests that physicians might consider more invasive treatments
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And apply the subsequent method of treating this disease, which I have already mentioned." - The practitioner is referring to another treatment step for a specific condition that has been previously discussed in their work;
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if the wound is healed by these means; otherwise, apply three caustic treatments at the lower third of your head (inside the parietal region and just above where the neck begins), which will be prepared from parts within this portion." - This line indicates a specific treatment involving localized application of multiple caustic remedies targeting certain regions on or around one's skull, with these materials sourced internally ("from parts within") – presumably taken directly from other affected areas like the neck. The precise nature and formulation of such treatments would reflect medieval medical practices where localized topical applications were common for addressing specific ailments based
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And there is space between each of these instruments, and care must be taken with the instrument that comes from water.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	May you apply and the thigh allows it, then use caustics at this warm place; if your addition is greater, then cauterize that over both toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for that within which is healed; and use those cauldrons as they are given by the master.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	For the treatment of worms and soothing all parts of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the mortification of the head and apply what we have discussed; then apply a caustic to that area where pain is felt on the head, treat all forehead pimples therewith, as well as above this division of yours (forebrain), applying treatment with three cauterisms upon your spinal discs.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the illness of softening for the legs to remove that and the sufferers endure such painful conditions as well, then apply four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back (the lumbar region), using a cautery inserted where there'm no discomfort from pressure at the base of the spine. Raise the level of comfort in general and alleviate the heaviness.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which is inside of it so that it may heal and this shall be with olive oil as treatment.
Capitol .x.	Based on the provided text snippets from what appears to be an
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	The given Latin phrase, "Capitol .x.," seems related to medical practice but lacks context for a precise translation
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Translation: It is not the seizing patient who has been subjected to caulking, but rather that this convulsion results from phlebitis (inflammation of a vein). The original Latin text indicates that cauterization was considered for
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	The provided Latin sentence translates into English as: "So that we can purify the patient's brain at their own discretion and with regard for the limitations when the malady is great, or if our treatment methods are ineffective." This statement appears to come from a medical context where there may be discussions about alternative approaches due to severe illnesses (maladies) that challenge conventional treatments. The focus on purifying ("purificare") and cleaning up the patient's brain suggests an attempt at detoxification or removal of impurities, possibly related to humoral imbalances common in medieval
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	Translation: If the patient is a child who did not respond to medicines, then apply maggot poultices and mustard plasters on them for several days with good-quality food supplementation (nutrients). The text advises using specific treatments such as maggot applications—known in historical medicine under terms like "entomotherapy" or similar concepts—and applying mustard, along with proper nutritional support. These methods reflect the medieval understanding of medical treatment and their efforts to address ailments where conventional remedies were not effective, particularly for
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Translation: Rub the head of the malady with one poultice and apply a caulcerizing agent to where itching occurs on the patient's scalp (as indicated by "manieyra," referring possibly to an irritated or pruritic sensation), along with another cauterization at the back of their head, as well as additional caustics applied over any other spot affected. Here we see a prescription for treating itchy scalp conditions using poultices and specific applications meant to soothe discomfort through methods that likely involved topical application of substances believed by practitioners at the time to have curative properties on skin compla
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the malady (illness) is strong and enduring, then you will cauterize those parts which I have described, causing a numb paralysis on the backbone of the chest and lower backbone.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is necessary for a second pointed cautery as prescribed beforehand.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient'se thigh is swollen (malace), then apply thin caution with this methodology.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The given text does not provide further
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Cauterizare melancholiae." - This line suggests a medieval medical practice aimed at treating what is
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and thick humors, it is then that we apply those very same caustic substances to which one has previously used within a limb affected by paralysis." - This line from the medieval medical treatise explains how certain applied remedies (cautery) were intended for melancholy believed caused by impure and thick bodily humors, particularly when such imbalance led to conditions like paralysis. The use of cauterizing substances is described as a therape
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excess leading to melancholy and if there's an overflow or surplus in the humors, then provide it with that which purifies one’seir mind as per what was given at the division." - Here, a remedy containing something believed to cleanse (purify) the patient's intellect is suggested. This cleansing action might be considered necessary following an initial treatment aimed at dividing or separating imbalances ("diviso" refers possibly to dietary restrictions or some form of division therapy). The context implies a holistic approach where balance and purity are
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Now raise the hood of melancholy and place down there a feather from which you will drape it over the head's circle (possibly referring to some form of symbolic or protective covering related to treatment), and position that atop where warmth is present on top of one’seir cap." - This line appears in reference to an alternative remedy approach, possibly suggesting a ritualistic element. A feather from which the
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The knee is sixteen years old, and its entirety has been examined.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Return your rest period now with anointment; it is worthy of sheep' extruded wool treatments.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	When it is heated over the fire for a measured amount of time, which makes them feel pain when they are in there.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Return them (the intestine/hernia) to its place in the belly of your body at the head'dictate location within the circle, and ensure it is warmed up inside you.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line into English:
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Return that spot into border or in places of linseed oil.
Capitol .xii.	Capitolo XII. (Note that "Capitol" could be referring
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	In this line, the text appears to describe a medical procedure related to stopping bleeding from an injury below the waist ("huela"). The term "cauterize water d
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the condition of water in the belly during division to your fellows as it has been said within these pages (implying a scholarly or medical text), then begins and gives beer made from groundwater that cleanses his head, taking care for all moisture. In this context:
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that salve is applied in water for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	When we make cuts with the pointed cautery on all veins and arteries, they are considered to be in that length within temple boundaries. (Here "Incideys am cauteri" translates as 'we make cuts with,' which is an old-fthy way of saying using a tool like a lancet or scalpel; "totas las venas e arcerias" means all veins and arteries, referring to the circulatory
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Watch for blood flow when it's being cauterized; if you see any bleeding afterwards, apply some medicine that is within your reach – this may be what you need to treat the wound properly. (Here "E guarda te de fluxs" translates as 'Be watchful of flows,' indicating one should observe for blood flow or excessive bleeding during and after cauterization; "e si veses" means if it
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Come to possess the knowledge required for extracting veins and stopping any resulting bleeding with caution; this is what you need when dealing with wounds involving vessels after a procedure like lancing or making incisions (Here "E yeu vindre am savieza" translates as 'come to know,' referring to acquiring necessary knowledge, while the rest of the sentence describes obtaining expertise specifically
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	There are two types (or kinds) of tools used for caution in the context provided, implying that different instruments may be needed when dealing with specific tasks or procedures related to vein extraction and managing bleeding – perhaps referring back to surgical equipment available at a medical facility. The sentence suggests an understanding necessary regarding these particular medical appar
Capitol .xiii.	In the context of this discussion about medieval medicine, "Capitol" might
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Concerning ancient methods of caution during cryosurgery – a procedure that may involve extreme cold to achieve hemostasis or ablation
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the ancient tears of humors accumulate excessively through veins and arteries in the forehead area where it is evident that they overflow with fluid discharges from water channels within the head, we perform cauterization on this place as discussed in our watershed assembly concerning clearing fluids from these channels; also performing cauterizations at the temple' extramission point and two more points between neck vertebrae.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If there is ingestion of excess (indicating consumption beyond what the body can handle), then it should be burned over all parts of the belly above where the small caustic was applied for treatment.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The text is incomplete as "Capitol
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	From here, it seems the sentence in question refers to a medical procedure involving foul breath or perhaps some form of purification related
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that water which we have divided and do not apply your medicine properly, then pour the liquid into the patient's mouth over three nights; place it on their head to cool them down, and use a cautioning tool for internal wounds such as ulcers. Here 'am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar' likely refers not only to treating existing conditions but also potentially preventive or curative measures with the liquid poured into the mouth (possibly an herbal concoction).
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Return that which needs cauterization, and apply two lances of cautery on the small spaces above each hairline between the strands of hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Guard your tool of iron from cutting that area;
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	From this instrument (of the pointed cautery), here it is the form.
Capitol .xv.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of European languages with
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Here is the translation for "Capitol .xv." from medieval medical Latin:
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eye lid is softened by illness or moisture, therein apply this treatment with a lancet made from this very same sharp instrument hereby used. This represents our method of action.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you, as a precaution (or for treatment), causticate that area on the two foreheads with small amounts of hot substances in entirety, and they become extended from the nostrlaus (nostril).
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Where each lancet's length is according to the quantity of blood required for its use.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery, according to how much the moisture of the eyelid is dry.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (The ".xvi." likely refers to
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the patient's hair turns into tiny particles and pricks their eye, they use forceps (forcepces refer to tools like tweezers) on the patient’s face.  
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the body turn into parts with knives that puncture it in these places, they perform two types of interventions here: cutting or applying medicine to burn away (cures).
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery of yours is fire, command that moisture come to your patient'thy hairs as they are for their bodies; ensure prolonged and gurgling streams; if you can take away his negligence (laziness or refusal), tighten a bandage on him so he shall not be overwhelmed by the cold entering through his pores.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when women give birth and have their hair removed, they pause the head of the uterus in the vagina, and place a hand over the eyelids of her body, which is like holding up the figure of an iron mask, as well as the covering provided by her own fur.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Return pause in contact with an album of humors or jelly made from crushed wheat over the belly,
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return the cautery with which this is done by fire (or heat).
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: Apply cauterization on the face that is gently done in turns, until it seems entirely burned through where there was flesh from myrtle berry, completely apparent naturally.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of sanity for the eye'thy work is that you keep your eyelid tight and their hair raised greatly by the sting of the needle.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and place it above this spot within three days so that the shield is erected (or set up).
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is inside it with care so that it may heal.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If any cause returns through their hair and the eye is softened, then they must use other instruments on that entire body as quickly as when they first applied those tools.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eye's corner (the medically referred to area), then, when they rise up where it naturally is and touch the lips, cut those off so that the hair does not tear the lip.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery of medicine burn this so that you command the malady to pull its hairs inside where they are lengthened and entwined, and assign it with a wax paper form for treatment.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here comes the translation for this line: "Pause there on medicine and apply that small one without letting it enter where malady feels its bite from leeches.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the doctor perceives that the anguish caused by clamping, they apply what is left of it with their medicine; and once the clamping stops, they wash away this residue using water from a vessel or incision site—wherein if you see your patient's eyelid has been lifted during cleansing (which should not happen), then return any part that hasn'thy already moved back into place where medicine wasn’t applied and the surgical operation was performed, to avoid further injury.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand over it as long as its border whereby the tail of the wound is healed has been reached, and take care that either the linen dress or another within which it is contained becomes cleaned out.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one uses juniper bark.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	E discern that men'sin humors are diverse according to their greatness and smallness; thus your concoction will be determined by them.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If you are not wounded along this path leading towards him who studies here in this art,
Capitol .xvii.	In translating this text from its medieval medical context into English line by line, we get
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	The translation for the given Latin-based sentence is: "For cauterization of a tear duct that has opened." Here's what each part means in English within this medical context:  
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula formed by the waters we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not confer your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this method: command the malady to stop its head between the thighs (indicating that some part is acting as an intercessor), ensuring with a minister' extrinsic moisture—preventing any agitation atop their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your hand pressure over his body where you apply heat or poultice made of flaxen threads, on the patient's skin.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the cautery of which this is its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	le which is taken back into its cavity has the form of a cane or sword-like instrument for lancets, from the limb on which the puncture occurs with the cauterization tool.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go inward into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to come out with temptation.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Mayhap that which is in accord becomes better for the treatment of this work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	When an opening (fistula) is present and cleansing it with salt water will purify that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If there is not an opening (if it'se open), then work on that and remove its protrusion from him/her.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Return your hand over the instrument that is lit and hold it here for my comfort so I am not disturbed by either you or humors in their cavity, and place the cautery there on the parts of the nose to break them up and dissolve what'thy hernia.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	So if the caustic enters into the mouth, be; and otherwise repeat the application of the caustic once or twice a week as per medical practice is required; leave it there for three days, then take rest over that spot at the border and send him with dry exsugetum to ensure healing while inside.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	May it be for another day and not healed yet, then rest on this sharp acute medicine within until the bone is discovered and adjusted according to what suits in their capital city courtroom.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of applying cautery for a fistula that is initially performed by placing it at the location of the fistula, wherein such form entails subtilly inserting underneze thereof some nail-like pieces made from lead; and your hand shall be applied below in good retention to prevent said lead from reaching upwards towards the above hole's entrance. And when punctures are placed on the opening of that fistula, mercury is poured down into it (into an alloy or water), causing the nails inserted therein and located at the site of the fistula to become fixed in place; thus healing by a wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have from cautery and care, then it is; but if not, apply distress to your nose and reduce the fistula in the nostril as soon as possible at its place.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (This line appears to be referencing a specific chapter
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	For the treatment of cuts on hands/fingers: then apply a pointed healing tool or instrument for wound closure and repair, known as caut
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Regularly occurs cracks in the lips, mostly in children: this suggests that angular cheilitis is a common condition among young ones, potentially due to frequent licking or other irritants affecting their delicate skin around the mouth area. (In English) This means that chapped corners
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So you treat those cracks that we mentioned in the divisions and did not properly care for them; according to this method described here: then apply a small heating tool or device (often referred to as 'little cutlass' heat treatment) on these fissures. This implies using warmth, possibly through some form of thermal therapy like applying hot compresses or gentle infrared exposure, which can promote blood flow and facilitate the body’s natural healing processes by keeping the skin moisturized and clean to prevent infection while repairing minor wounds such as fiss
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And if it's about how long you should apply this treatment, according to the subtlety of your tongue: here we must interpret 'subtlety,' which could refer metaphor
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Pause that initial discomfort within those cracks where the heating tool has reached: this indicates a need to stop applying heat when sensations of warmth or relief are felt at the site of injury, signifying effective pain alleviation and possibly facilitating further wound repair. (In English) This suggests ceasing the application of thermal treatment once you feel that discomfort inside those cra
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And apply care to it within which healing is complete: this advises ongoing gentle skin maintenance and monitoring after the initial acute phase of wound treatment has passed, ens
Capitol .xix.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating concepts from medieval medical practices into
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	From what you've given, it appears that the phrase "Capitol .xix." may have been intended as a reference or marker within some text
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the uvula or tongue has inflammation and infection, it is considered cracked (split), old, and problematic as fistulas develop; if you do not take care of this issue promptly, we have told you about our treatment methods involving hot cautery according to what appears necessary for treating the lesion. Place that flame within the opening of the fistula until it reaches the tip (prosopium) or back (occipucio), and let your hand remain inside so the fire can reach from there into deeper layers; apply this remedy as long as two to three days, ensveiling all our previously discussed treatments.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if the illness is gone and healed, be well; but if not, it's necessary to discover where and hold back the damaged bone as it comes forth in its turn.
Capitol .xx.	Capital X. (Note: "X" is not enough information
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	For the curing of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth become decayed, heal them with medicine without applying pressure; thus pause at the base of the thigh in the belly so that you can hold a cautery over which form will come upwards, ensuring that when you press on the tooth above it using this lithe instrument ignited by fire, warmth from the flame reaches into the core of the decayed tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Return your hand, and repeat the use of caustics as often as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here is the line by line translation:
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line does not contain decipherable
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Cauterizacio del dolore di dente": Translation - "Cautery of toothache
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Quan dolor di dent è per freddo, ovvero dove le viscere sono gelate (indicating a lack of bodily fluids leading to cold and stiffness) or vermin is present, the care will not be tolerated by health unless cautery in either one: caustics at cow borders, or on focus.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Cauterize is what you hold at the edge of cows and boilers in the forge'dictor, apply a pinch and wrap it over the extremity of the torture being burned on, tighten that holding onto the board which has been scorching by heat herein so as to prevent further injury.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding further until the heat of the focus reaches the chest region (the source sentence translated line by line:
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish to submerge wool or cloth under the upper part of that area which is sore, place it over the painful tooth and hold there until the hot iron reaches the cavity of the affected tooth' extrication (this implies a medieval treatment possibly involving some form of dental care).
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Indeed the cauterization is applied at the focus of flesh or iron, and there may be some swelling in the heart where the fire does not reach the mouth of the bladder.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Return the cautery to its shape, and place it on your teeth so that the cautery is seared; do this several times depending on whether the pain worsens or improves during that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When the application of that caustic which inflates the patient'thy mouth and tongue for an hour, this is how it should be done with the caustic.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if you are able to perform it according to how far you can go with your skill or instrument, then proceed accordingly for cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the cannula looks like:
Capitol .xxii.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating from what appears to be Med
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	From your Latin-like phrase "Cauterizacio de extrophulos," a possible English translation could be:
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	Translation: When external ulcers are formed by the overflow of humors and they do not heal through medication as directed for them; you then apply heat to that which is causing this condition using a cauterizing tool, holding two handles so it can be ignited at will. Burn one end with fire until red-hot (ensure proper control over burning the instrument), pause briefly on top of such an ulcer area and keep another piece ready for immediate use if needed; continue doing so as long as necessary to allow healing time whereby full recovery occurs from this ailment's wound.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the fever is slight, then stop applying the cautery according to the quantity of the fever; and leave it for three days, resting on top of what has been heated by the fire until such time when it cools down again.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And care for it with oil and bandages within which it shall heal.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	When speaking of such instruments as the cannula or these cauteries, they are similar in form and use by caretakers.
Capitol .xxiii.	Given that "Capitol" is not followed by an immediate English text
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	The treatment of rheumatic pain and contraction involves the use of caustics or pointed instruments for intervention, as mentioned in this line from a medieval medical treatise: "Capitol .xxiii." Here's
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity enters the lungs and primarily when it is accompanied by inflammation of complexities (which could suggest fever or pleuritis), urgent evacuation occurs through medicines that act as laxatives, while caustic treatment targets the painful joint in its specific location. Here'dictated a procedure for treating what appears to be pulmonary conditions potentially leading up to severe chest pains ("golayro") possibly related to pleurisy or similar inflammation of lung linings during humidity, with laxatives and caustics as the primary interventions.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And only if you do not reach for the cautery or touch the patient'se scrotum, use a needle instead.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	When that part of his back should be treated with another hot cautery, it concerns a joint in the lower spine area.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	El pointed cautery of him is cut in a certain manner beforehand.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is cauterized with water for it has entered within and needs healing.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii. (The given line doesn't contain any text
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	For the caustic treatment of lung disease and cough:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When the cough and lung disease are caused by excessive humors, and there is no fever or inflammation (indicating an ancient illness), then two cautery points will be applied on the shoulder bones above the collarbones of the lungs; as well as other cauterization at the breastbone location between the breasts. The caustics are shaped according to precedent form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, it is the pointed cautery that has been called for in your request, whose form comes before the point of arthritis pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And when points are introduced into those places, take care of it with the water that entered before entering to heal them.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Now, three times you can perform cauterization for this purpose: once as a warm application, and twice more according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Given that "Capitol" is likely referring to an ancient Roman pill
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	In this context, the phrase in Latin-influenced English seems to be discussing a medical procedure related to bandaging or dressings ("titilla" could mean irritation and "cap
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the aid's head is misplaced due to slippery humors and does not return on its own within an acceptable time frame for healing as dictated by tradition (the liquid we usually use), then it must be placed back, with a slight movement—as witnessed in our testimonies. Once the dislocation has been minimized or corrected through this restoration process, move the hump that is located between your head's lower part and those parts below you; these are relevant to where your left ma hand is positioned (if the joint is displaced toward its downward-located segments).
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the cautery has two heads; this is how it looks like.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place a caustic inside where that other enters, and there will come forth the figure of cauterization with its own lancets;
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus according to its quantity; this is how it should be done.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some adjustments are made according to this count and for these reasons (the number of lancets) is eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Here comes the next sentence to translate: Place rest over the cautery points with salt and attach the humors (body fluids) to tranquility, so that the member will not be weakened for any time as long as comfort is maintained.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is in the parts above and pain occurs therein, then apply caustic on the muscle or on the motion cautery points, whereby the joint is confirmed and moisture is evaporated, thus curing the swelling (ulceration).
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Translation for "Capitol .xxvi." is not directly clear as the original Latin-like phrase lacks
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	The provided text appears to be discussing the treatment of stomach distress caused by excess humidity within, which multiplies pain in that area. It suggests continuous care and caution against overconfinement as necessary measures for when an individual's abdomen rises above their back due to such issues (possible interpretation: implying a hernia or similar condition where internal contents push through the muscle wall of the diaphragm). The instructions given are complex, involving several steps and tools required in treatment. Here is what it seems each line addresses when translated into English step by step:
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery corresponds to the quantity of both ends of the penis's gonad,
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line into English:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach has been burned by this cautery and you sense it there: then that which was previously caustic to those points, continue touching them according to your desire for healing, and similarly treat with care what preceded in curative action until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	The text provided appears to be related to medical practices from medieval times, possibly in a bl
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	And when treating the foot wound, then apply an instrument or substance used for coagulation and healing (in this context
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the foot is in pain due to dryness or moisture within that which normally makes up its structure and has exited excessively; treat the condition with water we have at hand, without causing further discomfort—then bring about an urine leak (possibly referring back to some form of fluid accumulation). In such cases, one should attempt three cauterizations according to this method and quantity immediately after lying down by a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Where each space between the points according to their size and where the points are in accordance with the length of the body part:
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	No, do not use your hand for the cautery instrument.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of fluid that is retained exceeds the capacity of what has been collected in the bladder neck (cystocele), and it is not adjusted; and if the uterus stands on the feet of the patient, they stretch their clothes outward, which already have extended their garments.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is how the points of the cautery are shaped:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if it is within your skill and caution in the art of cautery, then you may perform this delicate task with these cauters meant for cutting purposes.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And do not process in the cauterization, and ensure that the instrument is hardened for the entirety of the spinal cord so it may enter into all joints through the hernia, where the spinal cord lies herein; understand this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The reference "Capitol" followed by
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	When treating the puncture wound of a horse, it is necessary to use caution for proper treatment.  
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	Whenever there is an ulcer or festering in the foot and you wish to know if that sores are within the flesh of the foot or in its garment (the sock), if it's located in the flesh of the foot, then the swelling increases and causes more pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the gown of the patient and the pain is intense and occurs repeatedly even for doctors who have treated him/her already,
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore when the ulcer is positioned on the sole of the foot; and where you place your finger to attempt curing it, also apply fire to the cautery that was previously described in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And anneal in there until the entire spine is heated, till it reaches a sanitary state of heat.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it with treatment for other apendages within that heals now.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Not when using this form of cautery not the one studied in medicine and concerning which illnesses have been long considered; yet I may try some variations on this procedure myself, but only if permitted by you all, so that we might benefit from it together.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of purifying ulcers through cautery.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	Not when you place your hand atop the instrument of caution, it is within the action that signifies a toe'dictum in work on the spine.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already have dispatched some of those tools that seem like iron rods and flames to the place where they are between your backbones until they reach this spot for which healing is needed, just as we discussed in foot ulcers.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May not fear in this puncture with the needle of caution, for it will soon heal within the abscess to which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	The provided text appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical termin
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	From lathing or cutting of the womb (which may imply a historical context where such terms are used for surgical procedures). The
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the womb ailment, if you do not apply what we have discussed about treatment and refrain from performing your own intervention, there are three ways in which to proceed correctly (according to figures provided), all of which are deemed appropriate methods; one is by making either three or four lithotomy cuts depending on the length of the womb as illustrated by those previously made for a patient.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Between every lancet used or a small knife and their hand, is the mastery of the instrument with which we perform our operations in the foot itself.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not use your hand with the points of the lancet, and gout is over its two joints (i.imparts this instruction for handling a medical instrument).
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes another method of cauterization so that you heat the cautery on two limbs, which causes displacement in the head joint (possibly referring to a muscular dislocation), and elevate the collarbone where it rests above the chest bone due to the swolthy leg.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if it is necessary for your lifting (elevation), do so according to the length of the body part, in order that they may become points with a sharp instrument according to the law of the cosmos.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Return the two linens or garments tightly within that space where they enter into each other'thy thighs, and hold them there to prevent movement inside those folds of skin.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return (or restore) the points of the cautery; and so they are four points that need treatment.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you go, then apply three types of cautery that have been prepared.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your care for the cautery you placed yesterday at various times during the day; it may also be relevant that other causes preceding in treatment appear.
Capitol .xxxi.	The provided text appears to be written in medieval medical Latin influenced by Italian, Spanish
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	This phrase translates into English as follows: "For the cauterization of ulcers." The term 'ca
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The translated line is, “Cauterizing wounds in joints is not done with a pointed instrument but rather appropriately.” Here the original text clarifies that while specific treatments are mentioned
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	The translated line is: "When you heal the ulcer and do not conform your treatment to what has been stated in its division; then there are four types of cauterization within the course of care - one over the stomach, another on the leg, another on the chest area (breastbone), also two between the spine vertebrae of the back and a third at the center of the breastbone. Plus additional cauterizations: among them there are four for relieving pressure in the intervertebral spaces; one to address issues with acidity or gastric problems, another on internal organs (possibly related to spleen), two more between spine vertebrae at different locations, and an extra application over stomach areas.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the thickness of the penis.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Return the used cautery tools in such a way that they can be washed for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And prevent the swolthy from being evacuated by the cautery that is in water for so it may be added to their treatments as needed aid and supplementation after meals.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what it will be used to burn (cauterize), which follows its previous form; that's where they apply it, and therein lies their hand – this holds their hands.
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual content for
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	When referring to the treatment of joints and hernias, in this context it means:
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are pressed downwards and filled with wet water, cover them twice on both sides of the leg between the earlobe and the ankle ring; raise your hand over these instruments without twisting it; elevate your hand further, but do not return to its original position until all the moisture has been absorbed.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the sentence to translate line by line into English:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And according to the length of the thigh, one applies pressure and removes it at the place of the hollow in the thigh; over each hip joint there are two lancets applied:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lay down sick person for long time so that no water returns from him/her.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes which have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" is not part of the provided text in
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	It appears there was a misunderstanding, as "de cauterizacio de cos de ventre" seems to be Latin
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When bowels are disturbed by moisture within them and cause digestive retention issues that occur in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with medicinal measures to heal without causing further complications; at times these blockages present themselves through vomiting which requires cauterization. Here they proceed as follows:
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see excess humidities and the abdomen excreting them, then burn that over the pentacle area and on the hernias, firmly adjusting the cauterisms above the stomach and in the groins to ensure proper nourishment which is lacking.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide specific text content but appears
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	From this phrase, it's clear we are discussing a medieval medical practice related to the treatment of hemorrhoids (hemorroidae in Latin). The
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When ancient hemorrhoids are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture and we do not provide the necessary external treatment (which refers to poultices), they heal using three types of cautery applied directly on top of the swollen nodes present at either side below, as well as a caustic application underneath the navel with two drops.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food not decomposed, and their face has swolthy edema, then perform that burn over the stomach with great cautery as previously done; also a cauterization on the breastbone (breast bone), chest wax seal-cauterizations, burning them for some time until it restores.
Capitol .xxxv.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise that
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	And to apply the caustic for the treatment of their ulcers, place it directly on their abdomen (assuming "lor" refers to patients and "abscizio" means application or placing).
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the ulcer (atery), then apply the caustic that has been prepared on firewood to it. This suggests an old practice of using heat or charred materials for medical treatments in medieval times, possibly applied topically with some form of cautery tool as described earlier.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Inside that which has been kindled in the ulcer you have removed (atery), place lastly your tool, and ensure it reaches into the opening of the vein from where blood flows with impure sanctity; this indicates a procedure to drain venous fluids possibly associated with wounds or inflamed areas during medieval medicine. This line seems particularly complex as it combines elements like applying heat (ignition) within an ulcer, using tools for treatment that are likely metal and designed specifically for medical purposes of
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Use either oil or vinegar for these wounds (which have been discussed), and afterward apply caustic treatment as needed when we've assessed them, placing care on those that are coated with ointments inside while they heal; this suggests a comprehensive approach in medieval medicine to cleanse the area possibly infected or inflamed before applying specific treatments. The use of oil and vinegar likely refers to basic remedies for wounds at hand, indicative of early medical practices where simple substances were used as antiseptics before more complex pharmaceuticals became available.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you are using a large caustic for treatment over the afflicted area (which could be understood as an external wound or ulcer), it might even benefit their vigor; this line suggests that certain treatments in medieval times were not just aimed at he
Capitol .xxxvi.	Given that "Capitol" does not appear to contain intelligible Latin
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The treatment of natural ulcers present in the parts (likely referring to areas on the body where these lesions are found).  
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work that has been advised at this place, and the patient is frightened by it, they are healed through caution.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when anyone comes with an opening in nature and it is old and diseased by excess moisture, consider that this amount of humidity beneath the indicated subtle attempt; thus assess how deep into it you must intervene.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Return the cautery that seems like fire (or apply heat) to it.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Return that hot branded instrument into this fistula and adjust according to how much it intertwines within the space.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Iterate within that period when the instruments have just been used for one or two days, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Return care for where it is healed inside,
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the location is sealed and materials are removed from it, stay there for a long time, then you will know that the patient has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not exposed on themselves, then you know they have been rotted or absorbed into their bones, from which causes memory of them will return to that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Unfortunately, it seems there is some confusion here as "Capitol" does not
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The phrase you've provided appears incomplete and somewhat archaic or technical in nature ("cauterize the ulcers
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain arises in the ulcers due to cold or heavy breathing, and at such times one might choke on their own phlegm (expectorations), then it is said that heating applied directly over any of these ulcerous areas can cauterize them. This heat treatment not only aims to alleviate the discomfort but also serves as a remembrance for those suffering from such conditions, likely recalling past episodes or emphasizing mindfulness about their health condition due to recurring symptoms triggered by environmental factors like cold air intake through breathlessness.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so quickly apply a small amount of caustic to the second one, resulting in three lines of treatment that may restore health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	I cannot provide an accurate translation for "Capitol .xxxviii." as this
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	The phrase provided, "Cauterizacio de la vesica," refers to a medical procedure involving the burning or
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When acute bladder distension and moisture cause the malady to retain urine in the organ of elimination (bladder), then it is necessary to perform cauterization at the site of pus on the bladder, using hair from a pillow for one part, skin debris or dust from left side for another; and with pointed forceps.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And according to the length of each lancet as per the number on its handle; and burn that which is necessary for cauterizing in the lowest part of the abdomen or both (if it's needed).
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And when it is necessary for the pointed cautery mentioned before, then proceed with its use as directed.
Capitol .xxxix.	The text provided seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	In relation to treating haemorrhoids, the translation of "Capitol .xxxix." could potentially refer
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When hemorrhoids come with moisture and heat, injections are prohibited beforeward as they can exac0urate the menstrual flow of a woman, delaying their onset; when these pains arise that need to be treated at her belly button region, it is done using three cauterizing tools within the abdominal area – similar in use and action like what we do with our dildos during treatment. Furthermore, afterward applying two or even four such instruments specifically over the location where discharge occurs; these are also needles used for treating them (cauterization).
Capitol .xl.	(Note: Without additional context or understanding of specific medical terminology from
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	For the treatment of ankle dislocation, apply a caustic to repair it (assuming "Capitol .xl." refers to instructions or notes in this treatise).
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture seeps into the joint of the ankle, and causes its bone to become longer than usual when compared between them (interpreting "Capitol .xl." as a note about this symptom), it is referred to by locals herein. This could indicate prolonged swelling or inflammation where one side extends beyond the other upon comparison of their lengths, suggesting possible joint issues such as instability or misalignment that may require medical attention.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The area affected by ankle dislocation is experiensively weakened herein (interpreting "Capitol .xl." as possibly referring to this clinical finding). This suggests that the site
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, when you cauterize the wound on the joint of your ankle herein (assuming "Capitol .xl." refers to a specific method being described), take care that it resembles tightening in place where previously there was dislocation—so as for the part affected by this injury, once you have applied cautery and ensured its position mimics closure of an open wound (perhaps indicating some form of binding or immobilization afterward to promote healing), it should settle into a comfortable resting place within that imaginary circle. This advice implies the importance of proper alignment post-injury, possibly through splintage and monitoring for reduction in dislocation before returning movement is allowed again (considering cautery as
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And those cautery instruments that were used before in stomach cauterization will be utilized here again.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this caustery is not at your disposal, then use three large caustic lamps for the same purpose as that one.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply the points according to the quantity of pain throughout the entire spine, and take care that whatever enters therein becomes healed.
Capitol .xli.	Given that "Capitol" seems like it could be referring to a
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The provided Latin-like text appears to discuss medical procedures related to the treatment of conditions, possibly involving joint pain and gout as suggested by
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	Translation: When the pain is in the part of the ankle and due to fluid accumulation or foul-smelling/artificial pills, we use water that has been previously collected here (suggesting some kind of remedy) for treatment; hencefor0623_
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The manipulation of the cautery in that second use is either a medicine-burning cauterization or a focus (or heat) cauterization.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Either space where you between each application of cautery, and the quantity or size of that same area; whether it is large as a spoon (cauter) or great (grand), this will determine how much intervention we need to apply therein with our tools for treatment.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May there be some restraints on the hot spot located at the head of the anguish, so that four cauterizations can take place.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize at the place where form was previously made during the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle; that is a closed circle and burns all along the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how one applies caustics when pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the groin area.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is extended inside the thigh, then there will be two lancets used on that space where you have entered with the malady causing pain; and one lance to cut through four parts of its exterior surface.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If it concerns the pointed cautery and its depth according to the size of the thumbnail, then:
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the evil humors invade and extend pain into these places of the feet, then here you will apply cautery to this area where it has invaded, possibly up to three or four points, according to what is needed for that specific location.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the malady causes pain that comes down into the groin area, there it is where we apply this pointed cautery here.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And when all the cautery is done and not exceeding as for nervous or severe inflammation, it concerns you over the patient'thy unconsciousness on whom such condition occurs without any injury to them from excessive burning of instruments.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And here are the translations for each line:
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When there is an accidental fall from stomach sickness and death arrives,
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts of a single section, then perform cautery on one according to this methodology.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here the skilled ones apply them in the cauterization of this joint, which is like a piece of iron from where the circumference is made up by one palm; and according to its thickness use as much as that found on an average bone or finger length.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here enters another third; and those spaces between them the amount of notes on their foot; they are these circles over two parts; and the length of those bands an inch or two, make clothing neatly arranged within those circles; this is how it looks.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Return it to the fire within where it darkens and sparks are made, positioned upon the division of the thigh, with malady resting on their lap (or back).
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Thus, heat three cautery sticks together in a single session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here applies that thing for three days, apply bandage to it and keep the covered wound inside until healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh, children, of this particular kind of cautery we seldom use for the examination of you all, and so only occasionally find those that oversee upon us.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who are suffering from it use the lancet here and cause harm where they themselves experience pain.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cautery tools be attached to the perforated armillary sphere containing the gallbladlaus of their gate, whose length is two nods or fists in the abdomen's navel region.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between them contains as much bulk of the body part in question, and they are loose above (and below), then keep them together according to this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	When you raise your hand and wipe away all the water down there from that liquid, which is wet or moisture (from within), it refers to a medical procedure whereby one elevates their palm using some instrument to cleanse excess bodily fluids like urine. In modern terms: Raise your hand with an implement used for cleansing and remove all the
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Elevate the limb for three days and rest it over that edge until the darkness of reabsorption (indicating healing or drying up) is done away with, then wash it daily using water from a pitcher; this action will restore vigor. In contemporary English: Elevate the injured area above where swelling has subsided for three days and rest over that threshold until reabsorption disappears (implying reduction of inflammation), after which you should cleanse with water drawn daily, leading to recovery in strength or healthy functioning.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Care for that affected area within where healing has occurred; this suggests continued attention and possibly the use of ointment on an already-healed region to maintain its health or prevent
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends within the thigh or groin area, apply pressure with your hand that holds water from above where it was applied earlier; this refers to a treatment technique involving applying manual therapy using moisture—possibly compresses dampened by saline solution for wound care. In modern terms: If you feel pain spreading into the thigh or groin area, gently apply pressure with your hand that contains water previously used on those areas; this implies continued so
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the practice of using urine for medical treatment, and I have already written about it in the treatise on medicine reformulation; indicating that they previously documented or discussed such an approach within their writings concerning updated practices in healing methods. In contemporary English: This method involves utilizing urine as a form of therapy (which can be considered unconventional
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and acid neutralized in both parts of the division made once, and pierced at intervals on a new wave whereby each divided part is penetrated by a small tool according to how much they appear within it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	So of the few remedies that are being cauterized with sulfur and mercury as they have been mixed for you, apply them accordingly when using your touch to ensure their effectiveness.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Guiliel reassesses the home of an ancient patient for their operation and healing experience that cured pain in the ankle and sciatic nerve issues, which is truly remarkable; moreover, they do not require any further treatment as long as they rest according to recommendations. They recover quickly when immersed in baths and applied with herbs from this very same source.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is pressed by certain bumps, and does not recede when released from the pressure, then a stone has formed recently; its pain can be rubbed with some grains of sand on the part where there is pain or in the thighs, groin, or hernia area, holding.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When it is laid out for three hours or as much time as the humidity of the air allows, according to its easing from constriction.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Return that item into bath and when the patient'thy leg is washed, insert it back into their body, whereupon the pain ceases and they heal.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	E understand that you are not using caustics for these remedies but rather facilitating the expulsion from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Socrates say that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it affects its blood; and these are the methods for applying such treatment: wool and ointment made from ancient oil, placed between the toes and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return the hardened thorn of goat hide and inflamed place inside where there is fire, placing it on woolen fabric and seal within that which is drawn.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return and do not cease applying water until the sharpness of the needle's point reaches the joint, then rest the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this operation of caution is called a treatment with cuffs or straps.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii. (The numbering here likely refers to a specific
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Translation of "Cauterizacio de dolor de dois" into English, assuming it's related medical practice
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some causes of pain in both legs are due to bruising or injury (from impact), constipation, and reasons akin to these conditions; they can be addressed through the application of moist warm substances that have penetrating qualities. This suggests an approach from medieval medicine where balancing bodily humors with specific treatments was common practice for alleviating pain associated with various causes like trauma or digestive issues, indicative of a time when medical understanding and interventions were more based on theory than modern science.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cautery is not used for anything else but this very specific quality that it causes through effusion of the humoral substance.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So then, remove the suppuration and resemblance of their thighs and chests which are pains above three lines according to his condition; place fingers or cauteries in each line as much as he tolerates from this discharge and vitality.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is necessary for healing with pointed cautery at points.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, then apply three or four pointed caulters in this manner.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (The provided line seems incomplete or nonsens
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	This Latin phrase translates to "For the cautery towards consumption of goiter." This sentence suggests a medieval medical practice where heat, likely applied with some form of
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This sentence translates to: "During this illness, heat treatments are conducted regularly for children; it is through the food given them that their bodies can be weakened and elevated during exertion." Here's a line-by-line translation with contextual interpretation based on medieval medical understanding:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And in the lower back and shoulders of him/hers that already begins to overtop others' vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you press and intend to prevent from spreading, then apply that pointed instrument used for cautery in this circular manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	That cauterizes over the entire backbone region of the spine gently.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cautery along the spinal canal with points for two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are their points properly made.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for the place within that has been healed by the water we have provided.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May you ensure that the cautery is not applied in a cold state but for muscle spasm treatment.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv. (The reference seems specific but without additional context
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Regarding the cautery of gout and joint pain, it appears that this line suggests a medical intervention for these conditions using heat or some form of thermal treatment as part of medieval
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold (humoral) humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when this type of pain occurs in the feet ("pes"), it has become customary for doctors to call such a condition gouty arthritis. Here they refer specifically to "dolor de juncturas," which aligns with medieval notions that sickness can be attributed to an imbalance or misdirection of bodily fluids, known as humors in ancient and early modern medicine theory ("fregas les quals so enfundutz").
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And when gout (cause of joint pain) is treated and not recurred due to the curative care provided by doctors, then such purgatives remove the pains without failures.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you are cauterizing that which is eliminated in the circulatory channel of the joint between the foot and the ankle with cautery, it means:
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	That is the form of this tool:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary for a point to be made on the surface of the foot, then use pointed cautery accordingly.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pains penetrate into the abdomen or other joints, and their motions worsen it, then you should perform cautery on any affected joint with three to four of these same instruments used for this purpose at that time.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you have enough lancets for these lancets and they are necessary for them, then apply the one needed without pressing too hard with your hand on the lance beforehand; use only as much force required to insert into the thigh area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters into both shoulders at once, then apply the caustic that we have mentioned in this chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the limbs alone, it calls for sweating therapy; and a needle will be inserted along the circuits of the meridians as they turn within these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there are residual pains in the fingers or on the chest and palm of the hand, then prick through the rims around each joint with a needle on any point present herein and upon the pulse spot.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If joint or muscle pain comes upon them during the days with their thighs or muscles, then they will perform cautery on all parts of their assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if the malady of the bowels is not expelled by a good diet and medicine intake, even then it will be removed with this treatment; God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English, here is what
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	The phrase "cauterize wounds" refers to the use of heat (commonly a heated iron or similar
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When wounds occur in the joints, and you apply cautery directly to the tendon attached at that point (presumably during a healing procedure), it is understood by some doctors as applying pressure with their hand above this area so that swelling does not extend into the stomach. It's further explained here:
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient' extrication between their thighs on top of your two, and command that they hold onto their private part to ensure no hernia or prolapse occurs from them (meaning: "no atrophia" in Latin).
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Here returns that which they hold for the attempt to break over the bones of each limb' extraterritory, resembling the bottom half of a circle at the divisions of the body; this is when it occurs in their attempts (the rupture).
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the pointed cautery as its form of use now:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When there is reason to make incisions with needles, prepare accordingly.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to ensure that the intestine does not protrude outwards.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: You have already opened between the thighs of the patient a space and placed cushions under them; another servant on their legs, and one on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the steam of the intestine during your cautery procedure, to ensure that through it does not come out onto the abdomen or cause another serious illness.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you understand that when you use the cautery, you do not hold your nose (literally implies using it without proper technique or care), then you will compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it is necessary for the children'dict points with the caustic, according to their greatness and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the site of the cautery within three days, until the skin of the focus has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When that is cared for with these ointments inside until it heals.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joint is swolgy over its two parts for forty days until it's sealed and the impurity removed:
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When the nourishment of him/her according to the length of time necessary for his/her cure is provided and ensured that the intestine does not come out, it must be done immediately in order to heal effectively.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time for removal after forty days, administer proper binding forcefully, and keep the cord there for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	If it is a matter of movement and filling with food and drink, as well as forceful use when applying this entire healing regimen, then:
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And when the initial treatment has been done using a triangular lancet according to this manner, apply it so that nothing is lost.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The original text does not provide enough context
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Cautear el torto." The phrase "cauteria el tortu" refers to the medical
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in the upper body due to manipulation or tapping and does not respond to medical care provided by physicians, those who perform cautery are tasked with puncturing points on the spot as a form of treatment for extended periods of time without relief from usual medicinal practices.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And with pointed instruments according to the size and height of them, as well as their flexibility and turning motion, we address the twisting and pain experienced by it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it heals through the first application of caustics, be; but if not, repeat over him those same applications on that part which approaches to the urethra so that as many of these punctures enter where there is malady within, leading ultimately to its cure. (According to custom for such pains it' extrices are applied repeatedly directed towards the area approaching the urinary tract in order to introduce enough caustic applications into the afflicted space thus promoting healing.)
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The provided text does not contain a clear English
De cauterizacio de lepra.	From your phrase "Cauterizacion de la Lepra," we can deduce that it refers to the
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 The use of caustic agents for the treatment of leprosy sometimes requires a strong application to act effectively; whereas, when it is caused by decay and melancholy (a possible reference to humoral theory where imbalances lead to disease), only a gentle touch should be applied.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you intend to cauterize that one, consider if the leprosy is present and has been treated with the waters we have discussed in section (and not thereafter), nor this, nor fear that corruption may affect the entire body of yours, then cauterize it on the head using a heated lancet: once at the top of your head, twice for each part underneze below; and both over two calluses; and one behind, upon the nape or servant.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the line to translate: And place your hand inside where you apply the instrument until blood enters a small movement in the bone, and dislocate the displaced joints so that thick vapors can be expelled from it; then cauterize over the wound as requested.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and shows signs of manifestation, then cover it with those cauterisms you have in your head; apply a cauterism on the tip of the nose, two cauterisms on each of his mouth sores, two cauterisms on two spondyls of the neck, two over their spinous processes (the bony protrusions at the back), one for skull and chest region, two above ankles joints, one for any foot joint, two over each shoulder blade, two over all his muscles, cover both hands' tendons; cauterize that area on all their knuckle pits (joints) of the fingers and feet, as well as every heel where they press.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Guard your nerves that are over the ankle so they do not burn these.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some treatments involve burning with a cautery on the bones of the pelvis and in another place over the mouth of the stomach, as well as for the womb (uterus).
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Be aware that the more you adjust the cauterization instruments, the more it aids and benefits; also know that in these burns there is no pain as with their hands, making them astonished at your touch on their body parts.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	When it is necessary for the cauteries (therapezymic instruments) to be large or small according to the parts and joints as previously indicated by the tools, in accordance with their respective needs.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the pointed instruments made of grain flour mixed with honey and other remedies within which they are healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	The provided medieval medical text seems difficult due to archaic language usage that combines Latin
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Regarding "de cauterizacio de stupor," it appears the phrase refers to a form of
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or asleep and healing requires it, use medicines, physicians (or apothecaries), and apply the caustic accordingly to that part of the body's size which demands treatment with cauterization tools due to either its severity or smallness. 
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And when they insert the pointed cautery into the hollow of the neck with a few pieces,
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return therein that which is within it for its healing.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes certain convulsions are cauterized even on the upper and lower parts of the body (masculine) as well as in the feet, particularly affecting the spinal discs between the second and fourth vertebrae where nerves enter this member; these areas become inflamed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not press upon it, but rather he who is wise in the anatomy of members and nerve exits throughout the body should do so.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlix. (Assuming this is Roman numeral for a
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	From the Latin, "Cauterization of warts which are mollusc." The sentence suggests that doctors might use cautery (burning with he
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are old and do not respond to the ointments of medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a heated instrument as soon as possible after cleaning out where they've grown within the body cavity (presumably this refers to an internal condition), ensuring that pus has been cleared ("the white and yellow substance" being indicative of infected material). The color change mentioned implies some assessment or reaction following treatment. Translated line by line:
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .l.	Capitalis Libri (Latin for "The Book of Capital
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Regarding cauterization of the skull, it implies a medical treatment or procedure involving burning a part of the
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When pain is consumed and that star descends into the body's course as it turns around us, at that moment we perform this specific type of burning treatment on a circle within the circulatory pathway where it causes disturbance or upheaval in motion. This sentence describes an ancient medical practice possibly related to cauterization used by physicians when they encountered pain associated with issues such as obstructions in blood flow, perhaps following from astrological observations
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	They examine those parts that have been burned at dawn with this specific cauterization in the meadow; may I not see it myself, but believe there is an ulcer present here too, and some signs of disease are already visible to you (the reader/observer). This indicates a periodical assessment by medical practitioners using their trained eyes after performing morning burns as part of treatment for potential sores or diseases they might observe on the patient. It speaks to an era when empirical observations were key in diagnosis and where astrology seemed intertwined with medicine, suggesting
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	They place a device used for burning in the circulatory pathway at this time with our current position/movement; or on that particular spot where they perform their method of burn treatment (citing specific technique). This line suggests an observation about how and when certain medical treatments are applied, possibly related to timing within daily life cycles such as sunrise or patient movement. The mentioning highlights the
Capitol .li.	Capitol Libri (Latin for "The Book of Capital
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Regarding scald burn treatment, it indicates a specific topic within medical literature focused on procedures or remedies associated with treating
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any one is delayed in ripening, and thus excess flesh appears on that part or due to the state of the humors which can make him feeble with scant urine or because of time; you want to hasten the ripening process for these patients: cauterize small puncture points within them using sharp instruments like tweezers, and apply a poultice on that part so it will crave during maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	May if you wish to perform the procedure of this, then heat will be applied to that instrument used for it; allow that heated cautery to stay in place while warmth enters through the site where fluid is being administered (injection).
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in that place where you have inserted the points recently, to ensure that the leg'se (arm) is drawn out, take care of it such that it heals properly.
Capitol .lii.	The provided medieval medical treatise is written in an archaic form of Latin
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Caustication for ulcer." The phrase "cauteria corporis lacerante" translates to
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	The provided Latin-like text describes the condition of ulceration as something that travels through the body and is compared to sawdust being consumed by fire (a combustion process). In English, this can be interpreted as:  
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you see that worm in the place where they suffered burning with a small lump of fire (cauterization), then light those cauterizing pincers little by little, and large when necessary at the location where there is the worm.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Return and apply caustic that throughout all entered areas, eliminating completely any cause within it without causing damage.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Return the ligament or hernia back into its cavity, and rest your hand over the burned areas until all scars are completely healed within three days, mixing oil inside while doing so for complete recovery of decay.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Return that for its care; take up an ointment made of flesh-producing substances (which could be interpreted as some form of poultice or healing salve).
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Return that for its care (or treatment); apply three times a day if the flesh grows back in where there is no decay, then you are well; but otherwise, repeat the use of caution over what has been broken into those locations which have deteriorated.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosive substances are sometimes used in acute medicine, where that is a place for cautioning (or applying treatments).
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	May our pointed cautery of fire be used gently for purification and removal of phlegm humors from the body, please note that I've made some assumptions about this text due to its unclear language
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And in the division of acute medicine, therefore take it when you have taken it out beforehand.
Capitol .liii.	The provided text seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Regarding the treatment of fingers and similar body parts (assuming 'semblants' refers to other joint or limb-like structures). The text discusses various
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Regarding the treatment of malformed or diseased parts at the end (fingers) and sides (assuming 'dejos' refers to extremities such as hands or feet), which causes a downward shift, these are treated with cauterization in two ways: one on focus [likely meant here is "area" referring back contextually] – for example where there might be inflammation at the base of an affected limb (this interpretation assumes 'foc' relates to some sort of localized area needing treatment, perhaps due to swelling or infection), and another on water tail [possibly a metaphorical reference; if literal it would mean "water cure," which is not applicable here], implying external application for healing. 
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterization on focus is required because if the cautery'dictions are not precise (likely referring back here to methods of treatment), it could lead to further injury—a situation as dire as being burned by a sharp instrument, which would be considered very severe damage. Such instruments must have fine and delicate margins containing all parts necessary for comprehensive part-healing ('clau' or key factor in repair). The implication is that the tools used should not only remove damaged tissue but also promote healing with precision to prevent additional harm, consistent with medieval medical practice where cauterization was a common treatment method aimed
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Pause the fire (cauterization) over that key area and place your hand to guide the tools of healing within this loop ('circuit' implying an enclosed space where treatment occurs), ensuring that these instruments penetrate deeply into the cavity formed by the cauterized parts. This suggests a controlled methodology, using direct physical contact with precision (hand guidance) and deep intervention for effective curing of damaged areas within limbs or joints during medieval times when such techniques were used in medical practice to prevent further injury through careful application
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	The given text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that seems influenced by Latin and various Romance languages like Italian, Spanish, French due to its vocabulthy and structure. Here's the line
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here is the line translated into English:  
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Return care is given where it'thy flesh has been healed inside until such time as it shall be restored fully.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If you do not convert it (the condition), and continue to apply warmth on the surface of the body, mainly in the thighs and feet, where you administer water or blood with a vial needle, holding your hand over that spot; take some water from the bottle' each drop has little quantity, place this under your palm, then turn it around (or manipulate) gently on yourself to compress out all moisture. And wait for just a few minutes until the pressure of the wet vial needles is relieved by the bites of your hand; after that you remove those still-residual drops with gentle touch from where they have been embedded in the clamp, and this will rectify any remaining issues if there were errors made earlier.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	If it is necessary for them (the doctors or caregivers) within the room, then bring cushions over all those parts where they are experiencing pain in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Return care for those pus that are eradicated by the joints, as they enter through fats wherein the body is swolthy (or fatty).
Capitol .liiii.	Given that "Capitol" doesn'thy not provide specific context or
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Based on your provided fragment, which seems like a Latin-based term possibly related to medieval medical practices:
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs in the nerves or due to fever as a result of irritation, it is believed that one should perform four types of caustic treatments on each spinal vertebra between them; and apply these same caustics also upon their chest and abdomen.  
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the shaking of him ceases and hastens his recovery from illness, as affected by cold humors.
Capitol .lv.	The provided text appears to be an ancient medical document discussing treatment methods
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the caulking of flesh wounds on the body, it translates as: "Concerning the application or process for tre
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When flesh is expelled from the body and pustules form due to hardened corrupt materials within; thus it must be addressed with care, applying caulking under a mint leaf or over an aggressive growth (likely referring to boils), extending up to its head—this could mean either at the tip of hair follicles where sebaceous glands are located ("foc"), along long-standing eroded areas ('razitz de erestologia'), or in deeper, more insidious spaces within tissue (possibly referring to abscesses).
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Here are the line-by-line translations:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Mayhap this is what it means and here's its translation line by line into English:
Capitol lvi.	Capitol LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of bleeding from a sanctioned injury by incision of cautery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops guided by arsenic that you inject or insert into the body part where it should be decomposed; and then appear as simulacra, making it difficult to restore what was lost at that time.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when you injure your backbone (spine), hold onto it with the sole of your foot at its base and pause over that area to prevent slipping out until healed as directed internally.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place small and strong lamps or cauldrons over the flames to blow out those inside that are made of fire.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And from those same points above where it broke open an artery and poured out its blood into that vein flowing with festination, place your ligature there so that it becomes detached and restricted this vessel.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move it and extract the caustic, then take another lashing immediately with one of those cauterizing tools that are prepared at the focus, so do not cease to inflict harm within which the sinew has been restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Guard your nerves here that are present and make them withdraw from above or other malevolence.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	When the arteries are blocked and it is not possible to unblock them in those places, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or using cautery where we have blood, or extraction when they are extracted, which burns out limbs and restricts the vein; if a ligature or bandage holds it firmly with external force, strong pillows resting on its bedding to restrict venous flow.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer proper restriction of the patient lie bound and tighten at position or cause reasons for burning and resemblance, do not comfort but restrain them instead.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen that there is no doctor or medicine present, then work with the place indicated above as if we have them here today and understand where this great pain comes from within the patient's body part divided by laborers, not exacerbated on top of their bodies; sprayed over the rusted iron nail they are standing on which is causing it to swell up and harden inside what has become inflamed. And may there be a need for cauterization or medicine intervention.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second division.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and suctioning, and of bleeding and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucazi.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When this process is carried out in this chapter for the purpose of drawing forth what they desire from it, according to whatever will be requested by them.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you come at this time of day, cover, father, so that in this capital city you learn the first principle of cautery treatment.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For careful watch that is required here, during the operation where care must be taken as it involves expulsion which contains life essence within (blood flow), this may necessitate cutting or making an incision on varicose veins or hemorrhoids and similar procedures involving extraction of maggots for pus removal.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	From all these things accompany fear and trembling in their bodies, which can lead up to death for them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo debeis vos manierar homens a manierar mocos de malautias.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Of them that are ill and feared of death because of the swiftness of their ailment's water (humors) and its prolonged duration which leads to sickness—hence they fear for what brings about death, due to this rapid fluid movement within their condition and its lengthy continuance causing suffering.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	From those things gives him his health and presents it to you, he hopes for this goodness, but the sick condition is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so that you consent to this where the madness comes from which is now among yourselves; and let your caution be greater than covesity, and do not presume any cause for it but rather a certain science that purifies it away—through such virtuous practice.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Now in the treatment of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication, herein lies help with acquiring fame and memory; a benefactor and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, He guides your understanding and does not send you astray; for it is within His own realm (or domain).
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And order this chapter distinctly according to the chapters on caustics and treatment of headaches within the body weight section so that you may attend to what is asked for by them, which they need in terms of such things (implying medications or treatments).
Capitol primier.	Capital First.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the healing water contained within a child'thy head for treatment.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness moves gradually in children, and when the newborn'se head first emerges from their birth canal.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Someway through due carelessness that is not clean (unhealthy or unclean) has occurred/arisen, leading to an injury or harmful situation for which measures should be taken promptly and with
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	Only in children do you see this illness, and those I have seen who died from it are displayed here as an example for all of us to witness the severity of its impact on young lives.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "E yeu e vist that a child whose head was filled with water could not sit on their own head due to its great size and perhaps because of increased moisture inside it until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is added between the navel and the bone or added on top of the skin in these places:
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case is moisture between the vertebra and bone and the prolapse (herniation) is slight, then cut at the warm spot on the back of your head where a crack appears as the length of the hernia passes through while this fluid moves. This is how spinal decompression occurs:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So if moisture is increased and ulceration becomes more severe according to this methodology:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the moisture is in your nose, it means that you must open up and drain all of its parts and squeeze out the water when compressing it to those divisions; this is not something for yourself to do.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you open in the spot of heat at the head, three cracks according to this manner.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And reduce the inflammation of the insides not allowing all moisture to stay therein, and tighten the fissures within sheets and woolens; apply warm water over and oil inside during daytime until evening time, applying liniment and ointment on tendons and unguents in hairs while strengthening the head for equal balance. Feed the patient dry food such as bread when their body is comfortably settled and healed within.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another incision method is considered when you see the size of the ulcer and the accumulation of water; sometimes this occurs at the back of head (occipital region), or in the lower part, right side, left side; therefore pay attention to where the ulcer appears with fluid buildup, and take action as soon as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the vein and outflow of black bile and phlegm through this flow of blood for the expulsion of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Capitol II.: (The continuation of text not provided for
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the inspection of the arteries wherein you have placed your fingers (or "hiltess" as referred to in medieval Latin medical texts), they are called Hilsses. In English: When inspecting or examining the arteries for palpation, these vessels may be term
Capitol segon.	From section II.: (The continuation of text not provided
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When even then complications or abscesses occur within the hips or chest area, and it is considered ancient practice not to administer treatment with medicines at this juncture; hencefors herein begins the primary remedy—the intervention in these two arteries. In English: Whenever there are issues such as inflammations (which may imply abscesses) developing within the hips or chest, and it is deemed outdated to treat with medicine at this stage; therefore, here we start addressing remedies by intervening in these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	So when you intend to insert those into the patient'se neck, and rub the hard fabric where they will be placed with pressure, ensuring that their collarbones are also under this tight cloth; take note of the vein there, and these points over each other as far only in men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Return the tongue to the arch of the foot and inspect each joint space in every separated section for an incoming stone entering through it via the head (which refers here likely as 'the head's entrance'). Here is the translation line by line:
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the splint into the artery and extend it towards the parts below (presumably referring to areas of injury or pain that are situated lower than where they currently rest).
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	When the length of the intestine is two fingers adjusted, whenever any vein in it goes out seeking exit pulse, then quickly through quick ascent and descent.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the needle does not appear at the joint line, then measure three fingers in width from the auricle (the outer ear), apply lubricant on it to attempt insertion, and enter into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the humidity of the sanction is measured for its quantity of water (or moisture), no more should be taken from it than what appears in the vital essence and fluid accumulation of the body' extraneous elements, respectively: thus ensuring that nothing excessive disrupts the balance.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider the soil (the patient'thy condition), and therefore if there is any cause remaining in the bone, divide it up here to prevent apendicitis abscess from developing further wound.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return strength to the child with wool and linen clothes, and take care of that which is inside where it should heal.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III.: (The translation may be more context-dependent
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the arches which are within the temples." This sentence likely refers to removing something from or extracting items located in the 'arches' of temple structures, possibly an architectural feature
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient acids or cataracts arise within the temple's arches due to agricultural moisture and quality of materials used in those structures, strong and seeming old stones appear among them; doctors use their healing hands for this ailment, thus we suffer these illnesses wherein removal from the temples or cauterization (treatment) has been demonstrated.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The pain of the operation and removal from those humors which are in the shrines; understand this artery that appears on your pulse but is hidden within a few people due to their rapid movement.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden from you, then firmly press the thighbone with a cloth; and apply heat or steam to the area until your tutor appears as an archer (meaning they will become visible).
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take hold of this device for it is so formed as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: And place your finger in that which facilitates entry into the artery; and put on boots and extract from there whatsoever is related thereto within where you remove it from the navel and discover whatever of the tunics those belong to, belonging to all.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is subtle, then wrap that around the extremity of the body and insert it according to the quantity by which their limbs are elongated and contracted; thus there will be no flow of blood unless inserted in such a way for the entire amount of fluid.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Return (to) reduce the swelling from the bladder urine into its cavity and place it for three times within, thus preventing re-accumulation or further distention of
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, place it in two locations on firmly attached flesh or strong cords for long enough to prevent decay and promote urine flow during convalescence.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Return the excess that is between two ligaments, and apply it at this time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, apply the pointed cautery inside the mouth of a lancet that has already pierced their external mucous membranes, and keep it at the location where this surgical work is being done.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	While you work or during the following labor day flow of sap from the artery, at that time immediately tighten and compress that very same vein, holding your hand within to restrict the blood flow therewith.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If there is a cause of those that are not with you now, then pause over the location where he has become congealed, and bring on cooling water within which moisture builds up until his agitation ceases; at this time his strength returns according to its proper sequence.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When the purge of blood from arteria occurs as a result of applying this cautery that has two covers placed on it at attempted locations and pausing occasionally for reasons related to fire or thirst, until they reach the bones whereby their limbs become elongated due to such draining—this is not consolidated in all places by means of this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the pointed cautery should be used:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the sharpness of both hoods (the two coverings).
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Even if the patient' extricates themselves and become more painful with two cots (beds), which are as sharp as any other for each humidity type that has infiltrated our body, we shall not hasten to cut into their flesh due to speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is any thickening in these places and heat accumulates at the focus of them, causing the flesh to detach layer by layer.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety and has been made lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	When it is about the space between two sheets wherein lies the quantity of the said bulk.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter. (In this context, "capit
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of sharp and sour humors in the joints. (This translation suggests that the medieval medical treatise is discussing methods to address conditions believed to be caused by harmful or excess
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the humors are sharp and sour within those veins beneath the head's crown vessels, wherein no external cause can contribute to its healing in medicine, often times the face of illness is covered with sweat as if a bee were walking there—a movement reminiscent of formicates. The humors are so irritated that even their skin dries and flakes like ants' exoskeletons; ancient medical practitioners, or 'physicians', address this condition through the intervention provided here (implying a particular treatment). This healing is solemnly performed with great care.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	When you command the malady wind to blow on the hairs that are in its face, and position yourself three times with your tongue at the forehead according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the fissure length is two fingers: one fissure extends from the jaw to the bridge of the nose at the forehead location, and the second corresponds to a small movement in the eyes' muscles, which are its parts.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Guard your jaw where the lips meet and extend your arm continually between both lower jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If there is an excess of three days' measure in any joint space,
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If there is one of his sweat-dripping garments or drying rags, it will extract the filth from him.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Return the shoulder blade of two sharp limbs, which is this form of his joint:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That is from within the second chamber of dissection.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Expose all of the spine where it between two intersections is located over the skull, and apply what from the joint migrates inside into the second intersection.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return straddles so that they do not enter this space (the spine) and encroach upon each other with another instrument called a catheter which is inserted from one side and does not penetrate on the other side.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	When the pain of gout requires that the affected body part be pressed upon it, and when you press on your chest or head (as previously indicated in pauses), take hold of what is attached to its ribcage; compress this area until reaching the migrating fissure, and remove all vessels descending from the neck.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May continued flow into the opening of the neck and be directed downward along another crack between them;
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Put force through the thigh's amount as needed, and press upon the swolthy knee joint areas with it.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And in the third day apply leather and administer great pouring of water or oil, and take care that it is done with bandage soaked in olive oil (or others) to heal the pus.
Capitol .v.	Capital City (assuming "Capitol" refers metap
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	The provided text appears to be a mix of old Spanish and possibly medical or alchemical terminology, likely relating to some form of therapy involving baths (lavashes) for catharsis purposes using substances derived from the head ("cap"). The phrase suggests an
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When arterial blood flow for catharsis continues and the humors of uplift become exhausted, care must be taken to monitor their condition; when ulcerated eyelids and hair are noticed along with pain in the forehead at this critical point before treatment substances (cataracts) do not come from these symptoms alone but rather originate deep within broken vessel parts derived.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all phlegm or moisture on the lips between the lower teeth of the small mouth opening, and restore what has been removed therein.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return it above the pulp in place and on oil, thus preventing ulceration from occurrthy coming out again.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the poultice has dried and absorbed moisture as it begins to rub off meat, then take two parts of wheaten flour (farina di frumento) and four parts of beeswax (cipolla), mixing them together with your hands. This paste is applied directly on these sores/ulcers involving the native flesh, while you administer it as in taking bread-like medication consisting of two portions wheaten flour and four portions of beeswax.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment for what causes pain in the fingers.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Throughout the cause of pain in the fingers is one of four species; it may be metal or resembling stone, like iron and glass, or fluid-like substances such as water and wine grains, possibly due to some animal'dict:
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when blood comes out of the ear or seems similar to those causes that do not align with it and stops flowing from the ear into some place where oil is violently spilled or syrups are mixed, then one administers its extraction, performs cauterization according to conditions, applies amputation if necessary, bandages wounds after they have healed.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Return the pause in the artery'dictor circuit some wool or linen pads, and extend the artery to the parts above it continuously; this is necessary due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not expelled internally, then administer external removal using the gentle instruments referred to here as such methods.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If there is a blockage (foreclosure), it happens quickly; otherwise, the doctor administerse gentle and repeated drainage using only a few small cups or tools.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	So if there is no exit for the humoral discharge, then place an arsenic tube and insert its extremity into the track of the aureola; seal it at both ends with wax and oiled linseed oil so that only the tube protrudes.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Extract here is from above where we strengthen our stomach breathing with strong attraction of water that have been discussed today.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If there is no exit-piercing in this manner, then take hold of the halter or chain with which they are fastened around their waist and pause it at the extremity of the limb; envelop that part gently wrapped as before.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Return that into the distress of the artery and remove it due to wetness;
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if all the causes we have described come to pass, then you must apply caution or treatment for inflammation and spasm immediately at that place which they appear.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And when such pain is that which you decide upon for the sanction of the malady in the vein of Phlegon, and remove it according to the direction of Vertus' will, taking hold with your hands what lies between them, creating a small fissure on the head of this thread-like part, containing its gray substance within that space at top.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	E when the figure of the moon crack reaches the stone, and once the stone has been struck with your appropriate tool at that moment in time, attend to heal that wound within which it occurs.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is fat in the gallbladder and has swollen, then administer treatment and removal; but if you do not obey my advice, take a gentle sedative as per this method.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer that which was caught in his gouty joint, where it has been found on the knee.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you think that it is already moistened by the breath of gold and rests in heavy movements, pause therein, avoiding putting pressure on its fingers or genitals, for then extrication occurs; this happens when they breatfal from us being with them.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May enter the water into which the swelling of the groin enters due to urination, and fill it with stones from one's own collection; if for some reason this happens (bleeding), then be; otherwise, take pebbles or round-shaped jewels according to its length, place them in your palm near where that water is on the swolthy part of the urethra, and have the patient step onto one such stone from their hand and jump over it therein.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that all the water remains inside where it has been drawn in,
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water rises in the mouthpiece that you hold between your fingers or a goblet, and place one end of it in the bellows and extend the other to ignite the fire within.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if it is necessary the metal instrument and water are brought in so many times that all of the fluid has been drained out as stated from above, then insert the catheter up to where excess fluids come out beyond the enlarged stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When an animal is dragged out of there (likely referring to a confinement or prison), if it'se small size, then pull and simulate its appearance; care for that which has been drawn with gestures and incisions herewith provided as treatment—and this cause will be freed from all other causes present within the cage.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When the extract of worm is born in the artery during healing and you do not comfort your care with attention to where the extraction occurred (artery), then ensure that you watch over the vein at sunrthy, which may refer metaphorically to being mindful or paying close attention.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any cause by worms here, extract that with gentle gestures or slight ones; and if no such cause appears, take a hollow catheter drawn from above and below this as the form of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate part into the artery according to the quantity that suffers from the humidity; and draw out syrup abundantly through it, so as moisture is removed continuously until all worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey the doctor' extramartial care regimen, then you will become ill and confined within the canula of cautery as we have discussed; administer these remedies which are already tried in treating worms, to expel them through their tract.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	When your discharge is what from which you extract the medicines in this vessel, it refers to using that substance as medicine within this container.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E for that one made of silver or lead, struck quickly in it wherein there is a small tool, and placed on the chest.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	So then they are in the position of necessity within the country where this procedure will take place.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the lamp and wrap it gently around their limb, and place oil or honey in the cavity of the chest, or the juice from any herb, or whatever medicine you choose from these remedies through the canula—which is in your finger—and apply that to the area above where the application has occurred so quickly that the oil (or medicinal fluid) is expelled into the cavity of the chest and makes the malady feel sore inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When something has been inserted into the artery is already cut small at its focus point.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And when taking out what causes it in the earlobe, do not be too rough; for those remedies of the auricle will not tolerate such treatment.
Capitol .vii.	Given that "Capitol .vii." appears out of context here
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	From care for bony joints (likely referring to the treatment or concern regarding osteoarthritis, considering the medieval medical
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some young children's navels (likely referring to umbilical cord cravings or obsession) are not pierced during birth and remain connected to the mother’s belly; this is considered present in adult men, seen as an excessive attachment of what remains after childbirth—the placenta remnant. This residue can sometimes form around where the umbilical cord enters (entrace area) or even be found at other body sites far from birth trauma ('partidas defora').
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when you injure in the abdomen of them who does not understand how to wear clothes (meaning they have limited knowledge or ability), it is among the major difficulties for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you pause the tail of the malady on the chest and observe therein,
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So if you see an outward display of force, work under that subtle aspect from which this form arises.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If in the limb where it is petite (small), one part of which is sharp and the other not, and its sinew consists of two leather straps to prevent harm to the heart.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is caused by raw flesh in the thigh or abdomen area, then cut it delicately and make an aggressive incision within which all the meat should be removed completely.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the stone is lodged in the entrance of the artery, then insert it underly with great subtlety and heat that little flame therein; place that within the vessel of the artery.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	So if the patient' extrication pressure is caused by water that their malady takes away from it due to outside interference, then alleviate this oppression of yours and ensure you do not harm the nerves of your hand.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you cool the flow of blood (flux de sanc), immerse sponge or cloth in water and place it over the forehead, using another remedy that restrains the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the text on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The translation of this line is not provided
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	When it comes to the care required for which ends up in our eyelids, here's an interpretation: When addressing or taking care of something that affects or
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When it comes to the eyes' eyelids which are affected by moisture (humits), at times they may become dry periods afterward during a day or "veguada." Here is what this means in clearer, modern English: When discussing eye care for instances where our eyes end up with excessive humidity that affects the eyel
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So cover those areas where you have touched them or felt discomfort before and separate these from their natural positions; place your hand over the affected spots that are out of alignment after shifting around as needed for protection while seeking treatment: This line suggests a methodical approach to treating misalignments in body parts, likely caused by displacement. Here's an English translation with context provided above: So cover those areas where you have touched them or felt discomfort before and separate these from their natural positions; place
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there's a pain caused by the flow of humors within you (blood), then apply those pointed instruments for caution beneath more subtly: This advice seems to come from an era where bloodletting was considered therapeutic, and cauterization with precise tools might be recommended as part of
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best form of cautioning is to apply these instruments and return them when any remaining cause for the issues with your organs occurs afterward (when conditions permit); once they are cauterized on purpose, those problems will not come back: This statement outlines a treatment protocol wherein specific tools or methods used in place therapy need reapplication only if new symptoms emerge following their use. Here's the English translation with context from previous lines: The best form of cautioning is to apply these instruments and return them when any remaining cause for your organ issues occurs afterward; once they are cauterized on
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately recognizable as
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	The provided text appears to be an attempt at translating from what seems like medieval or archaic medical Latin, with influences of other languages such as Italian and Spanish in the vocabul0
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 Movement within the lids of the eyes occasionally causes discomfort that assembles itself in its strength and firmness; for this reason, it is addressed as "grandius" (large or great). Here we see a description aligning with what could be understood today as eyelid spasms possibly due to tiredness or other triggers leading to increased muscle tone. The term 'duricia' suggests hardening which may reflect the tension and effort exert
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 Addition of thickened moisture in both upper and lower lids, possibly indicating excessive tearing or watering eyes which might be related to the discomfort caused by spasms as mentioned earlier. The mention of '
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 So it is considered that the greatness of this condition may stem from water appearing in parts below and above, which affects everything - here referring possibly to watery discharge accompanying eye spasms or irritation where 'lu' (water) seems to be an indicator for tearing. The underlying cause being light-sensitive ('leugiera'). This line suggests that the physician thinks about whether poor tolerance to brightness is causing increased water production in eyes, which often accompanies eye strain and spasms related with photophobia
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Therefore over that crack in the seam (possibly referring to an opening or tear), and remove what is there throughout - essentially whatever fluid has formed within it so you can escape from; also suspend what comes occasionally, separating outwardly those elements which cause discomfort. Here 'fen' might denote a treatment method where intervention occurs over the described area (a fissure or tear in eye tissue), aiming at clearance of accumulated fluids and addressing issues that egress sporadically, possibly referring to
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not dressed with the entrance of it if and only if (only when) you do not push through your eyelid even slightly at an extremely small opening, then there is nothing to note for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; take care that it heals properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If there is little (paucity), you will not come ill from that much blood left in him (the patient). The remaining blood restores health and rejuvenates the body.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the greatness is declining at the parts divided by the eyelid skin, then immediately lift up and suspend it for an instant, as you determine; take hold of that portion which has come down completely, if there's none through insufficiency due to a lack. If the eyelid itself becomes elongated because of inadeción (lack), this will not be noticed by any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And place it at the beginning (inception), wash with salted water; and care for the location where the essence resides inside to heal.
Capitol .x.	Capital Degree (assuming "Capitol" refers
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The provided text appears to be in a mix of modern English with some archaic or pseudo-Latin elements, making it challenging to directly translate without further context. However
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	From the grays that are created in the undersurface of the lid, primarily affecting children and worsening their illnesses; they cannot bear to look at sunlight as a result—those who lie there ensnared by light: Here is where we discuss ocular afflictions caused specifically under these conditions.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Through these actions you repeatedly touch their cheeks all the time and while they sleep on them; over their moistly-covered brows (their forehead), which already show signs of swelling, when you sense that location becomes sore spots/itchiness. Whenever those painful points are felt under your fingers herein, tenfold acknowledgments or itching sensations enter within these areas.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May happen within the belly where you cut open the vertebra until it reaches the ribs; there in those days, joint processes go through a crack according to the form of whiteness seizure.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So, extract those clothes which you have wrapped around the limbs at various parts of their bodies and turn them between the right and left side inside where they can be spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you ensure it does not extend through the crack, thus preventing the spine and vertebrae from protruding into that area, pay attention to this detail.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May you not see your arteries in the fissure during examination, may you adjust a small lancet within that which allows the arteries to process; and remove it at this point where we have discussed them before. Place their wound dressings under these wet cloths into water with wine or spirits, pause over the location of the wound, and renew those bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	So that, when salt and pause are introduced into the cavity of the crack to such a degree that what remains is merely moisture from that excessive fluid.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that which needs healing within it back into its cavity, and place your hand over it so that the intestine does not
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Return to its cavity what needs healing within the affected area's ulcerated place; as that which is placed therein yields or relents into treatment inside it gets cured. (This translation attempts to convey a medieval medical concept where returning an organ, in this case possibly referring metaphorically to applying pressure on or near an ulcer
Capitol .xi.	In the context of capitulum "Capitol IX," it
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	From touching with mercury (tactile or physical contact). This line likely refers to an ancient medical practice involving direct
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the palpebral regions of humans, hairs are adjusted away naturally and anciently using touching (possibly with instruments or hands), whereby we ourselves come into contact with the body and thereby undergo methods of illnesses akin to continuous tears and softening/lubrication within which is the cause for damage when touched upon purposefully, healing can occur in four manners:
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And when you pause the head of the malady in its thigh; take your left hand and put it over that portion, if converted (accepted), then say "be"; but if not accepted, insert a needle into the part where their casting pin was placed just below the eyelid. Make the needle penetrate through this beneath-the-eyelid location—because here are the hairs; and of these, because they belong to parts (body regions), pull back what is drawn from those body areas with your hand on the eyelid. Convert that into a ray (treat it).
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Even though it may be that the figure according to the quantity of elevation in the eyelids, already among men this is diversified; these are those moisture droplets inscribed within the eye with such a large amount for which the eyelids become softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Return the tongue to the space above and below the lines that you have drawn, starting from the greater tear duct down to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair split is as large as the king'thy body size,
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return (or fix) the stitches in the fields within three to four days, and take care of it properly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, stitch up the wound now, and care for that which cleanses and tightens, as soon as you remove its lids—the coverings of the patient'thy; moreover, suturing might be better So thus attend to these ancient practices.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	May they exert pressure on the thighs, and it is good work without fear in there.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another symptom in the head is redness of the eye with an onion-like tear (presumably made from crushed or grated garlic, which was known for its supposed medicinal properties), and lift up the eyelid using three prongs arranged as follows:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to insert the needle, then use an awl with which you have previously drawn blood and place that in the figure's heat source; also position another needle above the major tear duct, another over the minor tearduct, adjusting them so their tips are at equal height, elevating your hand to raise both eye lids as well as lift the entire jaw where we have been advised.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Once adjusted the lips of flesh with stitches, and take care for that which is healed inside.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May you also cauterize the ulcer or crack with sulfur and make it appear as if by likeness to life; apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And sometimes even with the eye lids of their hair, as a result for which you use in that about ignorance we have discussed today, so may there be an opportunity for stitching here; perhaps it is not out of place.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Atony of muscles is thus prescribed according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And then, by skillful handwork, apply lengthy cannulas or fine needles under which their placement corresponds to the length of the eyelid and its relative position from the scapula's latitude.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the limbs of several parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Whenever excess fluid accumulthy under the eye's lid and constrict your fingers to several divided parts of rigidity, apply it for a few days; then the waistband will die from stricture and if denied/refused, return into itself when you insert yourself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then strike with force on the thighs, and take care that the child inside be healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when secured (or fastened), the eyelid is raised and the hair does not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you perform this operation with these instruments:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e has the quantity of length neither more nor less than that measured by means or men.
Capitol .xii.	In order to render this translation coherent with no specific context provided for 
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the sharp hair in the belly hurts, it protrudes when the fur is hardened.  
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When hairs are not natural and hard and sharp, the operation in you involves taking up an acute hook gently and pausing at that delicate spot below subtly as a lion would do so softly; furthermore, adjust your limbs' extremities wherever necessary with careful motions.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When the length of the fields (likely referring to body measurements or perhaps a specific area) is as much as the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Return your tool gently under them briefly, and hold their limbs if you wish so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And place the patient'se head on their chest so that your work may be declared complete; it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Return the pelt inside and insert that into it, letting only two or three be in there at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And draw your hand over there, which has come out from the eye due to excessive alcohol in the eyelid (the natural state of it).
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is necessary to attract the essence and ensure that it does not leave through the parts where you have placed your faith in this matter, then pull back (or return) those things into their cavity while they are still within sight of you.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Evening comes and you witness the patient's woe, whereupon you touch their abdomen lightly with your hands, causing them to groan or clutch therein, easing discomfort for two to three days until the pain adheres to its place and arises from this good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the wound is short and natural hairs are present, adjust one of its own length, and lift it upwards to allow for proper healing in that space; then raise it as directed by law.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (The text does not provide enough context or
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When translating from a medieval medical treatise, especially when dealing with languages that have evolved over time and incorporated elements of various linguistic traditions like Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French, it
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye is opened and pressure on either of its sides occurs during contraction (either due to injury or anesthesia), it can cause harmful consolidation within the globe or part(s) divided, whether by surgical intervention for excising a piece ("cautery") – these situations are termed "raccoon eyes," which may result naturally from such events (congenital factors like craniosynostosis where suture lines fuse prematurely leading to asymmetric skull and eye development) or by mimicry of their appearance.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the reason for performing an operation on him be that you cut through that solidification and separate his lips apart while stopping in water between those pieces where a cloth is laid out, binding them together once they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use that which softens the flesh with fenugreek, and bind it in the water where their swolthy thighs and belly are located or linseed oil used for anointing, dissolved at the hands of those who handle them, then immerse all this into the bathhouse, to cure whatsoever is therein.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your care is that you pierce at the joint where it does not solidify according to how much food one eats during meals.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not any correction of humoral imbalance that does not restore the shape of the place as affected by fever.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The reference number "Capitol .x
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the treatment of this eye condition affecting the outer edge of the eyelid:  
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This discoloration in the eye lid which is named vitriolicly and of its own nature (either inherent or incidental); there is no external cause for it within itself.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May it be due to vermin or a crack or from cautery or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The way of the operation is that you take a needle in which make it double-threaded and keep this thread on the body'dict, making the thread pass from the left tear gland into the right tear gland until it reaches the extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Expose the flesh on the parts below the waist and above it, where that is connected to the thighs, trace along with blood in abundance within the spine.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if it returns the shape of the eyelid as desired; but if not, take a stick and pause there at the divided part, then turn that into the eye lid, and open those cracks in the eyelid's flesh immediately afterward.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Here come the extremities of the joints form two angles at the inscizie (joint), where they enter and gather together, forming their figure there as well.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is written in Greek letters: this refers to 'landa' (land). In English line by line translation would be: "This shape is
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then restore the meat to its proper quantity as dictated by how much of it you have eaten quickly, which is determined by touching your lips (the palpation). Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Adjust those separated parts and secure them with wool, taking care of what we have mentioned about softening agents and poultices within which they should heal.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If a crack or incision is made through it (possibly referring to flesh), then you must make the cut straight across on the eyelid skin, as that was beforehand.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	When separated by lips according to what has been said before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum total of the conversation regarding gout treatment when it is removed or diluted in operation, as prepared according to its form (likely referring to a medicinal preparation for treating gout), then that which has been prepared takes on various shapes/forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	Here comes the sentence to translate: The skilled craftsman prepares in any manner possible for him inside that he can return his figure back to its natural form, or even more so than required by the operation and instruments used in major configurations.
Capitol .xv.	The given text appears to be describing some traditional medical practices from medieval times or perhaps
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	It seems the provided fragment of a medieval Latin-influenced treatise touches upon topics related to eye anatomy and conditions, possibly pertaining to blepharitis (involving the ey
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	Translation: When this consolidation is done for men over fifty who suffer from drooping lower eyelids and restriction of natural movement, it's necessary to tighten the excess skin below the cheekbone socket (or orbit), lifting or extending that layer above. Thus ensuring no additional protrusion interferes with sight by limiting normal eye motility.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And place your incision below the subtle spot on the bone, which is not sharp like incisions, so that gout does not disturb you during the operation and remove the spike that might irritate its sensitivity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your finger may scrape away that attachment for the purpose of returning the eyelid back to its natural shape, and heal the entire attachment.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Here, you put your tool into salted water where it is washed, or draw from the spring of juniper that has been dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (This line seems like an annotation or reference
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	From the sloughing off of scales and the prominence of flesh within the lacrimal sacs.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that sweat is second in line after urine or nervous fluid; it resembles thin congealed moisture under the skin when touched with a finger and quickly dries up within an hour, disappearing from thereafter.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter but from the greater tear within, gradually covering the sight and preventing light and motion of breath.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the madness of action in his eyes be that the humidity holds his head down at the chest, and directs their fluids upwards with your hand over it; take hold of one drop from two pinches (roughly equivalent to a few drops) using only the thumb nail.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	When you seek that piece within her thighs for the back of it (implying a specific area inside or on top), approach from behind her,
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Some of the bones are extended or firm like the lion' extruding its spine – as you have said.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	E ensure you do not touch the transparent skin and that there is an opening for air in it, so that the pupil may be pierced through.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the blood is not moving and you cannot insert the needle or leave it there for a spoonful of time, continue rubbing this specific type of unguent with medicine until healed, as long as you keep applying treatment in that division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that one, then work with the thigh of the patient and place a soft pillow undernemediate (under their legs), following this form.
am subtilitat.	am delicacy or subtlety (This line indicates that there
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And when it is rare and confused, and ventures into that reason, take the hour of your day to consult with clear head thinking or resting by nightfall'dictate; then pour out what remains in another pot within today until tomorrow comes again. (This line suggests taking a specific time during one’s day for thoughtful consideration or rest as guided by lunar phases, and if necessary, proceed thereafter into action with whatever is left of the matter.)
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on that which is within until it becomes healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The seminal fluid of the tear gland, if it enters through a large wound and causes great harm, should be stopped for one time; and inspect that portion wherein you have examined her/him, to ensure no further flow of humors occurs thereafter.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Return the liquid in the teary eye and apply medicine within so that it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	The text you've provided appears to be written in Old Occitan or Provençal, which was used during the medieval period and is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French due to its geographical location where these languages are spoken (like parts of France) and historical interactions. This
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	The provided Old Occitan text describes the traditional birth practice in which, sometimes during childbirth (in "les huels" - implying labor or birthing room), there was an occurrence where meat would be cooked excessively until it darkened ("rogada"), and then a pinpoint of heat is applied either under the eyelids ("entro que cobre la pupilla")—this suggests that some form of direct warmth might have been used to alleviate labor pains, possibly in an outdated or folk medicine context. It also mentions pulling back the lashes and assembling them near a balustrade (which could be interpreted as using elements from furniture for support during childbirth), although this sentence is somewhat unclear:
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in him is that his belly stops at the waist; and with the humors of that person you collect all the cut flesh conveniently for it, using one forceps or a pair thereof; and bind the meat together until everything has been sewn by hand needle.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And it is your touch that enters there where we have recommended those things inside the joint of the toe, or small pincers for collecting scabs as they come forth according to when you arrive here.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your understanding is complete and the body'thy flesh has been cleansed in its entirety, then spread salt on it to dry out or extract medicine drops from herbs into powder form for use with corrosive medicines within an album bound by wax where you securely hold them aseptically.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of foreign bodies and they are severely inflamed, apply caution to treat them before the infection worsens; continue treatment until that which caused it gives way under appropriate intervention, and afterward heal this area with restoration whereby flesh returns within the space affected by these specific causes.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even though you remove the entire cure for hernia through natural means or accidentally using a sword (fer), do not insert your hand into any of these operations while observing that this body part is suffering from it.
Capitol .xviii.	The given medieval medical text appears written in an archaic form of Romance languages influenced
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Translation from the Latin-influenced phrase into English, line by line:
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	When arteries are hard over the groin and prevented from entering undernethyel area, their operation is performed above it for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary for the examination that you consider whether he/she has strength in him and not any other illness besides gout; then collect that essence (of his body).
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	You command the humors to cease flow in the belly and place them above that portion, according to your wisdom. And if it is one of those veins being referred to, make sure its diameter doubles as per this methodology.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	o such that in this manner they cut into one part of the body:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Here's the translation of each line:
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed the process, then heat it up in the cauldron or boil over to make sure that any remaining poison extracted from bile is neutralized.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of that at once, and if you must apply the fluid that exudes from it, do so gently and leave it on for days until the pain subsides and there's certainty regarding its healing by means of cautery.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Once more over him once healed that his mistress has entered into recovery,
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how the forceps are used:
Capitol .xix.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise using
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	In translating this Latin-influenced line related to the topic of rhinotomy (surgical removal
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you care for arising pains with cautery or acute medicine after the storytelling of such and not healed, they are not in their natural state but have become apoplectic; therefore, remove entirely all moisture that is present therein and within which bone fragments lie.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover bone in decay or rot within it, then this is the form of which that has been found.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is made of sharp iron, and its point is fine steel or stylus for delicate points by thinly slicing with a knife.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place your hand gently over the damaged area of the bone, and turn it slowly between the thighs, pressing little by little until you know that the damage has been smoothed out.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When there are some withdrawals or loss of humors, restore the place where these causes originate from.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the location is consolidated and good flesh has descended there from illness and disease for forty days, without renewal or puncturing and without any accidents occurring in it, you know that healing has taken place.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not in the body where to operate but rather reduce the crack to its shape of a nose and according to this method: then when you discover two kinds of iron or quick medicine acute, take them as they are; after discovery of these items for your operation, adopt their form accordingly.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Its metal plate is triangular and its handle is worn out inside the extreme part like this many times over.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the location with stociptical drying remedies, as you will use them to apply and extract medicine.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and place are sore, then return what was overflowing to the thighs; hence I placed pressure on the area of soreness.
Capitol .xx.	In this translation attempt from an archaic medical treatise with influ
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	The provided text appears fragmentary and seems like it is in a mix of old Spanish or Latin, possibly related to medieval medicine where terminology
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	Translation into English: When the hump does not weaken in clothing nor shrink and when loose phlegm comes out of it; then apply warmth to follow, with good expectoration for cure—apply a pause over where heat is applied on its scars after cutting, and sooth anointing salve that's made from acacia gum and aloe vera extract together with essences or sarcocolla (an ancient resinous mixture). Also apply strength by dressings to the hump at motion when it comes up in puppies.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The translation of the source sentence is as follows: "And it's said that fever takes linens soaked in lion moss and duplicates each on four parts, from these.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Return your hand as needed over them according to the quantity of what is required for their relief.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If while in ligature it softens, then that which is strangled may ease.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Return or fix the ligament as needed today and yesterday when we have discussed this matter together.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; otherwise, repeat the plaster on the joints and tendons inside where they enter, using bandages and poultices until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise using
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Based on the fragments of words and context given, it appears that we are dealing with some Latin phrases possibly related to medicine or anatomy from a medieval text. Here is my best attempt
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvea (the vascsular layer of a structure such as an eye), and you raise it up above its usual position like raising your finger with one hand, allowing air to enter into that space—this action involves two instruments: placing one instrument underneath where part has been removed ("in the portion below"), securing another similar tool in place (possibly a doubled needle related to tear fluid), and then inserting it following its initial arrangement; simultaneously hold up this second tool at which point some section of the uvea shifts into motion within that instrument's circuit.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	When you extract and place pressure on the clot above, immersed in wine alcohol and egg yolk, allowing it to flow inside where there is blood (possibly referring to a poultice or treatment involving these substances).
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return care for the humors that comfort the patient inside wherein they are healed by dirt or clay, used as medication in medieval times to draw out excessive fluids and promote health through balancing body' extrinsic elements known then as 'hum
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some guidelines assemble all parts around the circle of cloth within which they adjust their position on a subtle spine underneath that draws out impure fluids and promotes health by balancing body' exterior elements known then as 'humors'. They also ensure moisture flows into albuginea (a layer beneath skin) while descending the limb, returning it to its normal state.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	When strength is restored that it becomes healthy again.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii. (The label "Capitol" followed
De curacio de alconati.	It appears that you've provided a phrase in Latin or a related Romance language,
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	Translation: This illness that is called "gout" (which translates to "alconati") is not the one resembling water's escape from joints, it’s something else entirely.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	May the reason for your action be to spread the wound over the board and dress it with cloth from both of your arms' lower parts, placing them where you see disease entering at intervals after birth, securing dryness without letting moisture descend further or being wet by blood; thus causing venesection (bloodletting) in accordance to old practice.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not come down into urine, understand that there is water inside.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent to health has not been prepared as we have discussed, then gout will seep between your thighs and press down delicately with a soft sponge undernethy chest where cornea (outer layer of eye) is present in the crown portion (head/forehead area), until the sickness comes out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when extracted (presumably of the gallbladder), it flows into the tail-like part where you have mixed honey and water, or into that same place where you already brewed fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return its care for other causes within which it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii. (The text provided does not contain enough context
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	This line appears to be in a language that may have roots or similarities with Latin, Italian, and possibly other Romance languages. The sentence translates into
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	This translation attempts to convey the essence of the original line while considering linguistic structures that could exist in languages with Latin influence:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now that you have opened your thighs over a mat and placed your hand under them (or yourself), thus tightening the area, it becomes effective or useful according to their needs.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply pressure on the left side of your patient'thy eye lid if it is their right water (eye), or apply pressure on their right arm if it is their left hand; otherwise, do so with the palm of both hands.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take your right hand (or left if the patient has it on their right side), or vice versa (take your left hand if the patient holds onto their left).
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Return the limb' extrémity as close to the crown as possible from where the heavy beam in its book of parts is held by teardrop lake (lacrimal), and position your hand above it with moisture and turn around your arm towards that place.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And insert into the abdomen's book, and you feel that all at once it has already been reached due to heat.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "When it is the size of a pea from within its eye (the head) down to where darkness falls, this space is measured by that pupil; and when you see that same pupil in the vision of the hernia through the transparency of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Return rest if possible; therefore, when water descends, delay that other period before it becomes wet again.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is secured and does not descend, then take out the wax easily with ease of use, and apply that on your hand quickly over small clear crystal salt dissolved in water; and place outside the hare's entrails a sponge soaked in rosemary oil and egg white albumen (albumin), holding it underwater.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May those of our time rest upon that which has been consumed on this book'supine (lying down).
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your doctor in the treatment of their condition—for these are hard bellies among men who suffer from it—then hold on to his hand which is called the 'heel bone' (the form), as this indicates those suffering.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	So he pierces that part of the joint, and does not end there in the throat but continues directly to its subtlest place below.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And return (the intestine/hernia) into its cavity, place your hand over it so that the intestine does not protrude out
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And praise your work for the bed made from materials that can withstand moisture and provide rest on top of their two bodies in a dark room without allowing any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	In nature of him there is pause for his humoral balance to be restored and not let the head move towards the fourth or left side in total.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Whenever its thread follows its disposition into the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which is detached in that dark and gloomy darkness into the place from where it came out; look for some causes of this happening and return the ligament back to its seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Whenever you make wine during the healing process or so shortly after, then take it internally with an infusion (or drink).
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	When you remove water for it by a lot of and strong looking,
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you apply cauterization for an ulcer, do so when the humidity is low in the morning, and correct that which yields to cauterization then.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you clear the patient'thy sight and place your hand over their face for several days to come, they will be present in this darkened time of existence.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	When its gait is from that fluid greatly and discusses in these causes,
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Be aware that it is not permitted for the student of vision to have any delays during the operation, and if you are wise regarding this matter, ensure attention in carrying out the procedure.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from those among them who are skilled in art, and they say that there is a focus (or healing point) under the breastbone where water flows through, which when reached results in drinking.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Mayhaps we have not seen this water in our land which has purified it before, nor drank any of its waters among the free men of ancient times; and perhaps such water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of medicinal herbs for which it is placed upon those, whom ignorant they do not understand.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These pains are of earth or iron by nature, and these protrusions lie beyond their subtlety shaped triangle, just as the sharp end is with that form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv. (Note: "Capitol" does
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	The phrase "Curacio de carn nada en le nas." in English translates to, somewhat literally, as "Me
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	The given Latin-like sentence discusses the presence of different kinds of nasal carnations (presumably referring to polyps) without any apparent external cause, likened metaphorically or symbolically with scorpions and spiders from motz ("mass") pressure. It is referred to as "polypus" when it comes to its semblance to a type of pea mentioned previously (possibly referring to nasopharyngeal polyps). Here's the translation into English:
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	From him it is red and brown flesh, and from this he has yellowish-brown skin that isn'thy of a sickly hue.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So in these bodies where there is no deceit nor cancer, cover your patient with a blanket and warm their armpits, placing pillows inside those body cavities.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Extract that from the main parts, and insert what you have understood of those humors under which you know all flesh is held; if a cause for abcession in any part arises due to these humors within your reach with delicate instruments at hand, then extract it there.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the situation allows for an incision with a sanctioned cutting tool or when accidents occur and you need to stop bleeding, then do so immediately; in case of malignant ulcers, cut out what has detached from its seat (the sore) and seal all cavities within.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	When it is necessary for his breathing or of spirit and water in him to be reduced, return them into his nose with their proper place being there where air enters the body.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May if your nose is opened and moisture proceeds into the mouth, then you know that it has already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May if the moisture does not penetrate secondarily after covering, then you will understand that there is no flesh in the feet where bones have come without wax obstruction.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Thus when you encounter an obstruction loyal to them where any thickness resides and their navel moves, count the quantity of each part as it is in this body or over these causes for which they are susceptible, introduce evil winds into that area with a tool.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	When the smell comes forth and enters through their nasal passages into their gouty joints, causing children at school to run away from it, which is why they want to do this (presumably referring back to a previous action or treatment).
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	In the day of its cause, pause in the nose with a bronze tube for as many days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be for healing that extracts are used from this (referring to a remedy or treatment mentioned previously in context).
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the tool used for bloodletting, in which various potions and medicines are prepared.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which is like a small torchbearer), and with such appearance as a tiny candle holder when carried, it seems to be the flesh itself.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, use a closed canula inserted with honey and its flat surface uncovered; hold it in the area behind them at which their fingers will touch when exhaling or receiving fluid from sources that you desire to draw out (sweat and other bodily fluids).
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here's the line-by-line translation of this medieval medical treatise:
Capitol .xxv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical document written in Middle Latin or
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	It seems like you have attempted a translation, but the sentence is not clear and may contain errors due to transliteration issues between languages that use different
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Based on the provided text and assuming it's in an archaic or regional variety of a Romance language such as medieval Spanish, Italian, Latin-influenced vernac0:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which channel you have introduced that into his digestive process at the appearance of him/her, and from there onward distribute everything they contain.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand (or caustic/medicine) over the location or tool, which is currently in place there.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If it is late for your observation, consider whether the patient has lapsed (lapsed into a worse state), hardened with dark color and little feeling; do not touch that iron which bites his skull nowad each day bears witness to someone who repeatedly attacks him even when you try.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is of yellow discharge and not of cold color, then when infection can enter anywhere within that, expel pus from it and incise with caution due to fear for everything inside therein, heal what has been excised using this fluid and tighten whatever remains so that it may be cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text seems to be an attempt at translating principles from medieval medical practices
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	When the continuity of the nose, lips, and ears is disrupted by worms or figments (which may be interpreted as parasites causing damage through infestation).  
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You understand that when you break continuity in one of these joints, little to no discussion is had during that operation unless with learned men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So then, when you encounter any cause of those mentioned above (which consider themselves if they are freshly fled), and adjust the lips of that creature with stitches where necessary, take care to ensure what is inside becomes healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of continuity (i.soft palate) are already separated and any pain is healthy, then you must gently scrape some division within its visible portion until it heals securely.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the reason for stitching be that you add the thread of continuity or needlework as recommended in sewing together the belly, or perhaps attach it with your own fingers and know how.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (The provided text does not contain enough context for
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From the extraction of those causes that come into our mouths during fights or conflicts:  
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Movements frequently towards the mouthparts of their lips hardened by errors (impurities), and some even become smaller while others grow larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So that you convert the lips and fendas of each of those hardened parts throughout the body, inflate your abscess with air or water where it is contained within its cavity, and cleanse and heal this area as quickly as possible while maintaining pressure until recovery.
Capitol .xxviii.	Given that this text is from an old medical manuscript or treatise with a mix of
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Translating the phrase "de inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas" into English, considering it appears to be Medieval Latin with some lingu
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	The phrase "Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus" can be interpreted as discussing the grievances or complaints regarding an adjusted piece of meat (carnea) that has been referenced by ancients, and what must now be done to address these issues. Here's how you might translate it line-by-line into English:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return your hand position over the area affected by grinding stones or other dry and abrasive materials, as such objects may aggrathy (cause discomfort).
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, you must incis it immediately and cauterize it; thereafter the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (Note: "Capitol" here
De razo de dentz am ferr.	From reason of teeth, it means that there is a medical concern or symptom related to the condition of one
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in both parts and at the forums (which might refer to specific areas or structures) points are made red, bleeding edges, and some measures taken involve black vinegar or lemon juice inside where gum decay occurs through this flow. Here's a possible English translation:
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So that you separate the belly between your thighs and pause at the top of it on their chest, stretching out those teeth in which these sharp extensions appear as if sand inside them where no cause can penetrate due to blackness (negrotum) and citrinitatem (citric acidity), and that is caused by other moistened things within them already prepared.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if you have not resolved the issue in that part of reason, do so again on those parts today and tomorrow until it clears up by itself when you decide to leave or return home later tonight.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You understand that teeth require different types of restorative materials and forms according to the work prepared for your operation (treatment).
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And when the time comes for which these cuts are needed—the ones on top of those already made between the teeth (referring to surgical incisions), and other forms, they must be prepared by you as soon as possible.
Capitol .xxx.	The provided text appears incomplete or possibly corrupted (indicated by
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Given that "d'eradicacio di denti" translates to the eradication of
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you cure the toothache of his suffering completely at any time during the day or night throughout complete dental treatment, there is no cause for him not to continue with care after it has been treated; because within that substance lies a purifying element essential in treating the condition.  
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the thigh is forcibthy torn away to eliminate that you must certify which one of them is painful as it continues throbbing in the sore and diseased thigh, until its removal; then we have witnessed what was done by barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So when you need to confirm which is the painful tooth and understand its nature, then enter where it has any movement in the space between the spine and jaw (where there may be some motion), dissolve completely from the gums of all parts involved, and apply that substance or fine forceps gradually within as long as this occurs.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if there is no exit-hole (foramen), then take one of those instruments and insert it immediately, making the entire body easier for removal so that surgery can be done at once.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be if the tooth is dislocated or damaged, then when you dress that injury with cloth and compress that area of subtle movement below so that it does not twitch during your tightening on that limb.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Return its cleansing with mouthwash or water washed in it, as you cleanse them internally and externally.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a flow of pus at once, attend to it regularly; otherwise, allow some quantity of dirt and spit over the swab, and if you do not cleanse that filth away, then burn with cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers are those by which your mouth will be kept straight when removing teeth both outwards from extraction beyond their natural position, short movements with a small hand instrument and large ones using bigger instruments to prevent them from bending when performing these tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When they are as times of thick movements inside that when you begin them, they should not be doubled or extended beyond their limits, respectively.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVII. (Note that "XXVII" is
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The removal of teeth and bone fragments from fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the extraction of which tooth is being sought due to any cause, you must pause over its location at the border for a day or two until the area becomes softened; and apply an analgesic or compress made from materials that are assembled on the beak of a crow or swan, using forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extras outside of them are also pains made with a reed or leather.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my instruction with these forceps or tenacities, then bend over the razor and remove all flesh from the tool I hold in its small grip; this is the shape of that instrument.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Even if it is a short and heavy limb extension that does not threaten rupture or fracture.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the razor is out of its socket (referring to a surgical tool like a scalpel), then it serves; otherwise, help you with these other instruments whose forms include at least one large component as in the shape of this first instrument which has three sides cut outside.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it'dictorial and has subtle extensions.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will help with this tool that has two rims like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments that we prepared by sawing the teeth; it is well-made from this material into which they were assembled last year, and this is its form.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the twisted or shortened limb's extension, which is any bulkiness and not due to it being tightly bound that prevents bending.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you know that the tools of teeth grinding are similar in appearance to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle craftsmen of art understand by what means comes into their hands the operation and various illnesses; these are diseases for which ancient physicians did not provide instruments nor pause to address them due to different forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth break, or if you press them, take care of that part where it is convenient for us to use our instruments and forceps which we have mentioned earlier in removing teeth, this is how we shall act with regard to it:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And whether there is any swelling gradually, or if it'sealed by tightness in the mouth so that no escape occurs within where all bones are formed; and restore its place with suitable medicine for this matter.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small fracture in the bone, take care of that part from which it occurred and its darkness (implied to be associated with injury or bleeding), and heal what was injured within.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii. (The text provided does not contain enough context
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	In matters of teeth care, professionals take precedence over others. This sentence suggests that when it comes to oral hygiene and the maintenance of one
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent in their natural positions and mostly occur in women's breasts (which implies that they may be related to breastfeeding mothers), it is clear that one must consider: if a dental problem exists, then the treatment with its tools; moreover, this resembles purgation as done by hog slaughter, using Indian steel from outside cut precisely like sharp iron.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your intestine is where you insert it for the duration of several days to alleviate toothache pain and that it should not be applied elsewhere in the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an emergence of pus from the splinter, then grind that same iron piece used for this (which) herein lies.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: All of it from iron and steel is taken out; they take pointed instruments made of these materials which are used for cutting teeth quickly in a few days with ease, so that there isn't any other dent or abscess left behind.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines in the flesh back into place, and rub them with fresh linseed oil.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is pain from where part of the body has been broken and touched the tongue, then you must quickly remove that which caused the sharpness in that fragmentation, ensuring it's empty so that the tongue does not taste it nor will words be distorted by its presence.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide contextual text similar to
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	When translating from a language with medieval influences, such as the one provided which seems to blend elements of Romance languages like Italian or Spanish (given their shared Latin roots) and Old
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you have cracked the teeth before concussion and repositioning (percussio or cassation), and they cannot be anchored to that which holds them firmly in place like gold fillings but rather as silver, for it is movable – perhaps because of its softness. If your treatment has not been properly executed then you will find yourself suffering from these mobile ones at any time; however, with silver (silver amalgams), they may be adjusted and readjusted according to the days required during dental visits for proper alignment or occlusion correction in those teeth that are firmly anchored as gold.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when such subtlety and finesse occur as they can enter between teeth; how the form of treatment is grasping the tooth and drawing it double into both healthy gums, and increasing in shape if there are twists or protrusions in the space among decayed gums—this ensures that flesh reaches from one part'thy gap.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Return that thread within the portion where you begin, and tightly press your hand to make sure it is not sluggish.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your cord is where you must firmly hold his teeth that do not escape from it.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Return that liquid as it flows with Roman style.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loosened or torn apart, hold that one or those firmly throughout the entire time of treatment.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and straightness of healthy as well as diseased teeth are when bound together like this sometimes:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When you return a tooth or push it back into any of the available locations in real time and make sure that they grow again as we have advised:
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Not unless there is an expert craftsperson and wise person here.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxxiv.	The provided text appears to be from an ancient medical context discussing treatments for
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	When the tongue is affected by a condition caused by excessive lubrication, it prevents speech. (This translation assumes that "inscizio" refers to some kind of over-lubricating or swelling in the tongue'
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that affects the tongue occasionally or is by nature where one's body naturally stops (or limits), which can be worsened if there are parasites already present and established in it. Here, "dejos" suggests a limitation placed on movement ("le qual hom nays"), while possible interference with speech due to this condition points towards some form of obstruction or restriction caused by the ligament's effect ("prohibeys loqu
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	In this operation (treatment), you bite down on the worm's mouth located in your throat, and elevate your tongue to incise that ligamentous nerve within which it is supposedly restrained by its own movement limitation ("la sua recencio"). This suggests an ancient method where biting forcefully (likely with fingers or possibly a tool) on the parasitic worm's opening in order to dislodge and remove it, coupled with manipulation of one’thy tongue movements—potentially aimed at breaking through restrictive ligaments that are limiting natural speech.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if there is any dirtiness or obstinate growth (possibly referring to residual parasites, fecal impaction), and it's due for consolidation of the worm presence within you ("lahoras tu gieta unci"), then break that ligament apart along with dissolving its bondage. This implies a therapeutic intervention where cleaning (possibly using enemas, as suggested by "gieta") and physical division or separation are employed to disrupt the obstinate growth's structure ("consolidacio de plagua"), which likely refers to breaking up parasitic worm blocks. The mention of dissol
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	When you ensure that there is not a crack in the skin of the body and divide ashes and water flows from sancus,
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May if you drain the flux of blood, place it above the vinegar-tainted location; may if the blood flows out, then use a caustic to cauterize the area where this flow enters into (the vat), which will stop its movement.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that healer for other causes within which it is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol .xxxv. (Note: The original text does not provide
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The phrase "de extractione de rana vulgaris post lingue" is Latin, and it translates to English as follows
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes acidities arise on the tongue afflicted by small foreign objects, and thus they are forbidden because this amplifies within what is already present in one's mouth."  
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in him is that he breaks open the mouth of the malady before sunrise and considers the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see it as black or dark-colored and hardened flesh, do not attempt to touch that which is encased like a skull; for the humors have taken away its feeling there.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it declines to whiteness, where the moisture is located therein, then insert your hook into that thin veil; and pierce through all of its parts—if wind enters during your operation, pause for three strikes, so shall be vinegar (i.dict: introduce a cauterizing sponge to staunch bleeding).
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have treated him until he is washed and clean (and his other injuries are attended), taking care that what has been cured enters into the body again for further treatment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The provided medieval medical text is not directly translatable into modern English without some
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the extracted corrupted and archaic Latin text, it seems to refer to extracting gooseflesh (which could be interpreted as calluses or hardened skin) from fingers and thumbs ("doas aurelhas"), those that are nothing in the palm ("en le golayro" where "golayro
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gooseflesh appears in the palm of your hand (which are referred to as "glandulas"), they have been assembled by cold ("algodat" likely means 'coldly'), and these become hardened skin ('doas aurelhas'). When you treat them, consider that if this gooseflesh is black in color, has little feeling, it should not be touched with iron (metaphorically suggesting against using heavy-handed treatment).
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is desired for the color and complexion to become thick (indicating a change in physical state or condition), do not touch that with iron (avoiding certain treatments due to potential harm). Allow that thing within itself to mature, and if you must move it, then crush it under your foot.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or bluish hue and subtle in nature, then that must be inscribed within itself.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	Considering the operation on him is to decide whether the cautery applied has completely healed or if there'dicts any remaining, and at that time you lift his leg upward (to elevate it), head resting on the thigh, mouth closed tightly by a servant who takes hold of their hands.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is either silver or arsenic (the cautery), and subtle with a handle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you realize that it'dict the tongue and show them their lesion, placing your hand over there for an instant or more keeps it in place until you can pull it out as far as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Other liquids that you extract from the tunics (fabric covering), and apply this on the tool by which it is formed.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and they are gathered with forceps, but the outside edges of them become sharp, which is made of iron and begins at one of those places, painfully acute.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	Might you not have this tool with you? Then incise the bone from which it originates; whether it is cut from one side or another does not matter.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that the flow of phlegm accumulatively thickened by cold water drawn from wells or grains and fruits concocted therein contributes to this effluent blockage within which the movement of phlegm is restricted, thus necessitating proper care for its healing.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here come some further measures for the eye or other abscesses elsewhere in the body, and insert those there according to where they appear on the surface of the gums.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the ulcer had been so large that there were nine inches between where it entered and where I passed through two lesions.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you fed me with fistularly and let me rest in one of their chambers, then removed that part, taking out the large portion; afterward, you cut into another piece I understood from the other wound, sewing it up again inside my mouth, whereby I remained lying on this splint.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return its large parts back into it and do not let it run out of only a small amount.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore it is the gout of that woman, and immediately drink water, and apply food close by so that she will not cease to suffer from those outbreaks for a long time, until they occur at the place wherein suffering continues.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So then you will engage and cauterize the tumor of him (the patient), thus performing its removal by addition, and walk about with it thereafter; I shall take care that none of God'thy providence befall on this matter entrusted to me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or content for translation (and
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When the humors are imbalanced and entered, it is time to begin treatment.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh of the throat occurs and it is swolthy and long, then it is called a vertical (or perpendicular); and if in the thickness large and round, then it is known as boil (bubo).
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When healed, take the water you have mentioned in division and do not interfere with your treatment, continuing to apply caustic as before; if it is directed towards a round area, then care for that which has been added circularly around—and if aimed at a long distance, red or black in color (blood), away from the center of the body, hold on to what you fear there within.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you turn that second movement as described by the patient'dictor in their white and lengthy manner, whereby you make an incision of the malady with a tool from which its form is set and fixed within it for some time on the new (body), and pull out this part either using one or two instruments specified therein while inspecting at the joints.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When what is not inserted therein so much as the adjusted portion above its natural extent, if you insert anything from it at all, do let your speech follow suit accordingly.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Return (or fix) the inflammation inside and use this water that we have prepared in its cavity for two thighs, taking care of it so that it becomes healed within.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by his ignorance and uses fear in cauterization (which he must do), then it's only a sharp water used for this, not actual medicine. You should hold the top of their thigh with your hand to prevent swelling at that spot; also place your other hand under them or on their chest holding hands as we have mentioned here before:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When the exterior of its cavity is where medicine rests as with a woman'thy needle, and stops there on instruments within it for that mouth saliva or muscle movement from that patient can not enter into his joint to cause pain in him nor make worse whatever issue he has.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here you place your hand on the medicine and express it through the space of my tongue within which, as time goes by while drinking this remedy, it will darken and soothe due to the bite (application) of medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish to, prick the blister and cover it with this over the extremity of the ray, immerse the blister in medicine, ensuring that as much is absorbed into the canula under which the blister adheres; thus completing what was intended for cauterization treatment. And afterward apply a dressing once the wound has dried and fallen off within three to four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If there are indigestions in the practice of medicine, repeat that treatment, applying cauterization within the venous return path at its beginning in the border area, and purify whatever is present along this circuit of medicine; wash it with soapy water, treat externally with an embrocation, and insert into worm infestations while healing takes place.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This healing substance I placed for safety and used it with great caution due to fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times it is cured by water that has been subtly applied with caustic and incision tools in this manner: a recipe of mint, yarrow, oregano, rosemary, Arabian knives, chamomile, thyme, and sage for these herbs. Adjust all these causes (or some) to one potion, immerse it fully under water, simmer; place an implement made of silver or metal on the surface of this brew where there will be a crust forming over time: apply heat with gentle stirring so that no hands are exposed directly above.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert it into the mouth of the malady within which the breath rises to touch the palate, whereby the palate becomes obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here the source sentence to translate:
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be at your disposal this instrument now, then take a can and compose in the exterior of him an enclosure made of hay, so that the mouth of the malady is comforted; for the closed space of hay prevents vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii. (The given text does not provide additional context for
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the removal of thorns and water that clings to the foot, as well as from other causes. (This translation attempts to convey a medieval medical context where practitioners might remove physical irritants like embedded plant material or 'water'—perhaps referring metaphorically to
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Persistent attachments remain on the foot, possibly due to thorns or splinters and other causes (This translation interprets "motas" as persistent irritations like embedded plant material such as thorns ("spina de peys"), with an acknowledgment of additional
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore remove any visible water from those things over which your sight rests; place your tongue on the tool before you (as it seems to be in contact with fluid within the foot), thereby making clear that there is moisture present, as indicated by our eyesight and sensation. (The medieval medical context suggests using touch or observation—here represented symbolically through "lengua am instrument denant solelh" suggesting placing one's tongue on a diagnostic tool like an examining device) to diagnose the presence of fluid infection within the foot, following thorn removal and considering other
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	Water that does not appear and remains hidden within the foot should be vomited up by taking in spoiled food at once; if it is due to decaying meat or rancid fish flesh from a poor source of sustenance, this illness might secretly reach your foot through dysentery. Alternatively, take pebbles (from clam shells) made soft with sea sponges that have absorbed brine; hold these firm and remove the putrid matter therewith within its chambthy membrane—as soon as you extricate any thorns or embedded irritants from this locale where they reside, your symptoms will promptly abate. (This translation considers medieval medical practices of addressing foot pain potentially linked to systemic infection such as dysentery caused by spoiled food) and outlines a procedure for using natural materials found on the beach ("pessa de nap" or clam shells, "de razit la laytuga," which may refer to plant-derived linens used historically) along with sea sponges ('sequa leon') that have absorbed brine (seawater), suggesting a natural remedy for purifying the patient and removing infectious agents from within.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	May take a snake and bind it with fidelity (loyalty or trust), and insert the needle on both sides of its body, either using a sponge to extract fluid from inside when necessary; alternatively, use a pore and also suction out what is needed.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If it is not about these causes that have been mentioned, then use a tool made of lead according to this form.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a large abscess that appears small within its cavity, which you insert into the patient's ulcer for ease of treatment.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift the patient'thy head upwards and ensure that you do not touch their throat or backbone; this is what the doctor holds for them.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even if the patient'dict causes him to advance further into it (the illness), due to its local knowledge of the cause and because he induces his pain, taking out his tool accordingly based on how much is prepared inside that entrance which has been made ready for removal ("foro-getada").
Capitol .xxxix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation within
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	The phrase you've provided, "De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro," appears to be in a Latin-based medieval language, which may
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodletting is applied in the division of healing and does not worsen you, consider that it should be done on the gallbladde or bile duct within the liver, wherein thou hast been recommended an instrument for this purpose which belongs to thee.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you again find bleeding, extract that small or subtle discharge carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract from there, then take a concave canula and insert that into the area of the malady, placing a heated iron at the bottom of the canule' extrusion (making sure that the sausage-shaped humoral entity remains within the region), thereby preventing its escape throughout the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the translation line by line:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If there is no treatment-given water that we have recommended, then apply moisture to the thigh or on arsenic powder with the same tool used in humidifying the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When cold humors invade each part of the body (quando fredi umori invadono ogni parte del
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another peculiar aspect of operation in the context provided appears to be: When you hold an oily substance (carbon ignites within it) covered by a layer and placed inside that gap, positioning the extremity of the instrument below sublimation; pause beneath warming, placing your mouth on the tip of the canula (a small tube), sealing your lips to ensure that there is no rupturing during inhalation until you realize that sublimation has reached the area needing treatment.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not yet done so, then repeat the subfumigation movements, and prevent the humors in the malefactor from drinking, eat salted and acidic foods, and do not drink water; as it is necessary that this treatment be followed strictly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool with which one extracts stones from the gallbladder when seen; it resembles pincers used sometimes, but without any curvature herein.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The given medieval medical text appears to describe certain procedures or treatments for joint pain and other conditions related to internal humors imbalance:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears nonsensical
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	The sentence provided seems to be in a language that borrows elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish and French—what could possibly resemble Medieval or Renaissance medical literature (given the topic of joint pain). However, without clear grammatsical
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The sentence appears to be a blend of medical terminology and possibly Latin or Romance language structures:
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	Here are the translations line by line:
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second manifestation is in the places where acids are located, which when entering the head occurs elsewhere than at the back or abdomen (where an abscess forms), and pus accumulation that happens on solid tissue differs from joint inflammation; each of them requires operative intervention.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May some of which covers not be pierced but are properly indicative signs of illness in those places, and hence should remain intact for observation therein.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other implants that are dislocated when crossed and do not mature according to their place of origin—similar to those at joints themselves; such an implant becomes a cause for contraction of the affected limb, or if it is related to the main organ (most likely referring to the appendix), then its perforation occurs within this already diseased state. If you perform puncture on something that has not matured yet in relation to the primary abdominal area—this leads to indigestion rather than resolving, for it is where digestion takes place; and what was pierced becomes elongated at the divisions of the intestines associated with this location. If puncture occurs outside its proper time or site (i.e., not in a diseased state), then there will be no indigestion as complication, but instead it can cause fistula formation and ulcers that do not heal within the body of mankind.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of the puncture for the abscess, and so it is when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You understand that it matures when the pain subsides and fever ceases, and you should observe the decrease in speechlessness (silent or sluggish breathing) and pulse rate, as well as the strengthening of the head at the site of suppuration, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	When you know where the incision made for drainage is located, immediately after starting to remove pus and used in treating inflammation of bumps (abscesses), do so quickly at these spots.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforation shall be done through the length of the flesh or body, if spicules are in the parts of muscles or feet, and at sites where no reflection occurs (in joints, nerve sheaths, ligaments), then perforate according to that part.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a muscle location, then we let it pierce through until its digestion has been confirmed twice more as before; but if you perforate that area now, it will extend the leg of the patient and make their lips hardened and deepen.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May an apothecary insert a catheter according to the body'dictate or as needed by that member of the body which desires it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When you administer a small incision, and large or wide incisions according to the variety of the sizes of the instruments used for it.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other than the apendices where the cecum is constricted and inflamed, when it hurts with hunger pangs or throbbing similar to those caused by blisters and boils, at that moment also suffers such as this one who experiences acidity in doses of dullness.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who are seated with three joints; and from those in which it is ensconced like the branches of a myrtle tree or as the appendages of angles:
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	When they are in those places where it is administered as a round and crescent shape, resembling them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May those who cannot stand with their surface pinworms should not be pierced only that which has been punctured on the surface, or as flatly done for now.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, do not attempt to extract all of it at once; take out some from that part, restore what was taken inside another day, remove a larger portion on yet another day, applying warm applications as per gradual improvement until fully healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly if the malady is due to excessive phlegm or a pregnant woman/infant in infancy/elderly person, for their breath moves and leaves them ill; then it comes out through disease exhalation, and they soon die from this sickness. Here, doctors operate on these patients (likely referring to the removal of excess phlegm or management during pregnancy).
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Guard your work with great care and place the tip of your incision tool in it through which you pierce these thorns; be sure to avoid diseases, then consider if the pus from the thorn is scanty or a flat layer—administer accordingly what was prescribed for him/her by elders, and if the thorn is large and there are cracks in your incision tool's tip, cover it with plaster at any point inside where we might arrive.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess it has detached a part of the colon or you have made that area concave within its circuit, then cover it with fine cloth soaked in water (or filtred liquid), apply when adding pans and plasters, maintain moisture; keep this inside for three days to cure what comes out from the bandages.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If during your operation you experience bleeding of the sancus (blood), then administer cold water and let it flow through these channels where bandages are applied; place something there to stop this bloodflow from time spent on operations.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of bile persists, then take care that you follow your regimen and medicines as recommended here in our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter time and the location of the ulceration is where muscle nerves are located, then cover them with powder made from vine leaves and oil cauterously (with a heated instrument), stopping these over their respective locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the locations are carnivorous, then when you pause pulpils at the beginning in water and oil as we have said before today, do so until tomorrow; also cover up any abscess or pus that has entered into your body to aid in its healing according to what was previously discussed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	So it is that the knowledge of universal cautery treatment becomes necessary at any time, even according to the method I have described for treating each type of apendicitis individually.
Capitol .xli.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately decipherable without
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	When the parasites enter into the chest (thoracic region), it refers to a condition where these organisms, possibly worms or other types of helminth
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	When worm parasites enter the chest (thoracic region), they are encased in their own protective covering, which contains nodes; these structures act as organs for them within this casing - likely referring to how helminths live and reproduce inside a host. The mention of "nodes" suggests that parasites might be schistosomes or similar organisms with complex lifecycles involving snail hosts, where
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	They are laid eggs (ova), and those that contain moisture similar to sea-water - indicating the reproduction phase of schistosomes or other waterborne helminths, which require specific aquatic environments for their lifecycle completion including hatching
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture similar to pepper (possibly referring to the texture of infected urine), and their assemblage - likely indicating how eggs accumulate in tissues or are deposited outside the body; while others are stone-like/hard, suggesting mature larval forms called cercariae which seek a suitable environment for further development.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In all of them (the patients), and in the removal of those things there is no fear, as long as you perform their extraction without causing injury to the arrow.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The operation of these is what you are asked for, which holds together and within where they call it upon entrance, provided that you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it is that which counts for moisture, then you divide each section according to its length above surface as follows:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Here begins in the section of line B and enters into line G. So when the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that skin where this moisture lies, without leaving any cause from it for all; thus return to its original place if there are causes remaining due to it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Here it goes line by line translation:
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If there is a wart present in fatty tissue, then proceed with this method as follows:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	has a segment shaped like an arc, and cuts between the lips of that segment down its entirety, extracting your willpower from within it which contains him/herself at this moment.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May it happen that if your cautery causes opposition, then you must take the first measure immediately.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: As for appearance in apendicitis and care as you have mentioned before; on inflamed appendix it is placed a light touch, which consists of few drops and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May occur elsewhere on the head as well as here at these joints and nails of children' extraneous growth can also affect all their fingers (the entirety of which is external).
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	Pause the puncture of those from the lower parts placed by you, so that disease can be drawn up into the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Return care for that which is necessary in order to heal it back there (in its natural place).
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii. (The roman numeral "XLII
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the section of swellings which have entered into the colon.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Constantly occurring spits affect the neck, waistbands, and joints, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	When joint pain occurs in the neck and is caused by acids produced between them (implying a buildup of toxic substances or inflammation), it affects their own tunic (body covering) entirely, along with swellings at the nodes and apothecia (swollen areas resembling growths on plants due to infection). Here comes as they come together for treatment.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The following is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that position for the treatment whereby the color of what is visible here indicates its connection to the yolk and spread throughout all parts without annexing it to nerves, veins, or arteries; nor does it present with painful protrusion like a cyst which you must carefully insert underneys outside this line marked by .G., up until that same line denoted by .B.; then observe the entire area and extract those parts bit by bit using one's fingertubs or nails if necessary, as mentioned in our teachings.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	Es possible that a vein or nerve has not been pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanctum has detached.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation within which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Once you have investigated whether there is any other small skull diseases indicated by the diet mentioned herein, then examine and clean those that are found among them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the condition of severe scrofulosis and not already encapsulated within its own region, then remove that scrofulosis from its region.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Given that it is necessary for her faithful double-folded and which enters within itself, so allow herself to suffer the damage she inflicts upon herself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Return and complete with wax the child you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that lump entirely, then adjust the lips and cheeks of the patient so thoroughly that not even one excess is left behind.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May you find yourself in need to remove excess swelling due to the greatness of the scrofulus (a type of skin ulcer or tuberculosis), understand its cause, and apply appropriate treatment as directed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And apply treatment by piercing with an awl and applying ointment and spirits to them, in order that the rust causing decay of the body can be removed.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you turn and wash it again, then take care of that flesh made by the body within which is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Translating ancient or archaic texts, especially those that blend elements of different languages and dialects such as the one you've provided (which seems to be a mixture between Medieval
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 When dissected in the context of this section about apoplexy (stroke), none among us have seen such an illness before on our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the text of those sayings.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May sometimes lack in men who avoid the extraction of blood, such that for water it is not well extracted from all veins and major arteries within their body.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have had caustic substances inserted into the mouth or with two hooks when the illness is not in the throat, it must be urgency to remove the piece that causes pain due to cold extraction (seek immediate removal of the irritating object causing severe chilling-induced pain).
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want to collect the fluid (presumably referring to pus or other effluvia), insert the sponge slowly in three circles within each circle of the abscess, or four small sections for circulation between those two circles so that a section is inside and not on cartilage; this location is appropriate as it excludes flesh and veins from being squeezed.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is afraid, then extend one end of the gout-fist am once and open the fist until it reaches the channel; this may prevent bleeding from any cause related to that area.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Whenever there is pain for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour comes for extracting worms (presumably referring to a treatment method), add saliva from your lips into the mouth of the patient and use that single spit to lubricate their cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Returns medicine that helps reduce flesh within which it has been healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as recommended by Albucasis in his medical speech, what we observe is that arteries which have already ruptured due to excess gout (the uro) from within have entered death and their vessels are torn open; thus they will insert into the epiglottis so that breath can pass through it at any moment of respiration for some benefit, saving them from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Through this command, let the entrapped creature within be consumed over three days due to the cunning of the illness; and henceforthy we order it so that the entity is digested while healing inside him for health recovery.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when you have seen through me the patient's chest and placed a cushion on their thorax (their "gola"), placing thereon part of the lungs ('canada'), calling it care for them, while holding onto their mouth as they moan from illness, uncovering pus within ("plagaya") and then treating said pus with what was found inside it—small remnants.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So it was admitted that she had not inscribed a vein or artery, and the wind has entered her body through the play of insects; therefore, treated until the focus is healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not happen on the bed of restoration, return to medicinal care for your dispositions tomorrow.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now it is said that there is no fear in the section of the epidermis (epidermis refers here likely to skin, a common topic for medieval medical treatises). Here'
Capitol .xliv.	 Now they say that within the layer of the outermost skin, there should be
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Now it is said concerning scalding or burns on the sole of the foot (golayro refers to part of the body), which causes pain and swelling, that there may be a protrusion similar to an inguinal hernia in this area. Here they refer to what might appear as bul
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This typical blister-like swelling (apostema) is caused by heat and it occurs primarily in the legs of women ("mot" here implies a cause). Here they attribute this condition specifically to gender and possibly related physiological or climatic reasons, considering that these factors might influence skin sensitivity. This highlights how medieval medicine often
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It is considered either a twofold cause (possibly referring to an underlying condition and external aggrapective) or it happens naturally as part of the body's response mechanism ("natural").
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in nature, there isn’thy remedy for this situation (implying that within normal bodily processes and environmental interactions without
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And in nature there isn't an effective remedy for this situation (suggesting that without medical intervention). The first supposed cause is akin to nodes of grass or perhaps some kind of vascular condition associated with small vessels ("nodacio de arteria"), which causes fear. This statement reflects the understanding and belief in medieval medicine about pathology's origins, often attributing symptoms like swelling (possibly related to inflammation) to natural occurrences within bodily systems or external environmental factors that were beyond their control at times – a combination of structural ("nodes") and circulatory issues.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	When one does not have faith in them with iron but rather believes in that which is small, it is so.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv. (This line does not appear to contain enough
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	The phrase "de secco dos os noses" appears to be in Portuguese, which translates roughly to
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 Translated into English:  
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	When you recommend such a difference between birth (exitus) and function with doubt,
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So they say that heat and fever cause violent pains within when the boiling overflow is subdued; and once the bubbling agitation ceases, so does the pain, heat, and fever.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May not be warmth or fever nor pain; count that which is within his sac for its cause.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you reach the stage of healing for this node that pushes it out and investigates its strength which you will introduce into place according to how it comes forth in the neck whereby you apply it now.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here comes the final step according to your measurement of the size of the ulceration, and remove any protrusions and take into account what has come out in its traces on him/her.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of fluid (of any color), then you insert a catheter through the skin as deep as possible according to what has been mentioned in other applications.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If you do not remove moisture from its marks (wounds), then they are greasy/slimy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it is dry above him has a shape of a sickle according as this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	When you have learned it as taught, and take away that which has been cut out from the whole of its cure-giving power (i.dict), protecting either hair or skin over this area if possible; remove that illness located in the navel therefrom.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If during the operation it is broken (likely meaning surgical intervention), there'dict be no way to remove that which remains healthy/intact, and caution must constantly be exercised; otherwise, this unharmed entity may also break through at any time while still inside you.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from here any cause arises, little or much, then return according to time.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find that from the patient some small part has been affected by sharp corrosive powders and inflame them entirely, then stop at the spot where there is an open ulcer being cauterized, and treat this wound until it heals itself.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great, then you clean your lips with water and treat that which contains it (the excess humors).
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May your pulse be towards you, or not-pulsing there, then apply heat to the place where blood is clotted and pour that thick fluid for two days or three inside while purging impurities through pores (diuresis), and return to separate what has been separated from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The original text does not provide enough context
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the necessary structures for section and puncturing/perforation:
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these inserted forms, and of them three species are therein great, and from those they migrate, and among them the small ones.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of insertion is thus this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of introduction for migration is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of insertion is thus:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are made of iron or bronze and descended from the limbs properly, thus feeding into the cavities through the apendages.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experience and they bear names; among these is one called Berith.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So of these three spices, some are great for merging (e or mingling), and others few in number.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience is thus acquired:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experience walking, body part:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	La form of experience is little, like that of a cushion:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	With these apendices and exits, as well as fistulas and boils between those of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	So seft redontz, heavy stones and pebbles are used as they have been stitched together with large needles made of ivory or bone (or iron/silver), which become the weights for apothecaries' balances.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "They are black experts who agree that in those cavities where they protrude upwards as a result of these flows being reflected at their level, there are fistulas.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And of three kinds, some are extracted from their lengths, and others from other things, according as is necessary for the quantity of the opening or narrowing.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of experienced lead migration:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of small wooden model:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the arrows are made from special materials, some as simple and only requiring a curve to make them, these being three types: large, small, and iron.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	From what they use for anointing, and from three kinds of spices.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those points have arisen curves, of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From what they have three curves, and from these three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Everything that is necessary in that place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single large unit, shape of flesh:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a single pill:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of one joint complexly few, shape of limb:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of large joint:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an egg for departure, form as it is (or in this case):
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of an urine drop, shape of a leech:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of an egg has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of an umbilical cord has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an oblique with only two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of an arrow has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of an ointment has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of one hand has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the knives used for cutting and removing nodes and implants, made of three kinds: one from iron, another from mercury, and the third is very scarce.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of the scalpel is scarce:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The external parts of those bodies where pain occurs sharply and not smoothly, but because it hurts during lancet puncture to avoid damage to veins or nerves; for these reasons, the uterus and abdomen are calmed by a little heat which helps relieve inflammation from abscess rupture.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of poultices, and they come in three kinds: large, small (or fine), as you carry them around with you.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of heavy jade:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of gout migration:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of maid is poorly formed or ill-shaped.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are pains from humors and likenesses of fire within which they feel pain.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When it is in the exterior membrane pierced with a needle hidden within and located at the divisions of body parts and below them when you go to see (the doctor), do so as if you are also seeing.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of splinters, which are not seen through the piercing of apiculture implements and cannot be detected by illnesses, and there are three kinds: large, medium, small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those things.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of gout are those by which the flow of blood is withdrase and consists of three kinds: large, small, and scanty; these are the shapes (forms) of it.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sourced from yolk of eggs, round and small in size they are.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these herbs of vinegar must be ground and pounded into small pieces, in order that the flowing outs (of phlegm) may gain speed when needed, especially if at your first remedy they are not sufficient.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for abrasion in the entire body, but only on meaty areas such as limbs and hips (cushions), chest, breasts, belly, and navels—and similar to them are moistened with humidity.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some of these tools are small-looking like bones cut from the flesh; by which means you get removed when pierced through with a lance or dissected via vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some movements are painful according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	The given medieval medical text is challenging due to its archaic language blend of
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Given the complexity and variability in interpretation when translating historical texts, especially those from different languages or with a specific jargon (like medieval Latin medical terminology), here is my best attempt to translate your provided
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	It appears there may be some confusion in the translation attempt provided above and possibly typographical errors within your source text which makes direct interpretation challenging without a clear understanding of archaic language usage or context specifics to medieval medical texts:
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the person who immerses in water following this formulation, from line B to line G, cleanse the entire lesion thoroughly and apply a live-born medicine of fleshly composition; also adjust the lips between teeth with said medication when dressed for bedtime, thus curing what is within that has healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breastbone declines at the joints and becomes softened by its own resting as with women, then it is split into two sections below these pus spots, which resemble the crescent shapes of the moon phases; each one contains within itself what another lacks for this form of line arrangement B. and G. Then cleanse the linea (the neck) between both labia lips of a child, remove swelling/edema herein, and administer as directed in terms of suture material and powders needed for healing until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the inspection of the water that must be entered into for the agitation of the malady and its bile flow, then pour down corrosive oil and submerge what has been dissolved inside by this watery destruction; take care to restore what is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii. (The provided text does not contain any words that
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When crawling arthropods, such as insects or spiders, are disturbed and they vibrate due to their sensory structures called antennae (or appendages
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When crawling arthropods' sensory structures are disturbed and they vibrate quickly due to the substances of scales or hard parts (such as chitin), which contain a protective layer similar to an exoskeleton, known in Latin medical terminology. In English: When insects or spiders with crawling appendages have their sensory
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	From those that contain moisture; and from which are encased within the body cavity according to this diagram: between line G and line B. When all fluid accumulated in an infected lesion is drained out, apply a poultice of healing herbs inside it for today's recovery process.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Return the wound or dressing that is appropriate and available in oil at once for it to heal.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the purulent abscess of the glands and scleroids is present, then you divide it on that spot as we have mentioned in the section about scleroids.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the vermin is spread so extensively that it ignites upon contact, then apply treatment as soon as possible in this matter.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlix. (This line appears to be referencing a specific section
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	In the context of this medieval medical text, it translates roughly as:
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the scab is cracked open and the navel has been tightened over it, which are where inflammation and abscess have occurred through arteries or veins: when an abscess forms on the scar tissue of the wound; you will feel stridor in your chest.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that which is through the vein appears in the body'dictates of a disease or condition at hand.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Secession from this ulcer is an error and mainly in the area where you hold your legs tightly (hips), thighs, groin (angina region) or neck/head; these are crucial areas for its treatment to avoid being overlooked. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Over that which belongs to them for their inflammation of the gallbladthy (chalice or bladder), cut into the shank part and sever it there; take out its flesh with a sharp instrument, remove the chalices themselves, revealing what is hidden within.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Return the needle to that pin and make it penetrate into another lancet at two places, which causes you both of us (the physician) to extract those outraged lancing instruments from their temple area.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Return (or apply) pressure to the location where it is between two ligaments and within which the stone has settled entirely in him/her, thereby resolving the adhesion.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise text:
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an ulceration of a veinous section, then you take hold as far as possible from the affected area in your body where there may be swelling and insert the needle carefully; make that puncture penetrate deeply enough such that when withdrawing one extremity while inserting into another part of it with thread made from grapes (vine), forming a ligature or suture.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May you fear that we extract the thread (referring to removing a suture), and if so, then insert it into the small hole made for this purpose today by your first needle'thy action; tightly bind the surgical threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Return the ulcer to its place within you while it is still wet with what comes from inside of him/her; then take away any excess swelling around the navel and apply that which has come out of them, holding their hands in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here you place the compress over him in which you have immersed it with vinegar and oil; apply the treatment that is said to heal, soothing pain and cleaning within where sickness resides.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital of apoplectic illness which is caused by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	When you have an abscess in the artery and vein, seemingly as if there is also an abscess in their nerves (when palpated or due to excessive manipulation), it appears that way too.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is painful in the hands of helpers or at the ankle, or anywhere where joint pains are prominent,
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And there is no abscess in the groin area, and because of this it does not spread towards either side or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So those who are in joints and cannot contain their iron within themselves will find relief when they come together against each other (referring to the practice of applying pressure or massage at these congested points).
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is in the head or forehead below the collarbone have a splint for support.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If there is a small ulcer (apostema), then take that one and apply it to the foreheads and separate those two from each other; remove what remains of its base/root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, then raise your hand upon him, and scrape that area, and apply thereon some dressing for stitches, and take care of him until he recovers fully.
Capitol .li.	Capital (This is likely indicating that something significant or important has been
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The provided text appears to be in a Romance language influenced by medieval Latin, which could suggest it's from an old medical treatise or similar historical document written during the time when these languages were commonly used for scholarly and
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	The translation into modern English is as follows:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes another sentence to translate: "And you have already seen one, and in his abdomen there were two things that looked like fungi, and there was not much difference between these white ones.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned outwards and split apart, with moisture flowing from there all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Thus I incise these and transfixed them in the one foot, each eight units long and the other six units long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If fear and anxiety overwhelm you (and your mind is clouded with them), guard yourself by iron will; it may also be necessary to use freshly forged metal, as we have described herein before; allow this treatment for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop jüse in der Strittigkeit des Hahnsfußdrahts; daher muss man den groben Drahttre nicht ständig behandeln lassen, solange es sich selbst ablöst und arbeitet.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	May it be that if their thighs are thick (large), there is no cause for fear and distress in them, mainly where they are inside the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you divide the patient'se womb, and apply cautery there so it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And take care of that which is inside that shall be healed (the patient).
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Even you who do not assume that there is a blackish piece of little feeling and movement in question, which indeed may be cancerous growths.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When you come for memory recall as instructed (this translation assumes that "rememoracio" can be interpreted in this context as an instruction or request related to remembering, based on the medical and proced
Capitol .lii.	It seems like your input may have included a fragment of text possibly referencing legal documents
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	The phrase "curacio de eminência del umbilic" appears to be in Latin, which translates roughly to
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is a matter for treatment due to reasons or because of fissures in the cribriform layer over which leaks may occur; these are typically seen with other ruptures below, or pertaining specifically when draining veins and arteries as dictated. Moreover, this can also relate to collapsed bowel movements (obstructed movement within) caused by constriction of the intestine due to wind pressure – a situation which might demand specific remedy according to what has been previously indicated in these cases.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If there is a split in the cistern and leakage of linen (possibly referring to an abscess), then the appearance of pus looks like the skin's color; it may be likened to a lion'thy pain, presenting itself under various circumstances.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the exit of the hernia, then when you have reported what we have counted together, with perhaps strong differences in size, and wherein each one finds their place as before mentioned, return; immediately afterward, they are washed at baths and subjected to vigorous exercise.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May it be for moisture; the lion is not hidden when close to your hand and is neither constrained nor cramped.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is because of sanctioned punishment (implying some form of disciplinary or judicial action), then there appear the blackened spots developing due to decaying darkness decrees, which could refer to signs of inflammation or infection that manifest as discolorations
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is because of meat (potentially referring to a dietary or ingestion-related issue), then there appear harsh, large spots that are fixed according to their quantity. This suggests that the blackened areas might be related to some form of skin lesion likely associated with excessive consumption or improper handling
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is because of wind (possibly referring to environmental factors), then the touching of him/her turns into a lion's roar. This could imply that exposure or contact with something influenced by strong wind
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation in him/her is considered if the prominency of his/her navel (the umbilicus) is because of sanction, or veins, or wind; observe that you must not perform treatments on him/her as instructed here, out of fear and concern. This indicates a need for caution based upon specific teachings given in the capital where signs were discussed concerning arsenic-related issues (arsenia) and venous problems, emphasizing restraint due to potential risks or harm associated with certain medical interventions.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of his/her navel is because of an intestinal protrusion (hernia) or sling, then you must command the patient to retain control over it and keep it extended; furthermore, apply a password for attempting in all parts of the umbilicus—and position yourself between your legs with one hand on top of each other above his/her navel. Then surround this area within its circuit using a spinal stick or lay down as directed during trial attempts at restraint: and extend towards those greater than usual divisions (parts) to maintain control, while the password remains in place inside it; also ensure that the belt stays firmly around his/her waist. This passage outlines specific techniques for handling hernias associated with umbilical prominence during medieval times, highlighting how restraint and correction devices like spinal sticks or a heavy leather girdle were to be applied while keeping certain boundaries in mind regarding the manipulation of body parts affected by such conditions.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the fabric (the skin), then take that one and apply it here; also incise those surplus parts of him.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, encircle that area, and return to your operation: take two needles and insert them into those fields strong and thrust the needles into the circuit you have finished around the caries of the kneecap, where they pierce; then firmly bind the caries on four parts using these needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them into where it pierces the extended flesh, inscribing that which enters when pushed in; mark those places where entry occurs, and apply care there for what comes out of the woolen garments inside as heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel's prominence is of fleshless or due to moisture in it, then cover that abscess immediately with dung and sweat extracts used here, which you dry up within its location; take care for your own health too while covering this area.
Capitol .liii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide contextually understandable text
De curacio de cranc.	Based on your provided Latin phrase, a direct translation into English would be challenging without
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the division of species concerning head and treatment approach within medicine, where we aim to avoid causing injury with our intervention—and heads are generated in this area requiring caution; hence have said about it here for medical care consideration.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and severe, you cannot expect that from the patient who has not been cured by anyone else nor have I ever seen them recover therefrom.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is when you allocate ashes together with having water to drink and cleanse some of it if there'thy abdomen distension appears swollen or bloated (possibly indicating constipation), that is, beforehand, prepare a poultice for your belly.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here comes the first sentence in English, line by line translation:
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is contrary action of thick blood from the vein or artery, then burn that area where the flow of thick blood has stopped, and pay close attention to it as well so that healing can occur within this treatment space.
Capitol .liv.	Given that "Capitol" in this context does not form
De curacio de ydropici.	The provided text appears to be a non-standard attempt at translating from what seems like
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	In the division of water-derived spices and fragrances from each herb for medicine purposes.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron alone is the essence of temperament itself and not approached with bellows or tuning forks nor with potions (which are fatal).
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herbal tympanist as medicine and it does not cause discomfort in your treatment, consider that if relief has been achieved at the groin or abdomen area of those issues related to body ventures (the thighs/abdomen) similar to what is happening here with these individuals, be wary lest you treat another ailment.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Might you find the thigh's excessive vitality, and it is not another illness but simply overflowing blood alone, nor will infants or children suffer from this condition; your task as an operator is to raise the thigh between yourself and patient, and apply pressure on their abdomen with your hand where water appears at the site of inflammation immediately after puncturing it.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is when two sharp parts are joined together with a suture (spine), but there may be some small length remaining at once during the operation to ensure that it does not enter into the cavity and can still be controlled.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of watery humors is due to a disturbed liver (believed in medieval medicine that the spleen and liver are connected), then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of it is due to melancholy (which often refers to an imbalance involving black bile in humoral medicine), then your section should be on firm ground.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And when your team is on the chest where you want to speak of the humors for that they do not run wild and overflow there,
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Return through the cisternal opening until the stone reaches the place where it is lodged in the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that outwardly (or bring it back) inside its cavity and insert an instrument of this form into it.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it seems like a small silver tube undernethyre; made of either silver or ivory/leather, to which at the bottom I have attached three tacks (two from one piece and one from another), and its tip is sharp according to feather quill size – used as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And when the suprapubic worm is present above water (presumably in reference to an abscess or similar condition), as soon as you bring that instrument upwards into the water, it will rise and evacuate a portion of its fluid within the hour; but if what comes out does not do so within this timeframe, then your malady worm may resolve itself due to the influence of one's spirit animal or be subjected to five healing touches that are appropriate for death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May expel it according to the quantity of its fluid and as per your arrangements for the vapors from its foot' extrudement and humoral balance, respectively.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return the instrument to it on other days if the malady tolerates taking water in small quantities and applying warmth for several days out of fear, being careful not to drink too much water so as not to increase fluid intake unnecessarily.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	May you fear the belly (abdomen), and pour a great quantity of water upon it, so that he is buried in sand at the backside, tightening him up with baths, waiting for long periods; thus his condition treated by dry medicines while being cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Cauterize the stomach area and place the spoon to extract water as has been previously mentioned in the water account.
Capitol .lv.	The text provided is written in an archaic form of language that
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Translating this line from a medieval medical context into modern English, we get:  
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some days, children are sick from the womb of their mother and/or the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it's torn or out of place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So then proceed with a shallow puncture of their thigh as delicately as possible, according to this method.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Return the pause in the wound with a subtle needle of iron and thread that partake therein; let it be done for three days or four-and-three parts (i.dict).
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he wants to urinate his gouty fluid and urine; return that back.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not stop the blood flow, then it is possible that the urine will go over this area and wet what here.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that from which they are thrown be treated with iron as we have said, for up to four days until it is exacerbated.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When those are not in their place and cause harm to them, which is natural birth defect due to the prolapse of the urinary bladder into its lower parts; because it prevents ejaculation within these regions as a result (and thus precludes conception through sexual intercourse), this constitutes illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E guarda te that in your operation of blood flow, you must prevent moisture from entering; pause at this point where there is fluid within the vein and take care for healing inside where if it'thy cured.
Capitol .lvi.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English while considering its lingu
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Translating the provided text into English, considering its similarity to Latin and other European languages of that era:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Movements worsen this illness in the vein and its prominency of fatty tissue.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	From that one it is malevolent (or harmful), and from the other it is not (harmful).
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No harmfulness, cover that detaches the subtle and removes what is within therein; and pause over that spot where it sinks in Egyptian wax below, and place this same on inside where healing occurs as if contained by enclosure herewith administered.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If it is an evil black bile (which represents melancholy in humoral theory), then you must apply the points of your pointed cautery to its liver and spleen, which he refers as their insides' organs.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the foreskin is on the head of the penis (circumcision not performed), and one part has been cut off while another remains intact because you held it during cutting; afterward, when treating that remaining uncut portion once healed within where it was cut, your care ensures no snip-off will occur as long as treatment of the penile foreskin continues.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And examine the genitals and foreskin blackness and hardness; so that you can cover all of what has already been discolored or degenerated, and lines over this portion which is colored red with bran-flour paste mixed with crushed pepper and eggs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that healing is provided for whatso extruded within its cavity, and place your hand over it so as not to let the intestine come out again.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May it be necessary for fluid of sanctity (or blood), then administer cauldrons according to this method.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Quarly cautiones jubat unus duo locorum temporum specimina, sui est fluere sanctae et plebee quiescendum.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the gallbladthy is corroded and destroyed at once, then you must insert a lead pipe into the flesh of the foreskin to allow the bile to pass through it there.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the foreskin at the base of the penis (and this adhesion is not pulled out from where it' extrudes, nor excoriation circumcision; when one suffers adhesion due to dirt or scab) come what must be cleaned with a sponge inside that which has dissolved suture and have completely removed the cap of the foreskin.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to desire those exquisitely, then cover your spine and penis with some cause of the head or foreskin; as soon as you have done so gently but firmly pierce through them using their subtlety in removal.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return between the foreskin and the head of the penis below it subtly, which already allows infiltration into the body'dictating wherefore other humors cannot attach themselves there as well.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And return its treatment is within that which has been sealed so it may be solidified or heal properly.
Capitol .lvii.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .lvii.", it
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The process of refining the children and caring for those who have been circumcised in them.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity with other diseases: however, if it belongs to our operation and from our willfulness, and because of that which comes naturally in children, we must assign them the better healing way through less painful puncture.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that ancient people did not practice circumcision among free individuals at their leisure time and only used them when they acquired new tools for experimentation. This causes the majority of craftsmen and barbers to resort to using a new razor or straight razor; they use hairpin made from steel wire as well, holding onto it with their nails.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already employed all these methods and cannot do any better with words or thread that in embroidery, some threads escape from under the fabric piece below, others around the penile area between two tunics, tightening the thonged cushion of flesh here quickly. The rest are directed towards other insights into knowledge securely without pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	E arises the purifying action by which it is felt (joint pain), and from this finger-like part used by surgeons, there is no assurance of safety within the member' extrinsic parts; for when it enters into its place, deep inside the body.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In surgery with an unguent (ointment), if you rush and cause damage, it will ruin your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child'thy bellybutton is naturally small and tends to get dirty easily in such a way that there was no need for cleaning it out, which has been observed by him (the doctor).
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the mending process that I've done with thread and nails for strength involves proportional measurements of these materials; hence when you determine your two thicknesses accordingly as guided by measurement comparison in a specific timeframe, it results in compression of the finger according to its figure contained within the entirety of this instrument (likely referring to bandages or splints), without any error whatsose.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E la maniere d'operer initiale est qu'il faut maintenir lendoient principalement dans leur genou à peine si nécessaire et s'ils peuvent rester dedans autre jour.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Whenever that joy can enter your mind, it is within your power to receive such knowledge.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Here you prepare the patient to be in that state and not awake (or conscious), and hide your tools under their sheets or on top of their chest so that they do not see them nor anyone else who is using them.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And place it back in the marked spot on his/her foot sole, and fasten that lower part of one lash with this small piece provided by him/her, then tie your hand around both parts where they are joined together for support.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the translation:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of joint pincers, this is how it should be:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	They are some external supports and others internal joints that should not cross the hilt of the club, their length corresponding to the combined lengths of two handles grasped in hand.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Mistakes in understanding are often hard for the innermost core, or a portion of it should be studied more deeply.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So that when you spread it on your finger during the time and place in proportion, as instructed for treating an ulceration site.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then remove that part and incise it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days and the poultice applied to the inflamed area is drawing fluid out quickly, then apply water into that place wherein the abscess cavity shrinks; remove easily what's softened by moisture, and wash away whatever you prepared for.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Guarding your head with a veil is not for you (it's not recommended or suitable).
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	So take care of that water which the soil has absorbed from the dust, which we have recommended in the course of the soils' properties.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is inserted into the neck in measure, and you obey its divisions below, you will notice nothing at all.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he care for that which we have said is inside so it can be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	In order to accurately provide translations for each line of this medieval medical treatise written
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	For the given Latin-like text regarding bladder retention and its treatment, here's a translated version:  
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retain urine in the bladder is considered a disorder caused by excess phlegm or pus due to stone formation or inflammation, and it seems similar to those described by doctors as cure-related divisions.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and retained within it lies in the bladder neck where the ureter already presses upon your thighs; then take measures to relieve pressure on these areas from time tothy (whereas "time thy" likely refers hereinto as a duration of waiting or treatment).
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And align the patient's legs on their chest and stretch his abdomen as much as is feasible above them; tighten the belly until it reaches him there at that moment.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder contracts and expels its contents into the lower parts, so that urine is completely voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If it is not dissolved by the water we have mentioned so vehemently as the cause upon the abdomen, then cover its extraction with a tool of this form: It may be made of silver and subtle lion conqueror; small in size like a slender staff or wand used for gentle suction (a type of catheter), which is thin at one end resembling both palm and thumb.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When they apply the leg on the foot, and enclose the bladder of it with hemp thread or woolen cloth bound together tightly by oil and bayberry juice;
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Extract carefully from wool thread by hand strand by strand, as urine dissolves the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Return that part for cleansing with urine and use a cupping tool until the bladder and hernias are alleviated, without ceasing to apply the cups while this is happening.
Capitol .lix.	In this line of medieval medical text translation from Latin-influenced language into
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	When the quality of enema and instruments used are appropriate, they correspond to this purpose (or situation). Here "enema" refers to a medical procedure involving introduction of liquid substances into the rectum through the anus, often for therapeutic reasons such as cleansing or medication delivery. The phrase is emphasizing that effectiveness and appropriateness
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess appears in the bladder (vesica) or at that location where there is coarseness and/dictate puncture has occurred, it becomes necessary to distill waters and medicines into that place. Here "bladder" refers specifically to a body organ called vesica, which stores urine before excretion through the urethra (the passage from bladder for expelling liquid waste). The procedure mentioned is one where specific tools or instruments are employed – possibly endoscopes and other medical devices used in cystolithotomy ("clamp-bladder surgery") to remove stones, treat urinary tract obstructions like strictures (narrowing of the urethra due to scar tissue), abscesses or
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if in that exterior part there is hearing silence and a closure has occurred – it implies an obstruction within the urinary tract outside of the bladder (perhaps indicative of stones lodged at
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that location, there are three disruptions: two from one party and once for the other (likely indicating multiple urinary stones with different origins). Here "traumas" or “disruptions” could refer to kidney stones causing
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the place where it is collected (likely referring to a body of water or fluid in some medical context), that's what gets called into action – and its quantity depends on how much there is, which once drawn back becomes subjected again by drawing out whatever caused this mobilization. Here "drawing" suggests removing material from the place it has been collected (potentially urine samples). After extraction ("expelled"), if long enough, naphtha ('naphta' in medieval Latin influence) is used during naval battles as a weapon or repellent – metaphorically suggesting that similar agents might be employed post-extraction for treatment. The context likely involves urological procedures where urine samples (collections of 'fluid') are drawn from the body, examined ('expelled'), and treated with certain chemicals like naphtha if they were used in any way to aid medical processes during medieval times or as a misinterpretation based on mixing metaphors. In modern understanding this makes little sense – urine is not stored for naval battles nor handled chemically beyond
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of crab'endo into the moisture, and draw out that water which is pushing against the cavities above it; thus removing the moisture therein.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form under which the bladder is constricted, and that shape is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is either of silver or side quality, and I have placed the head on it like a small feather, then quickly bind tightly with ligature.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Return the bladder to its position, and hold there until moisture accumulants in the bladder can be scalded at the focus (source of heat).
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return (or reposition) the limb of the patient in its cavity, and place your hand over it so that the limb does not protrude outwards into the wound area
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand over the bladder to prevent urine leakage due to pressure within the wound area that has reached this point of vulnerability, as the moisture (humidity) continues its spread downwards into the bladder through where it entered internally. This instruction likely relates to managing a situation in which an injury or surgical site may compromise the integrity of surrounding structures such as skin and possibly organs like the bladder, thereby necessitating careful handling by
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	Then if there is no bladder present, take a wool pad and make it into a circle; pierce that entire circumference with an instrument (likely indicating the use of needles or similar tools); carefully reposition your fingers within those disruthy areas until you resolve their movements. Moreover, as long as urine accumulates in there—pausing only when necessary to address these fluid buildups—place a circle around this area similarly but with cloth (presumably for the same purpose), allowing any remaining water or fluids within that space while intermittently pausing and managing it. This elaboration suggests an ancient medical practice, potentially focusing on wound care where bladder control is compromised due to injury; herein lies a method of prevention against urine leakage involving the use of absorbent materials (wool) alongside careful manual technique for affected individuals who may have sustained damage leading to such complications.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then take that circle with your hand and apply it to the area as fluids approach or enter into (the bladder). This indicates an immediate response technique wherein, once created using wool—as previously described for managing urine leakage—you can use this makeshift barrier in conjunction with direct manual pressure provided by your hand. The intention is to block the pathway of fluids reaching or entering into (the bladder), likely as part of a broader strategy aimed at preventing complications associated
Capitol .lx.	Capitol .lx.: This line appears incomplete as presented; it seems
De extraccio de peyra.	Extraction from rock." (This translation is fairly direct, with "extraccio" meaning
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 "We already have them sorted by species of stone and care in rock medicine; the difference between those formed on hillsides and those from within bladders is noted." (This translation attempts to convey that practitioners categorize stones based on their origin—whether they come from hillside erosion or are produced internally, possibly referring to kidney-related conditions. "Specias" here likely refers not just as species in the biological sense but categories of stone for medical purposes.)
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	Here they have said that the operation takes place in which hand is involved and a section (or part) of it as well.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	When produced in the bladder itself is that which remains therein,
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And there he reports that such an exhibition has been made and abbreviated.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that stones are formed in the bladder mainly during infancy; and from his sinews they appear as water vapor due to their subtlety, appearing therein (within); gout attacks his urethra, causing intermittent pains, and dressing occurs at this time.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	It is the healing of children within that place who have reached fourteen years, and it is difficult treatment for their limbs.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May in young people move through these waters.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that which the bone is larger and curettage puts it lighter; if there'dict a little of such substance present, contrary to this one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when you arrive at the treatment of that, cover it with a cloth from the cradle where they extract completely through which crack is located on your belt; this gap for some time prevents the poisoning of the stone within them and their inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Return the bladder that you have prepared within yourselves and ensure all of it is done quickly, so that the entire bladder descends downwards at once.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Return that which is inside there as well as all of it through proper means.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then if you feel pain in the space (or abdomen), then place your hand over it immediately.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If not already done all at once the touching of your body, then you must urge it to excrete its left sinew if there is a malady in the belly or as indicated by the sign when the patient is an infant or has completed puberty and insert that into their buttock.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through a channel of clay that sits inside, flowed what is said by thee.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that small one is converted into something within the bladder neck (the term "col" refers here likely to part of the urinary tract, such as where it connects with
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Place your hand over that which they have stated, and remove whatever is left from the place where it has been set down (this implies an action to extract something unwanted or residual after discussion). The full English translation for this line could be:  
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Command the servant to press on your bladder; and command another servant to extend his right arm towards the parts below you, holding their hand tightly in the area where they are performing cauterization.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return it back into its seat from where this one enters:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	e separate them between the anus and the genitals here; not in the place of sleep but above the left hipbone; their portion is on that stone and this section holds it down there at the belly, forming a transverse section according to how much space you want from that stone for the part contained within. But do not forcefully insert the tool used below the navel since they cannot withdraw it freely when necessary.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You understand that there is some stone from which the treatment of him must be difficult due to its water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid it appears like a lion and is round, made of its own light essence for purification.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that which has been angled or marked out, adjust in the crack/fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not a cauterization tool available, then create one over that part which hurts or where you have applied pressure with something sharp, and do so without leaving it out of sight; otherwise introduce your subtle curving instrument under the affected area immediately.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	May you not be able to cover it there, then increase the disruption a little bit; and if you see a flow of bile rising up, cut off that with sulphur melted into vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is in one place, then you will draw it into your mouth and hold over it on that spot; also apply pressure with something small here as if they are pains of desire.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is much pain (or great suffering), it is ignorance that you have immersed yourself in such a large section of the body; for this reason one or two causes cause harm here: either because they remain within, or due to continuous urine distillation, which means that not all parts are fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May administer the removal of it within which has gone out (from its place), or in a broken limb where claws are inside to extract that very one, all this done before being expelled outside into casts/plasters.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your treatment, then fill the womb with the juice of aloe and of dragon'thy blood, tightly bind it up again.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Pause on that heated linen or oil and vinegar mixture to allow the poultice (ointment) to be absorbed by it.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the bowel or hernia on top of the patient's abdomen and do not tear the ligature inside until tomorrow.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air escapes, apply water and oil herein, and take care to keep it with linseed or tallow ointment within which it may heal.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	May you apply cauterization to the wound if it is inflamed and decayed, as though he himself were encased in ice within his bladder; for through him comes urine (which has been forbidden because of its outflow from the body), thus inserting a sponge into the patient and extracting that very substance.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here returns the water for cleaning with vinegar and salt, which is essential against all species, that brings what heals within it as long as one remains in recovery.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During all of the healing process that you lay with both thighs and adjust the medicines which have been paused over the location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the gallbladder, it remains there, and administration of urine is prohibited; thus healing this patient who comes with a deficiency that reaches an organ, previously accused of obstruction due to these treatments; you have already extracted the fluid (urine), now take hold of a forceps forged from iron, which constitutes its form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From outside the cavity, in gout, it is lodged within a pipe.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Return it close at hand, and place your hand over there on the stone for that it does not return to the bladder again.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert the iron into the thorn, piercing through with ease until the thrusting instrument enters that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Revolve the cautery in your hand slowly within that small stone, and use it to perform the puncture until another section of that body enters through there; when this occurs, then the urine is discharged.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Return your hand above what is broken from the bone'dictor of separation, where it hurts and there comes out a reddish flow (likely referring to blood), and thus the urethra heals.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	May if this treatment is not within your equipment for any reason that prevents you from doing so, then immediately apply a finger to the stone (likely referring to some form of physical manipulation or acupressure), and another application up on/above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	When applied directly over that area between his thigh bones in this region of pain,
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that outwardly (or) remove it externally.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Return those parts for which they are fastened and cleanse the sanctified cords that have become dirty in dust; this is what you do on the ground floor (likely referring to when one returns home or back to their quarters).
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to use hemp rope for the pelvis, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other band above except when removing the belt from under the pelvis, at which time the waistband returns to its place and takes up the filth.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary for you to lift the belly upwards from below (to manage or correct), then raise your knee to its divisions above, and return must be done as discussed hereinbefore with these matters held in hand by yourself.
Capitol .lxi.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	From the stone of women's bodies.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pebbles are scarcely formed in women'thy thighs.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	May it be found at any of those places, making the cure difficult and forbidden for overzealous hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one of them is a strong woman with veins visible.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if you do not find a woman skilled enough to extract the stone when it is thrown out by the physician or from among women who have had stones, then what shall one do?
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The clear woman here knows this art, mainly in surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The location of the section over the breastbone in women is longer than that on the chest area; therefore, there arises a fear of invasion by sections beforehand.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to bring up water for you, then take hold of one woman servant who knows how and apply light pressure; do not overdo it.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	May if you lack it, seek a skilled midwife who has been trained in the care of women or a woman present at this stage in their birth process.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore take that present with you and command him/her to hold all the water you have given them until the examination of the back is complete; this causes concern because if the woman is pregnant, she should not lie on her belly but rather place herself at the foot of the bed (or lean against a pillow), indicating that they wish for childbirth.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if you crush that, command it to insert into that very place immediately.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	May it not be a wound; if so, the matron commands that her duty is to insert and position within the cavity of the sickness and place pause on their left side above the bladder area, apply what good concoction she has prepared.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if you suffer it, have the one who gradually worsens that of the bladder to their joints come into mind whereby they can reach at once within which part is affected by urgency due to excess in the body' extraneous humoral fluid.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Place oneself submerged in that position where the thigh of each leg is at rest and centered under it; this does not disturb the articulation joint from its connection with the pelvic bone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And if there is little flesh left for consumption; and insert or thrust the knife into that portion, and feel the bone—adjust accordingly based on how much you discern has been dislocated from that area.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	E understand that the stones of the body are causes: some few and large, like a lion or an iron spear, sharp as well as long and round, having ridges (or 'ramps').
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you understand how much spices are needed for what you intend on using them for.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see outflow of phlegm, adjust in the glass that has been three times washed and put your hand therein until it is discharged (i.improvement), then return to your work while the fever subsides.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And prepare you for those instruments which are used in extracting stones from humans, so that your help may be useful in their operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is due to internal bleeding (hemorrhage), then stop the area with powder, apply fresh lint and tight compression without further movement; do not remove what has already been extracted, for this will likely lead to death from illness.
E aprop cura la plagua.	In this translation attempt for an old medical text that blends elements of Latin with Italian,
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of your pain wanes on certain days, and you find it returning to its place, then return quickly to your work within which bounds there should be no excruciating stone left behind from such discomforts. (Note: This translation attempts to convey an old medical understanding that pains can lessen over time ('sharpness of the pain wanes'), and when this happens spontaneously, it's advised for one not only to continue with daily activities but also be mindful about returning any physical discomfort back into their routine
Capitol lxii.	Capitol LXII (This appears to reference a specific section or chapter
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Section on herniation, also known as an "erection" in medical terms referring typically to the pro
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is not simply an accumulation of moisture within the white circle that lies behind the coda (tail) of the intestines contained in what are referred to as 'guts', and it's called a "circle." In traditional medicine language, this suggests understanding how body fluids might contribute to conditions like hernias. Here we can see an attempt at connecting medieval medical theories with observations that indicate fluid imbalance or leakage could lead to physical manifestations such as the
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases it is within the parenchyma (the functional tissue of an organ) that nature itself forms therein where another humidity already exists; and this lies between the coda behind which we discussed earlier—and note, they are not stones but rather natural formations made by body fluids themselves. Here again in medieval medical parlance is a recognition of how bodily processes can generate conditions such as hernias through fluid dynamics within tissues that may be closely linked to organ function and spatial anatomy – specifically the area behind what was earlier described, which should not contain stones but natural accumulations formed by body fluids. The description stresses on understanding internal changes brought about naturally in
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The generation of this hernia is through debility which reaches the kidneys, causing these substances to ascend therein; and some are expelled by a painful thrust upon the kidneys.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	Here's the line-by-line translation:
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And when it comes to the joints for which this addition of water is meant: if we have mentioned here the white cistern that we have spoken about before, then rheumatism (gout or arthritis) subsides gradually during a long bath with its shape resembling hound'lausers, and the humidity takes it away from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If moisture is present in the patient's pancreas, then an abscess forms there and thus he estimates another issue (within himself).
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If there is fluid between the base of the urethra and/dictum blanche (which could refer to a bladder or similar anatomical structure), apply pressure with your fingers immediately.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to learn about the color of humidity, look at the exudation in which its form is preceded; and as soon as it enters into the trace whereby one becomes infected, examine the color thereof immediately present.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to treat him with iron, then if it is possible for you to consume the black bile that he has, do so and sometimes apply his flesh on himself.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When his position rests on any cause for few moments and takes breaks quickly with cloth covers.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Set your position on the left side of him/her, and order the servant to follow his right side, extending their arm upwards towards the neck vertebrae and lower abdomen section.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Returns pressure with a lath and divides the neck bone of the vertebra within the limits of the intervertebral space.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	When the second section is drawn out of line from below the jawline and reaches the chestbone where it can be understood by a competent physician.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and watch carefully so you don'thy not re-injure it; your excision is where healing may occur gradually as dictated by what seems possible to you through observation of the wound.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Through proper piercing of the bladder filled with water, and extraction of all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Here the translation of each line into English would be:
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that during your surgical procedure on the patient's cushion (presumably referring to an area of padding or bandaging), when you have completed this section involving suturing of the testicles' canal, return and adjust those lips/corners of the penis canal as sewn by his genitals together. Make sure it is done with care so that he recovers fully.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have corrupted the humors through another illness, then when they arrive at their vessels where it is collected by the releaser, remove them and attend to that which we mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May if water is added to any parts of the body, then you know that those are hernias; therefore examine that part wherein you have already performed an operation elsewhere in the abdomen; and if it's a task for you here as well, perform it accordingly.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and take two dry cloths and linen wrappings according to this likeness; they are for the extremities at which one may either pull or moistened lint, arranged in accordance with the structure of waistbands on pantaloons, whereby one leg's wrap is drawn up through the crotch, and the other goes down over the tailbone part, along with two limbs each upon a pair of hips/hips respectively, all properly adjusted within the waistband of trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with fine cautery needles inserted into its place where the bile ducts are located; and it so happens that you grasp a thin cautery needle, insert them therein along these bile duct pathways, until one discovers within what appears to be an empty bladder containing water. Then take those same fine cautery needles according to this method:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	e is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Return through that portal orifice, and it is set alight until all moisture has been expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Return the scrapings or cuts, and rub them with fine cautery flame; carefully inspect every part you can reach within where it'sin possible to completely remove everything present therein; keep your hand away from the fire so that it does not touch the focus.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Be aware that this operation is saving and increasing distance from flow of sanction, which is better than the procedure with an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May you encounter an abscess that requires drainage in the time of cutting or during caulcing (cauterization), or flow of pus; when this happens to treat it according to what has been directed hereinabove described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient'thy thigh is painful and there's no hope for a second operation due to its horrible nature, then perform an incision as I recommend; when you have verified it yourself, based on what has been said about the signs, that this hernia protrudes.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And when you seize the patient'thy thigh raised on any kind of cushion (probably referring to a hoisted leg with support), pierce through the ganglion in the lowest part of their spine, and pause according to the length of the body segment.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	When I have opened wide for all water flow through it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return your pace over the area of rest and apply that which is there as well as this one, in order to make the patient'thy limb warm from water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which is within for its healing.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	May it be that the water's opposition at this time when you pierce through there: and it is not pain but white foam in the muddy pools of children causes its resistance, preventing the treatment with water or tool from which the water will be extracted; adjust a small one within the pool.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	E understand that water returns and is collected for a few months or until those humors are alleviated; when they accumulate, according to the physician' extrication technique, gout passes its days within them.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol .lxiii.: This line appears to be an index or reference number
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	The given text in English seems to refer to a section about the treatment of "carnal protrusion" (likely referring to inguinal hernias). Here'
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	In the section about this type of protrusion, fears are often lost regarding major consequences; hence I advocate for its dismissal and restoration through better treatment herein described.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	When remembering that operation conducted therein with those instruments of mine aid/assistance.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So say that the swelling occurs in the joints where muscles are attached and they become wet due to excessive acute causes or impact: either it bursts into the muscles themselves, or because of striking/impacting forces.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	When the hue of ulceration corresponds with the body'thy colors and is not aggravated within it pain, then it is a severe ulceration.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When it is loose from where it has been fixed and its colour darkened (aplasty), without center lines visible at the location of fixation,
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May it be known that when this ailment is due to inflammation of the joints, and crust dissolves at those spots upon application hereof; but do not touch them with your hand.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is pained by an inflammation of the vein not be scattered for any cause and requires compression on these matters.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that this specific malady affects the other bones; and you must insert the catheter of the bladder, positioning them below these parts, extracting the one from the sigmistic area, disrupting the suspenders of the vessels, binding together those related to the urethra which will be torn apart.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if it is that flesh has already solidified therein (within), take out the excess and introduce what should be inserted.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an adhesion within a cause of the chest or between the breasts, then you must release that entire adhesion and insert it through round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the location of flesh behind is where it naturally occurs in this place (the adhesion), then insert everything you have gathered here, and extract it with a hawk's swoop as we did before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So once your operation is complete, fill the wool with oil and wine; take care that this treatment enters while it'dictly heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	The text provided is written in an archaic form of Romance languages influenced
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	From healing a hernia, it comes from the womb (or perhaps indicates that care begins at birth or originates within). The sentence
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The essence is encapsulated in an application that resembles a soft wrap around the testicles to alleviate them and make it difficult for exercise or walking over the hernia, possibly indicating some sort of treatment meant to manage discomfort associated with this condition during movement. The sentence suggests using something like a compressive garment made from mollifiable materials (softer that can be easily worn) designed specifically around testicles—this could refer either literally as a form of tight underwear or more metapthyically
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the healing process for this illness, it is done out of fear because we remember how faring with that which has come before led to suffering or complications (hernias). This line suggests a preventative approach where caution and vigilance are emphasized due to
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But we must consider that this illness may return as the first does, indicating a need for continued attention even after apparent healing or recovery from an initial episode of hernia to prevent recurrence. The phrase suggests vigilance and possibly pro
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Therefore it's said that you should spread the hernia over an elevated cushion (potentially suggesting to position oneself in a way where pressure on the affected area is reduced); and align your testicle suspensors at various joint locations; as well as cover those other pieces assigned, placing them underneath accordingly. It then instructs you furthermore that not only should these items be moved vigorously (possibly referring to exercises or movements meant for recovery), but also extend tendons of the genitals into depressions below knee bows—which could imply a physical therapy technique focused on promoting blood flow and healing. The phrase "extenda am les tieus ditz" is somewhat unclear, as it may involve specific anatomical structures (tieux) not commonly referenced in modern medical terminology; this part of the sentence suggests that movement or extension should be forceful for therapeutic purposes—it
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Return (make) your finger inside the calf bone along its cross section deep within where the veins have been discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Excavate all parts where you have extracted them from the scrapings during their removal, which are present in the sanctuaries (or areas designated for examination or treatment).
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	In those places place a double-pointed needle and thread it through the first ones where pus is formed, and place that other on their backs, holding their hands.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return those in place along the midline for every fourth segment according to length, and extract what is added by fresh or decomposed fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May you pour vin into all the vessels, provided that their testicles have been removed or they are being emptied for reasons related to these vessels; this prevents them from receiving any nutrition through the vessels and ensures they remain calcified (dehydrated), so as not to be beneficial in those places.
Capitol .lxv.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately recognizable as part of a coh
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	From the treatment of intestinal protrusion (hernia).
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the stomach from among the angles of its viscus chamber, so that with each movement those cords break out towards their ends.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either of the cistern or due to excretion from it, and you must soften these spices for their causes: by hitting, rubbing, shouting, raising any cause severe, or seemingly so.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When the humoral fluid (salt) is expelled through coughing for a long time without being purified and accumulates within the phlegm in the lungs, causing inflammation of the throat with its entrance into the chest cavity:
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When his body'dict signals that pain has suddenly struck with great intensity; various outward signs appear on the seemingly healthy side of the hip joint, and it is through evacuation of the bowel that this occurs; in essence, all parts of the injured hip are involved.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases it is that part of the intestine protrudes through the abdominal wall, and this condition is called an enteric herniation herein described.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some instances are caused by winds and others run into the opened intestine cavity here, where there is great impurity of blood from the humors (malady), causing severe pain when moved upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness's spices we fear lest it be avoided in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if you command the patient to return the intestine (belly) into its cavity as per your restoration plan and place yourself on their back between their legs, raise their cushions.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here is the line by line translation:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is within your capacity from that which has come out, take as much of it back into the body's cavity (orifice).
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And apply scraping here for those parts where the sperm whitish hard stone has been discovered within their penis.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the tube in water that contains semen (sperm), into the space between the white circle where it is connected to the cord of manhood, and also between the second circle, this releases whatever adherence there may be behind the organ of male descent.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	In English line by line translation of the given medieval medical text would be as follows:
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If any cause from within is found, then you must apply it immediately to the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Envelopes the limbs of the fields and places those around them vigorously, ensuring that none of the vessels therein lack cause for any ulcer not to occur hereafter.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And when the other ligament is grasped after three days at this place beyond it in length, holding its quantity equivalent to that of the first sinew and tracing out all around according to roundness, take hold hereafter from there with your hand.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Return the incision in the area of the hernia neck, where it runs and heals as we have recommended herein what has been said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Here applies the wool soaked in oil and placed on dirt; administers the bandage they have prepared (and some of them are cauterized with white vinegar, which we apply inside to prevent blood flow concerns that may arise from these movements), allowing the bandage to fall into place by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	May it be that the bathing of him/her is delayed, then his/her waterfall (urine) will back up, and rest over there until we have spoken what needs to be said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Return care for it with other remedies of diseases within which it has been healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing treatment
De hernia ventosa.	This appears to be referring to "herniation." In the context of medicine
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this case with a hydrocele, none have shown that it has been cured by their intervention (translation could vary slightly depending on interpretation). It seems the original text was discussing observations or expected outcomes regarding treatment of hernias and possibly included descriptions of various
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	On the first days said that it felt as if we had recommended in treating this hernia which was there; and so you should place ligatures on its surface above where liquid has accumulated due to action of our work, ensuring they are dry at the site before inserting them. This translation attempts to convey a description from an old medical practice regarding how one might treat a hydrocele – implying that initial days or observations were made about handling and potentially surgical intervention for hernias with fluid accumulation in some manner using ligatures, following which they need drying at the site of application.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when it is time for care as we have discussed, then that shall be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	The provided text is structured as if it's from an old medical manuscript with a mix of
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	From the constipation that occurs in the intestines (anguos indicates "intestines" here, and ropció can be interpreted as some form of obstruction
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some movements may break the intestines while having them (implying a situation where one might be dealing with an obstruction or disruption within the digestive tract), and they seek out that location likely referring to symptoms such as pain in certain areas of concern, which could indicate inflammation or another issue
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And none of the gastroenterologists (genetici refers to "gastroenterologist", a doctor who specializes in conditions affecting the digestive system) have any cause within themselves for these issues; and if they do, it is very rare – returns there at all times. This implies that such professionals rarely suffer from intestinal problems like hernias or constipation themselves, but when this does occur, it's not commonplace
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if the time is prolonged (likely referring to an enduring or long-lasting episode), there must be care taken within that chest cavity where they keep this object – and when pressure inside it extends, which can happen due to inflammation of that space being present in their intestines as well; thus softening the site from where it was extracted (this suggests medical intervention may include drainage or decompression). The mention here underscs a cautious approach required for such situations involving prolonged internal pressure, emphasizing attention to potential complications like inflammation leading up to procedures aiming at relief and restoration.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of him/her is with pointed cautery as has been described before.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here come some remedies according to this method: and the hump lies on their two bellies (hips), and it is sealed where there are broken tendons in the groin area, following its course for three inches.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Return strength to the white scimitar that is within where it was discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	When you apply pressure on that above the prominent part of the spine and press upon the abdomen' extraterrestrial body (this could refer to a concept from medieval medical theory where 'cipa' is understood as the tailbone or lower back, possibly relating to an organism perceived outside normal human physiology), do
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	When you apply pressure on the two prominent areas above the spine' tailbone and adjust with one of these atop another (likely referring to positioning or bandaging techniques), do this for treatment purposes, potentially aimed at relieving pain or addressing a specific health concern related to that area.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Apply pressure to the spine's extremity without touching or compressing entirely all of its parts and do not extend beyond this area unnecessarily, as it is for treating an inguinal (abdominal wall) hernia; these actions should guide your intervention in care. This translation interprets "extratz" to mean applying external pressure outside the spine—a common medieval technique possibly aimed at correcting or alleviating a physical condition, and here it is applied specifically with respect to inguinal hernias
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Care for that which pertains to healing diseases and, as you inspect the fields (potentially referring here metaphorically or literally), purify this area and restore what has been broken within; when it comes to a hernia of spine tissue where contraction occurs but there is no elevation in prominence at rupture site—focus your care on these aspects. Here, the text advises focused attention on healing from diseases associated with areas near or involving the 'ciphac' and emphasizes gentle restoration without forcing dislocation (as indicated by "no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura"), likely
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	The translation for each line of text from Old Spanish/Medieval Latin medical treatise into English would be as follows:
Capitol .lxviii.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript where symptoms are described using language remin
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Mollify the cords of the testicles." can likely refer to reducing pain or discomfort in the spermatic cord, which
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 "Moves gently the cords of the testicles in adult men are milled down by pressure between those parts and it is looked after." This line suggests a treatment approach where gentle movements or manipulations applied to specific areas around the spermatic cord can alleviate discomfort. The mention implies that this technique may help improve conditions related to the cords, possibly addressing issues like varicocele (varicoceles in patients), which is when veins within the scrotum dilate and tw
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 "Therefore necessary they are who care for him that makes water the male organ as his own, and ensure all around where it has been milled down is kept in place with their lips." This line translates to indicating a medical practitioner's role (likely a barber or surgeon skilled at surgical procedures) responsible for ensuring proper care of patients undergoing treatment related to the male reproductive system, particularly focusing on managing water influx that could be associated with conditions like hydrocele. The reference here involves adjusting one's lips (possibly referring to mouth-to-body contact or direct palpation) during such procedures as part of patient care and monitoring.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish to consider the excessive length of the milled-down cord as three or four times, and then perform a tight stitch." This line suggests that when there is an indication for further intervention due to significantly elongated cords following treatment (which could refer to spermatic varices where veins become enlarged), additional procedures might be required. Here the excess
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return your attention between the seams, and tend for care of other afflictions within that heals and fields fall away.
Capitol .lxix.	The provided text appears as if it were translated from an archaic or historical form of
De castracio.	It seems you've quoted Latin, which suggests medical termin
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Here is the translation line by line:
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that goutacheiro (gout) occurs in two ways: either through drawing away or due to the rupture of a segment.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When the pain is caused by suffocation, the way of operation is that we form a water cage within which their lungs can become soft and elastic so they may hang downwards while the guts are being untangled inside them.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return these things into your hand so that they become solutions and do not appear suddenly during handling.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May pain occur due to a crack and separation (fracture), where you hold the beast and press on the coda of its left testicle with your hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Return the suspensor and trace over each joint within that space which two limbs process through.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those purulent substances that you have caused within yourselves.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not lay upon those of the chest any cause, but rather apply it gently over the areas where there are fluids (likely referring to regions affected by excessive humors or body fluid accumulation).
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This disorder of impotence is better than what befalls through constriction, for when strangulation occurs due to tight bonds that the creature wishes to copulate with.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Return care for what is inside that has been healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Given that this medieval text appears as if it's blending Latin with
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The phrase "de la cura de hermafrodozia" seems to be referencing the treatment or care for le
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The care for hermafrodozia in men involves two methods: one is to apply warmth where the scrotum spaces are located (near the testicles), and another method addresses a condition characterized by an abscess that resembles female genitalia, situated between the testicles. Here we can infer this text relates to medical practice for conditions affecting male reproductive organs during medieval times when modern terminology was not available or standardized as in contemporary medicine.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some of that body fluid present in the scrotum arrives,
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special kind: and it'sin relation with two testicles of man taken together (a few) at the beginning for that reason.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure involves three kinds of substances: two from men and one specific for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And that you insert those bones adjusted into where it escapes from there, and take care of those other illnesses.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men in which semen is produced within the scrotum (not treated nor opposed), as such:
Capitol .xxi.	The provided text seems to be instructions or observations from an old medical treatise related
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	About the slowing down and appearance of flesh in women." This line suggests that it might discuss reasons why there is a delay or lessening presence of bodily tissue (flesh
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The lentigo is adjusted according to natural causes within which it suffers and in whose regard; and certain measures are magnified in some women up until they resemble men, particularly during intercourse." Here the text appears to be discussing hyperpigmentation (lentige) on a woman's skin that could change due to internal factors or societal expectations. It seems from this translation it may delve into topics related to body image and perhaps sexual dimorphism as influenced by cultural perception of beauty, which were relevant in medieval times when notions about femininity often hinged upon alignments with natural laws but also social norms regarding women'thy roles within society – including their behavior during intimate
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Thus you take away the excess of lentigo from your body or on some other, by dipping and inscribing." This line implies that there was a method to manage hyperpigmentation through practices such as 'dipping' (potentially referring to an application involving water) followed by mark
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And mainly in the skin of those who are not yet born (pregnant women), to prevent bleeding." Here we see a suggestion that treatments for hyperpigmentation were thought to be particularly effective or necessary during pregnancy, perhaps due to hormonal changes affecting pigmentation. The concern with 'ble
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And it is proper that you care for the wounds within which healing occurs." This line underlines an aspect of medieval medicine where attentive and appropriate treatment was essential not only to manage symptoms but also
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May birthed flesh is the kind of meat that does not enter into her womb until it fills that space; thus we must observe when she enters those parts like a cock's (and this will be our first call to action, "maladies in motion"), and then take care within which heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De curacio de alratica.	It seems that you have given me the Latin term "Curaci de alratica
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The text snippet in question appears to be a passage from a medieval medical treatise written possibly with influences of Latin language structure and vocabul each term can suggest:  
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	An accident caused by illness has occurred, and it is pain or due to underdeveloped flesh or subtle hernia.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If there is an indolence undernethy (under the silk), and it belongs to their mouth sores, then with your tool you will break that obstruction here.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied over the sore lips and when pause (pressure) is given to the points indicated by their touches of the mouth corners, it means that they are applying a technique for localized pain relief or diagnosis at those specific areas in line with traditional medical practices.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Here comes the sentence to translate: The woman is over her two thighs extended, and with force she inserts that delicate instrument so that it can be broken through and the obstruction removed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And cover the area with wool and oil, pause there to hold it at home for a day or until solidified; this prevents further complications.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the scab is thick and hard, then it needs that you insert a splinter of juniper or myrtle into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If it is for flesh (meat), then place that upon a cushion and incis them therewith.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And these are the remedies that make stop the flow of pus and blood, as they take it in, with aspirin, mercury, arsenic, adjusting the bile from the liver.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the entrails from protruding improperly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Eugena that for hygienic purposes over several days and administer saltwater therapy to him.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Return its cure through the other healing within that it becomes healthy again.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some pains occur in the uterus naturally at birth of other parts, and these are covered according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	May if due to apoplexy (stroke or head injury), the condition of the skull which is in the brain should not be aggragy contrary to some measure taken therein for treatment.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The provided text appears as if it is written in an archaic version of Romance
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Regarding the treatment for hemorrhoids, tail (prostate), and red throat inflammation within the chest of women:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Embarrassments are appreciated from the openings of veins within which blood flows constantly, and when these embarrassments become hardened masses (gout), they form their own symptoms.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And in the division of those things and their respective humors, I have directed which ones receive care and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it's said that hemorrhoids and thrombosis appear when in the womb they do not manifest feelings; there is neither cure nor sword for them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those over which the mother' extricates herself through her touch be healed by them that are treated upon it.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in moisture and extend her limbs (or put on wet cloth or linen), and mark those areas with needles, it means:
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply powder on those that flow from one of your inscribed bites, so as they feel like and resemble them when thirsty for salt (which indicates an excessive humoral imbalance).
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into stockings for an hour, and return them afterwards in cool water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of bile persists, then it becomes thick and sluggish in absorption and secretion involving mercury sulfides and gold filings and similars.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	When flour of barley and honey is mixed with water, apply it externally on the two limbs of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction is detached (meaning perhaps an abscess or some form of purulent swelling), then apply heat with two breaths and scrape it off at the breasts; otherwise, adhere by means of two blows to each nipple area.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request what requires stern attention, so that you can see the second thing I have mentioned here in speech.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In caring for that which is healed inside.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The provided text appears to be a mix of medieval Latin-influenced language with some
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Given the context and attempt at translation, it seems you've quoted fragments from what could possibly be an old medical treatise on treating a puncture wound in
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	This line appears to be a complex description of various types and symptoms associated with wounds, including:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have spoken of these illnesses and their respective spirits, as well as the remedies for them in division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you dig out in this tract of osteomyelitis what is found inside when doctors extract it from patients, and if you want to know how they perform the operation with iron tools,
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And when you consider that the pain from inflammation in their abdomen is sharp and accompanied by pressure and fever; if they clutch at it, there are no chances of perforating through them, but rather treat with what helps within until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Evening when you clasp the woman onto a couch that provides pillows; let her lie on her back with her shoulders aligned to the midsection of her abdomen, spread out hips and pause at times for breaths between her belly movements, holding each other'thy limbs. 
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here comes the line to translate: E prophe illa donisa segua per latrier et administre l'instrument quomodo es evocu eon le orificium de la mater, forma dolendam cuiusque causae fariatur aplicare.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you are about to administer this tool onto the master'gy of the woman's womb and only what from the instrument enters into her uterus should be allowed, that is, the seed and head (the embryo), leave nothing else within or outflow.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	May it be so that the tool is larger than the patient'thy skin, then you must pause on its texture with small pauses to prevent the entirety of the tool from entering into the patient's skin.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E when you pause the liquefied matter flowing down from above in the patient'supine position, and hold their tongue with your instrument, rotate it within until overflow occurs into the moisture of mother (i.e., vaginal fluid).
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and is touched by the hand and moisture and heat (the body'thy environment), then cover that part with a linen pad soaked in warm sea salt applied to the head at the base of the skull (at the nape).
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the sickness is expelled, then you pause in a bath filled with crushed or fresh oil where there might be any swelling; and stop the flow of blood in the section before Mother'thy womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause above the mother and on the clean woollen pillow immersed in water where they are boiled:
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it will be cured in two days with oil that is put into wherein healing shall take place, or when they become well again.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the patient has an infestation in their womb that you have forbidden from treatment, they suffer because of what we had discussed earlier regarding care for them.
Capitol .lxxv.	The given text appears to be in Medieval Latin with influences from Italian, Spanish,
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To translate the given medieval text into English line by line:
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the matrona imitates in her sustenance the figure of natural childbirth through labor and delivery phases; when you touch the woman as she expresses at different times, seeking to smell the air above her, it happens because this essence upon them comes from where they come naturally (from their parts), which is why wise ones understand that this part represents a second natural figure. It's nourishment over her head and for the secondary child; either suspended or hanging downward on the umbilical cord belongs to it, held by its hand.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you turn those joints, the belly of him/her will be compressed to ensure that his/her unborn child does not move while they are on their back and is cleansed with this second fluid for purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is not natural and unlickable occur when you enlarge upon your feet and the body of yourself appears before your head, and the weight of yourself on your legs or atop your chest; therein I transform over one's own spine, taking forms like those of oneself that cannot be licked.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary, it is for the midwife who must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against errors and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When showing his entire figure in them, and it is understood therein for water as well as being above (i.dict to the heavens), thus representing him entirely within these waters.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is present in her womb naturally, and it exerts strong pressure on the part difficult to bear, then this burden makes those who carry (the pregnant woman), causing them pain due to their heavy load of phlegm from barley flour soaked with oiliness. At times, when its movement further weakens her state, she experiences severe discomfort in that area where the fetus is located and releases body humors filled with fenugreek boiled in oily substances.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Place a metal instrument between yourselves as you sit on it here below; another holds that within its tongue, which contains moisture from this wetness.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Precede gently pressing upon the woman'thy belly until she delivers her baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not done already, then the woman is considered encrusted with pus and seed of honey (and possibly flaxseeds), which are applied by hand.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the patient' extraneous teeth have been removed and placed at the table (presumably indicating dental extractions), then you must gradually reduce those same pieces back to their proper place carefully.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the patient does not obey internally (meaning refuses treatment or fails to follow medical advice), then:
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the masses are not torn down and come out through the abdomen or waistband of your clothes, then you must examine those areas carefully to extract them from there, which is what a doctor would do (Forugh).
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of childbirth upon her feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly is on their feet, and you push them downwards, make it small, lift up that which they hold in their hands (presumably referring to limbs or appendages), stretch these little ones out gradually:
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he enters the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make that protrusion conformable according to God'supreme will.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no water cure available that has been recommended by the doctor, then return the little fetus gradually within while maintaining breaks at each subsequent stage of nature; this will heal the leakage (presumably referring to fluid accumulation or loss).
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited to have all the fluid that we recommend for treatment within us, then take muscle of old age and softened rubber, and crush them thoroughly in the mortar for good impact, applying lines on the fluids extracted from a woman' extramundinary parts (possibly referring to womb or other female reproductive organs), which hold their essence.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Return that body part (the joint or affected area) into water immersion until you achieve relief from the conditions of hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts of it are softened and then made moist with myrtle (myrtle was often used in medieval medicine for its supposed healing properties), do so under the pause, there.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you are under sub-fumigation (perhaps referring to a mild form of treatment like steam bath) for an hour, then your pain will surface on the chest and rise out through the lower part of their belly into compression, which makes it so that they feel as though going forth.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Evaluation of his body and its limbs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you engineers gradually insert your fingers; and have the woman stand on her knees, with their feet bent upward (arched), placing those same hands over them as well, continuing to complete these actions.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here it gradually presses on the patient's abdomen little by little, and applies what is taken from their feet with fingers as they are prepared in portions during labor stages.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not out yet, then lift their legs and move them vigorthy, applying pressure where it's over the small intestines gradually until the fetus enters its parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	1. Return your hand and guide the little one into it gradually, commanding the woman to express herself within its opening.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eye salute predominantly hangs from one of its most.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When it is reduced in her size (the patient), even if you cannot do so yourself, then lift the woman and carry her to that place.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it is not possible to move, place the leg on the bed, and actively massage the hips with forceful movements; administer ointments made of mucilages as advised.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has come upon you, then take that instrument over the bedpost (probably referring to birthing tools or instruments), and study its use in reducing discomgy (likely meaning pressure on the body part during labor). Then form a second natural shape for the fetus, and make it turn within itself so that enters into one's own cavity.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Eye salve applied over expanded belly and its facade is at two from her navel.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the woman holds her hand over the fetus and gently turns it little by little, that makes things easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is time for them to urinate, and they pause on the back of their body where we have applied oil and mucilage beforehand.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exitus (death) prepared over the side; likely referring that someone has arranged or is preparing something related to death on a particular side,
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When men suffer from horrors of this plague, think about it; and you must involve the second hand inside your thumb so that moisture can be expelled from it.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is prolapsed onto the face and chest of him/her, then you insert that part into its belly button, to prevent it from being retained or delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And lift the fetus into its divisions within while stopping that second pause which covers it up, and order the woman to compress herself with some effort, should God will or not allow escape of any labor pains.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or many offspring.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that joints move naturally without pain, and sometimes up to three or four times a day is normal; but if it feels strange and tarts out inside you, it may be due to natural causes within yourself because there'se nothing wrong with your body.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Given the mixture of languages and medieval medical terminology in this text, here is a translation line by line:
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult for them to carry their burdens and come upon us with unnatural figures as described by you, then attend to these children accordingly.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is subtle and gentle in her actions, providing ease and delicacy, as well as timeliness, then according to its entire form she brings healing along with it when prepared by this skillful woman (midwife).
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what formed within the womb and abortions occurred.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some become pregnant in the month of May one to four or five (and up to nine), and I must verify if a woman has had six abortions, which causes pain measured by the esteemed wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxxvi.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical document discussing treatment methods for certain conditions
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When the fetus is dead, here comes another line of a medieval medical treatise in Latin or similar rom
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus (fet) in the division of medicine and it is not defiled, and today we are speaking about using a mask (opperacio), consider that if the woman is healthy (sana vertut) and has no accidents from which she might lose her purity (perdicio over ella es temuda), here comes your course of action.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When a woman is lying down on the bed and her head inclines towards it while her thighs and hips are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister takes hold of that limb or the one bound by ropes, in such a way that the patient' extrusion does not occur beyond necessity for removal.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Return yourself moisture for the patient'dict mouth, using honey and aloe juice and lentils of him/her own.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Here the midwife applies her hand over those things and their fluidity in the belly where the umbilical cord remains;  
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: At convenient locations in water: therefore consider whether your head is prepared for it, and remain there until you are secured by humors of yours or on your chest (or back), mouth, palate, beard, neck bone, or any other parts belonging naturally.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If it is upon his feet or in the back pain between them (the thighs), then it appears on their chest side (between the ribcage and diaphragm) during deep breathing.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Where the tongue is in the middle of her mouth and bends at that place where it'dict between the right side of the body (hips), inserting its ease into this space, remaining there until reaching the cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place another cushion under him/her if necessary to keep the tongue attached and not extended too much in accordance with his/her throat length only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	When gout is present throughout the body, it shall be treated herein such that its pain may subside like teeth grinding away within one'se mouth for healing.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the fetus is dislocated, then tie them up where it has been pushed out, and make sure that everything inside goes back in there again.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	May it be that the swelling near the other is an abscess and cannot be reduced by compressing this one; therefore extract that from wherever it's located so that everything comes out, and inspect or incise that here within its space or in the groin area where all of it has come out.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And when you make things in the other part of the body (presumably referring back to the chest and feet), here is what should be done for both areas, please clarify as per medical necessity or customary practice by do
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the fetus is large or there's acute pain in its abdomen, perform an obstetric incision (childbirth surgery), which may involve inserting tools between the dilation and fissure of the cervix to extract amniotic fluid with instruments called "alundat", whose forms correspond to those used for other purposes within this toolset.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is in pain and compressed by the shoulder blade, then it has been opened inside where the moisture that exists within the chest has become secreted out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it does not become complicated and if you can endure the pain, then cut through the head as soon as possible according to what is within your power.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there are outflows from the belly or it is inside your body, then you must pierce that which carries moisture within it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If it is about their feet, then the treatment of yours will be gentle and directed towards the mouth of your master (the doctor).
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	May it be that you have contracted the belly and chest (venter et piéce), then take out what will cover your hand, which encircles over the area so that fluid can flow within those places where it currently is located.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May it be that if the other members are bent and turned back to their head; may when the maiden's mouth is open, insert her left hand into its base (below), secure her chin with this same hand, draw attention to the crown of their hair, and place one or two pins in your lap, drawing them toward those lips.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted by scab which causes pain in it, do not touch upon them; but rather administer effusion for moist fatty causes from before.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	When applying plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on the patient'se chest, then if possible use a needle (a form of cautery), and administer that which we have mentioned for the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then place him in pillows and extract (remove).
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When there is no cause of secondary origin found for this issue.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all of your treatment preparations, then administer what we have discussed for the care with these tightly compressed bandages that swell up due to mother'al influence (a medieval reference likely related to inflammation or edema).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have a flow of bile rising into clear streams and administering the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And there was seen in his stomach a woman who had died, and placed upon that other instrument already employed herein (referring possibly to medical tools or devices), and also on this dead body itself lies another servant (potentially referring metapthyically to an internal organ).
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Unfortunate it happened that an ulcer has long been present on the patient' extrémité(s); and now there is swelling with pain in the limbs.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And when he calls for care and has been treating him long ago, yet his child is not strengthened or cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And so you press on him with some strong constrictions causing suffocation, and bite his arm, then pass over it for several days, another day's biting of the other arm; he has been too much astonished that there is not an organ in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Thus wrap the patient in cloths, and extract from them stones or bones that are present within their bowels, having done so for a long time; to correct him by means of a small bracelet.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of turning about in which she is lifted up:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how they bind the limbs freely in which two hooks are located on the ends of each foot.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Even though this subtle virtue can be pain or of ebos (ema) or wood from boys:
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additional measures are inserted into the mother'se mouth so that they can be taken when you rotate the specified organs through these procedures.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another resembles that subtle and soft putrefaction undernethy therein placed:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Such pain is from iron or lead according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Even in the limb's extreme part two additional supports are added twice a time, and the length of these additional supports is one hand span, and their height from which they hang is two hands high.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish to open these joints (probably referring to the knees), then make your woman lay on her back with her legs hanging down, and there she will be where it is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Return your hand over the area, using the instrument you have with which for eminent treatment as per the mother'supreme appreciation that sets within whereby she has placed it (the medical device).
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method of treatment that they used in the past:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impact that makes it push against the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship that he knows about which contains his head (cap) grand
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And when assembled with forceps at the extremity, they are used repeatedly and for some time; similarly using them as handles following this form, also repeated frequently according to where it is inserted and counted upon.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of ashes few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an arrow has a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an arrow has splinters:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of forceps by which your teeth hold where the head of the fetus is contained, 
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a splint has two ends at which the head detaches:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two leather straps:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are being used and when they multiply the spices of it and prepare them according to quantity, place the instrument on its platform and put out some people for preparation tasks.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you must not perform any actions with those instruments, for their necessity cannot be avoided.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the second extraction (assuming 'De extraccio' refers to a previous action or context not provided here
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second extraction (second stage) is retained by the childbed, you must command the midwife to hold back her saliva, and perform that stirring motion for delivery, placing your hand firmly over the mouth of it and on its nipples if necessary. If after doing so she expels, then be silent as an offering (perhaps suggesting a form of respect or submission).
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a vile and pierce through the covering in that herb where its heat has burnt the mother'se mouth; apply therewith warmth and rue and anise and camomile and crushed Arabic and cassia wood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave and placed there on top.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Return your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out of its cavity; place a cannula (a thin hollow metal tube) in the mouth of the patient, and insert it into where the emesis is occurrified within the curvature of the stomach. 
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	When that movement is required as mentioned earlier today, and another servant has arrived quickly (hastily), to do so now at this time of day.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May it not lead to exacerbation of this treatment, then command the maid (nurse) that submerges her left hand in sesame oil or millet paste, and inserts it into his navel; as you have found another one therein (inside him), insert that second one too. If inserted alongside within the belly button's area, press them firmly together so that they do not come out again:
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Accordingly, where joints are dislocated right or left side and easily caused movement difficulties.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Here is the line-byse translation into English from medieval medical treatise text provided:
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted, we have already prescribed the cautery applied by striking and medical treatment with water from streams or medicinal plants.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not all causes recommended have been removed, watch that you do not disturb the one in process of abstraction—but if what has entered from within is present at the woman's hip joint and needs to be treated with bandages or pessaries; these will purify it for upcoming days and dissolve any remaining impurity.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the humidity is high and it rises to the head and stomach area, then medicines are administered under fumigation when necessary.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May humors of ancient origin be brought under smoke from nutmeg and dried fruits.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of tool with which a woman is undergoing menstrual and secondary secretions containment must be maintained,
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Such pain is of bone or stone (sic).
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When subtlety is stopped under the navel and largeness above the focus (bellybutton), and superficial effluvia (discharger of humors) has ceased in the chest's arms,
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	E where that tongue is swallowed within what'thy below fumes, repeat another time on itself and so again iterate.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of healing for an infant' extruding from the navel not pierced through (or unpierced).
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Much child does not pierce and enter into their buttocks, which are subtle and limp.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Now turn over the apron that she has pierced there, and if not already done so, then pierce it with a splinter of gout stone, and make sure it does not touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Return your hand above that which is smeared with oil and vinegar, and take care of the wax within it as if sent by God.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is inflamed, pause in the throttle for several days with a catheter inserted, and observe when the child will start to feel discomfort again.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And you have already coated the apprentice'thy bottom for congealing of pus or abscess; hence once that this congealment is secured, and it heals with what we possess from cure and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of caring for those ulcers that come unexpectedly.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The abscesses that come into the lower parts of digestion and large intestines, which occur from behind or in one region:
E es una fistula o motas.	It is an opening or abscess (fistula means a tube-like passage in medical terms;
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that ancient connection is releasing moist or sticky white vapors and some movements are coming from these openings (fistula indicates an abnormal passage; poylurys can refer to a discharge of fluid), indicating the presence of infection through those fistulas. Here, 'nodacio' refers back to what was previously mentioned as either moisture or vapor release characteristic of conditions like gout where inflammation and possibly an abscess (motas) are
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	These penetrations are troublesome for the reason that they cause exacsion and discharge (excretion); some of them even have an outlet or opening through which efflux occurs, leading to other patients' contamination; others use this same pathway as their exit site. This indicates a spreading infection possibly due to these penetrations that require careful management by the medical staff and appropriate cleanlinthy measures such as using salt (malaute of egressio) which is historically known for its antiseptic properties, thereby preventing further contamination from occurring through this exit route. Here 'egressio' refers
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	These fistulas have movements within the space inside them and into the bladder (vesica refers to urinary bladder), as well as between the thighs where they penetrate, entering both legs' uterus/body cavity ('meat of vergua')—and for others who enter at the juncture or junction of hips and buttocks (notz refers to perineum). Here it underscores that fistulas can lead not only to discharges in different areas, such as urinary release from inside bladders due to these abnormal passages—potentially indicating complicated cases where there is a connection between the urogenital system and skin
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When a penetrating and non-penetrating (or closed) abscess enters the anus, it is that you place your finger inside of it in the anus, and insert threads or iron into the fistula when there is no threat.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that situation the humors enter into subtle forms of lead or hare within which you feel the humor or hair, then:
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that one of them for trouble from indigestion or worms and windiness, as we have said before, then understand they are non-permeable, and thus attend to your care.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the urethra, it means that its purpose is to extract that patient' extraneous urine so as to make this location suitable for medicine and thus solidify in treatment herein.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May it enter the juncture of the thigh or into the bone and cause pain throughout the circuit, then this thing is called when I attempt to enter here if not in a state where entry into the bone does not occur, causing further pain within the injured part; which must be quickly dressed with powdered substances; for it has no place in that medicine, nor can it be solidified.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those perforating ulcers there is not a cure, and the treatment by these doctors works weakly on them which they firmly hold onto.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May heal as expected according to your recommendation and that which has already been done; nothing penetrating or outdated remains in this treatment process.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva les cambas de lu intre elles, les coysses sien entro ventre d'eulle, i apropo entra tenta plom o era si est en fistula turtiusitat, per veil la loc on que sapias.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that person feels pain from bloating into their belly, then as soon as you intervene with your fingers in the area of their belly, do so gently to avoid worsening their discomfort.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a push in the belly and perceive it as something that wants to enter through there (belly), then understand for certain that this is penetrating; therefore, do not attempt anything at all here because if we have said so beforehand, now avoid doing any such actions.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May there come back again healthy people who are sick in bed among themselves.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	From the medical treatment for which you hope well, as before indicated, and into which you introduce that flame with care according to the size of the ulcer'thy hole; placing it there until it reaches outside the groin area; and repeat inserting those three cauterizing items inside whereby you understand all these contracted muscles have become sore like a feather quill from an inkwell.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If it penetrates inside and does not enter the area where you sit (the rectum), between that point which is expected to be flesh or cartilage, a fistula forms on the surface of the colon, then dry out the surrounding part of the fistula belonging to the abscess content, and once dried it should go back into the affected spot within where extremity of the penetrating entity resides. And through this way (the penetrated object), when moistened by its secretion again enters that place from which limb-extremities originate, freedom is achieved for both subject and fistula.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Return mercury (or some form of treatment) to those veins that are constricted and not ruptured by any cause, using the penis cannula inserted into them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May it happen that the flow of bile sometimes seeps between you and your abdomen when those stones inside are moved around; in this case, use instruments for cauterization at the focus or acute medicine: thus, with these wounds healed after being adjusted by these tools, and pus exudation from moist humors reduced.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	So are the remedies in which we practice incision and extraction; when they have been restored, he is cured and need not fear further iterations.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has entered into the belly of him and is lengthened on the surface of his body; then insert your finger therein within the abdomen, and examine around this area.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	Therefore if cent ten (which could mean 'hundred' or might be a misinterpretation) times the attempt and between you and her it is not flesh but bone, which has propensity to penetration, then there will be no operation in this place, but by trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	When the cause is to be administer each of three remedies: or that which cauterizes it as we have decreed; or after restoring its cavity so you can intervene with your hands and provide care, preventing contents from spilling out into the abdomen, treating ignorance-driven ailments; and ensure this chosen remedy is strong if needed. Or extend that garment and moisten it therewith for intervention as we have decreed, or use another sharp instrument of acute action to mend fistulae infiltrated within the cavity you can touch with your hands through cauterization; then perform restoration on all remaining flesh inside the wound if poultice applied outside does not consolidate and opens an unsealed ulcer, treat it further for abscess related to swelling.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And when some draining is finished according to this method: it happens that you insert the catheter into the fistula, and in the abdomen'thy surface touches both the navel and on your belly-button line, where inserted tube of a surgeon enters through an incision made for perforation of extremity(s), as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that sheath of flesh or enclose those fields, and attempt to insert your foot within the foramen where continuation takes place.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May it penetrate into the margin of the anus properly inserted therein; and withdrawing that part, you adjust both ends together again, each time freshly washed for one or two days until may come to insert said end back inside flesh where those carnities (flesh formations due to intestine protruding) are between its extremities.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And take care that what is inside be solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	May it not be penetrating if the orifice of the fistula is closed off as such in any way you prepare, but rather its purpose to prevent bled blood from flowing out (and so entering your body), and apply thereon wherever necessary that which heals within.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine is what forms the opening of the fistula: its curvature causes acute pain and the other division does not cause such sharpness, hence it'thy needed to apply remedies only when necessary.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the seam of hemorrhoids in which there flows within that place.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras," either between the buttocks as if they were made of flesh and these are similar to fat, or because those areas contain carbs.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From those small and large ones that the sanctus cor verifies during those times and are one entity, and their motion, and from outside the womb, in the limbs of him/her.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Whenever those who suffer from the hollow of their buttocks due to scant moisture have urine that is lemon-yellow or a little droplet in consistency throughout brief periods (as indicated by the color of the body), it suggests humidity loss.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The cure for that which was introduced into the bowels is to command the malady (disease) so it settles and expresses itself within wherein bubbles appear, thus entrusted to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you bite and press down on those parts with your tongue, and then apply pressure to their veins as needed for these reasons.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May it be that the pincers are not in those places due to humidity there and softening of those, then take those up with a sharp cloth or iron bandage, and remove them from those spots using tweezers; apply powdered herbs on top for further treatment after cauterization as per subsequent steps outlined earlier.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Return that care for it until they are healed within themselves.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the belly does not expire (indicating vomiting), then crush it with pebbles in which small biting is done, and wash it with that water present in the bowels where drowsiness arises due to evacuation when the belly contracts.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is humidity and dampness, and it is when you grasp those with your finger or tongue that they become moistened; once done so, apply care to them with whatever means we have at hand to treat what has been said inside as healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When all is done, and only that which belongs there remains not removed from it, thus allowing the excess of the sickly heart to flow away from that specific area.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand over the belly, dipped in oil or on a cushion; and place it there above the colon, commanding the humors to stop circulating.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is inside the box when it'dicts time; and when it expires, take care of those within it who are in need thereof (treated with oil or other remedy).
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treating fistulas (This translation assumes that "fistulas" refers to some sort
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 During continuous walking, cramps occur due to cracks or natural stone formations. (This translation interprets "motas" as pains/cramping and assumes that the reference is likely to an environment with rough terrain which could cause discomfort while moving
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	When they are ancient and not beneficial in that medicine, then you must strike the spinal point or apply your own grease inside where those pains have become wet with discharge from below, which prevents them (implying an abscess) from healing; accordingly, take care of these properly after consolidation.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When you hold those raspy things powerfully inserted and they become scalded, then take care of them so that they heal properly.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of poultice application, it is effective.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Be aware that the armor is closed and not fully tightened according to the color of the body' extrinsic parts at the end of fastening it on; there are pains throughout the body, mainly in the joints of the legs and feet, due to which you must provide relief.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when it is inserted into the loop of the joint and has been caught by the forceps or on one end alone, and removed from its place completely, take care of that very much.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then burn the second that came before in his head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers be pointed and round on the surface of the body, and they frequently come into being in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for its care is that you extend and insert it therein or in which you newly introduced the faithful one within whose box (the patient's body cavity).
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it here (at this place), as we have said before, at the focus or in urgent medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now it is removed with respect for inwards and outwards using the same tool that was used earlier.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May there be a small or large pinpointed insect protruding on the surface of the body that causes discomfort in any position and it bites into the flesh, causing pain all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Caring for the patient requires a catheter made of gut or coil spring steel, and it is strong enough to occlude inside what holds within that circle formed by said canula in its parts; you turn your hand around on top of the canula while inserting whatever has been placed into the circuit of this formularity, pausing there upon reaching the bone surface, removing (eradicating) it from their flesh.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make a hole with an iron or silver wand according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The part below the canele is subtle and silent (not pierced through), wrapped up such that above it, one learns its absorption and revolution of this thing.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to burn away the worm as mentioned in the process of burning the intestine, proceed with this method of treatment using a heated instrument (cauterization tool).
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In terms of instruments used to administer purgatives (cleansing agents).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Here are the translations line by line:
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of Chrestian large and small:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube below, in which the bag is tied according to this methodology; and it's at that point where the bag was previously fastened multiple times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	E the limb of him has been laid down, which is deaf (so it cannot hear) like a lion at rest; and in one side there are two abnormalities, and on the other aspect another defect, with its size corresponding to the coarseness of the rays/light and small addition made.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	When it is a bag where they have placed the potions of beast'dictum or sheep intestine and its handle is one hand.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	When pierced by force due to awkward turns, and if the space between them is where its thickness lies.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine forces it out through pressure or pain, withdraw as much as possible; and if sleep comes for one whole night due to this disorder, there may be improvement in vigor tomorrow.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May you castigate that within the abdominal sores and eye illnesses of him/her, then repeat the use of caustic inside until healing occurs.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is bleeding or fistulas in the belly, then gently and carefully apply pressure with the sponges, those are what children use for criteria (to stop bleeding).
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treating diseases or pains (Note: "curacio" may be interpreted as a term
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 Of treating diseases or pains that suited the free man, and you shall speak of these ailments and remedies according to their complement (Note: This translation interprets "curacio" as treatment/care for illnesses). Here'sinvolves an understanding of medical practices within historical contexts where professional health care was not universally accessible. The mention of treating what suits the free man suggests a social hierarchy in access to certain types of healing or medicine, which could have been more
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 So you shall declare that the illnesses are diverse, according to how they manifest and where we apply bandages (Note: Here "plagas" refers generally to diseases or health conditions; 'faytas' likely means appear/manifest). This line indicates an understanding in medieval times of different ailments presenting differently based on their symptoms ('how') and the body area affected. The term for applying bandages
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 And for the causes by which they are made sick (suffer from illnesses), it may be due to stone woolen bandages, or splints of bone and wood; lancet pricks, sword thrusts, axe blows, lance hits – resembling those that cause them harm. This line illustrates various physical interventions used historically for medical purposes before modern medicine was developed—implying treatments such as bandaging with stone wool or splints made of bone and wood were utilized to heal injuries which could also be a source (cause) of illnesses. Here we see an early recognition that physical trauma can lead to health problems, suggesting some understanding by medical practitioners at the time
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the humors present in these body parts (head, chest, back, belly, waist, and limbs) also exist like worms crawling upon them, resembling those of the members' organs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	Even recommends some treatments for that reasoning and guidance concerning other illnesses.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When you eat simple diseases (presumably referring to certain foods or conditions), but remember the complex ones that will come up at mealtime; they arrive for dinner at third-course consumption.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So when you experience simple pain in the head without fracture, consider: if it's due to stones or illusion, then press and bleed on the occipital part of the head just enough; do not delay too long until extracting from that area where there is apendicitis present with cautery abscess. If no other cause prevents cauterization, mainly if this appendix inflammation consists mostly of pus (few), then treat it quickly and remove as much as possible immediately afterward.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	When it is time for counter-treatment of the affected area struck by illness, and you must watch over the groin to prevent distension from filling (replenishment) with excessive fluids or heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May it be that if any cause of meticulous care is prevented, he will reduce the intake of food and not approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When pressure is applied over the ground or where they are swolthy ill and it drizzles therein in which one becomes seizable: if you apply a healing cauterization, cover with oil rosemary seedlings or herbs to ensure immobilization of oneself.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are secure in applying the caustic and pause over the ground, if it has recently been applied and the dust hasn'thy settled where advised by appropriate small applicators.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed and become cold, then place your hand inside as a covering until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May it be if the child is large or due to lack of space and similarity, and their lips are not adjusted for sucking as recommended by its own piercing? Then adjust those parts accordingly according to what has been recommended for the piercing on them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May it be discovered that the child has broken bone and skin, but not restrained by you with anything more than a small suspensor; then attend to that very same thing carefully using medicine so as to restore flesh back into its place of origin (the coccyx), ordering the wound fluidly fed on foods wherein growth occurs: heads of cabbage and forms similar, until it becomes composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If infection is present in the navel and does not adhere to the bone, then you must drain all this pus and apply care to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases the artery or vein through which blood flows is not severed by medicine, then ask about that vessel; and if you have to create an incision there, cut it with a sponge or ligature (together), provided that what has been mentioned does not worsen your condition. If necessary, induce vomiting until the flow of blood stops because the artery/vein was severed by cauterization once they have healed up.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pains are simple and small, then the cause of them is windiness; take this powder over those places until the air changes it there.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manipulation of talcum powder is this: take one part oil pressed from seeds, two parts dragon'dict taken and not extinguished, three portions prepared; all mixed together well-grounded and beaten, the mixture filled in herein, congealed with sea sage within which it rests when applied.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply firmness to that area with pills and pressure thereon without allowing for sliding while it rests so as not to be moved by the patient until healed within herein lies medicine'supremehealingremedyinsideherewithmedicineonlyallowedtomovewhenpatientreststouchthearea
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one uses only cauterization alone and is not currently under its own seeds and sanctus (dragon'se) essence,
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation takes place on the large humors when it is decided that they should be stopped over those and are still unrestrained in their channels, which have not been disturbed by air (possibly referring to external factors like weather).
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air is altered, and especially in summer, you do not understand where this powder should be placed, then take care of those places with stronger medicines that we have mentioned before; place them there so they can form a paste (a poultice); or use flour from bread made with water and honey as an inside treatment when it is heated up. Take proper care of these items while the cure takes effect in your patient'dict
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you break a bone in the body, and it is small, then extract it with force during movement.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	Here is a line-by extralanguage translation of your medieval medical treatise into English:
De las plaguas del col.	From the humors of the colon (or from the disorders or imbalances in the li
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 When the soil becomes acidic in the colon (or when there is a difference or imbalance), it makes no distinction between the sickness of the belly and that of the head; both are simple to treat medically.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May you inscribe or arterialize the nerve of the colon if it is a nerve, not in its current location but to prevent treatment with water that causes violent spasms, similar to vinegar and semblance for their eyes, which they do not look at as such.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No joint does not stop from any cause of madness; the substance of nerves is also feverish and continuous flow within it, which causes all limbs to be filled with it.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If the healer is interested in using folk remedies for treatment, then when washing with water (or possibly non-rosinated oil), apply some herbal decoction or infused olive oil as directed by this methodology; heat and stones used during bathing along with liniment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the patient is large, administer stitches or trim their lips, and take care that they are cleaned until healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth or pain in the lower parts of the body, it may be due to gout as well (in that location), then pierce through where necessary with a trephining instrument used by doctors for such procedures.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the patient there is an embedded artery and blood flow has been obtained from it, then separate or dry out that one, or apply cautery to it if necessary; this will prevent fluid accumulation (or effusion).
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May you have secured the vertebrae of the spine or all, and thus protected the veins in the neck; do not touch that area with your lips on its ridge above where it meets the backbone, but adjust them over their natural curve, strengthening this part through structure alignment. Leave it for a few days until healing occurs within those sutures or fractures – and ensure appropriate care to prevent any movement inside which has caused injury from worsening.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May if the child already has pain in the bone, then I will strike that place; and if there are fragments of bone present, take all those you can from them; but if it is not possible for you to enter inside, let water be introduced so that the child's flesh may swell up (and come out), and its entrails shall also be separated and removed.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the patient is young lately, then grind over that powder which has been recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If there is an opening (fistula) in the child, then treat that with water from which they will remember to come back to their head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From illnesses of the chest or resembling ones, when it falls between the shoulders and is felt in the space between them, on the chest or armrest (chair), back, handle, or breastplate:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or cottage wound and at times the depth of such an injury, you must consider that sometimes wind from the foulness affects when the wounds are open (bleeding), for then knows well that the patient is dying (their condition).
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is no depth in the patient and their wound has recently healed, then you pause in that first hour after ointment application, without stretching so as not to reopen the sore deep within it and bring back its circulation into the chest and reduce swelling, perhaps pausing again with oil applied, cleaned up daily.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the unguent is not at your disposal, then rest in the bath with water drawn from below where dirty waters flow to that sick fluid may come out; and make sure the malady (gout) sleeps on top of the muddy ground so that clean water can circulate within it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May if already three days have passed or more without worsening the malady' extraditions, and at times other beneficial measures are taken by you; then take care of that as well (for recovery), and look after all necessary treatments while it is healing.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	May it be that the healing of him/her is released, and as long as this holds true, you have already cured a fistula; therefore take care of them in your capacity (as a physician).
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the swelling is due to a gap in the space or wound and it's simple on the skin of the thigh or chest, then treat that with water previously applied for stitching if large, or powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there is pain in the bone and if those stones are separated from it, then use forceps to remove them at that time.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them be drawn out that the vermin may escape from them; this is how their removal should be facilitated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other unexpected illnesses in the other body parts, health is restored with the same water that we have mentioned before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From "the humors of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfalsh (disposition) that makes you ill in your stomach is either great or little, or wandering.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great one sometimes comes pain in or to the nerve of it (the nervous system), due to their intrusion and because they are tightly and subtly bound together.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	Disruption is difficult due to other maladies, and their reduction becomes hard if you do not remove them from their place of insertion immediately; this causes swelling in the breast as a result of what they have inserted into it.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the best resolution would be to remove it there, as it is difficult in these specific areas mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You understand that surgery on the abdomen is divided into four methods, and if you want stitches to be common ones used for other diseases of the body, they should correspond accordingly in their sewing techniques.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other stitches communicate with each other (and perhaps also directly within the abdominal stitch), here comes:
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Here comes your recommendation for each of you regarding examination and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So when the child is small and suffers from a hernia for that reason, it becomes difficult to reduce (the hernia), either because of its diminutive size due to birth trauma as we have mentioned before, or if the swelling occurs in the hernia due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when water is taken in, now cover the infused herb that you have submerged under a cloth alone or dipped into water while coughing up phlegm and using mustard seeds, pepper, and pumice to aid in resolving the inflammation within.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	When certain measures have been taken in which water has entered the cavity where inflammation is present, it is better than water alone for its resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine in which it was lodged with water and vinegar; thus being drained by a little cause from within itself.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is possible to release the patient from this treatment, then divide the breakdown into small parts with an instrument that has been previously drilled in (the joints).
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary treatment is better when it'sinvolvement of cutting or drying up what needs to be removed and cleaned out.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the tool, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp turn of the limb, and another non-sharp turn, and a subtle movement; neither is it about the subtlety of bone – this one turns acutely narrowly.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the intestine is expanded and protrudes out of its cavity, it'thy reduction should be done according to his/her natural form if at all possible in that location; but better yet than elsewhere on him or her.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and it's in the lower abdomen area, then you make the hernia protrude on their backside, and place cushions undernethy legs; if it’s below the abdomen, put a cushion beneath their head and shoulder pads placed at that part.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	In cases where you must attend to large pains and those that travel,
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the small pains you have prepared for them (the medicine), apply it where your servant is between your five limbs bound together; this tongue holds everything whole in its mouth and adjusts the lips of him/her, as well as lifts from that which has caused a stitch to any other.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here is the line-by end translation:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E sian les agulhes migrar entre groceza i subtiletat, quar les agules petites mover l'ieulement de la carn; ec es dues grasses dificil entrament en la coda, e donc per aquo couvre que sian migiaren en subtilitat et grosseça.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	Even if the needle is fixed in any of the patient'thy extremities foreseen therein, to ensure that flesh does not disintegrate and provide a barrier before its solidification.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they are not sewn for a long time so that the patient is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These surgical needles contain sharp stones for use in small wounds; it is enough to have one or two of these tools available for their stitching needs, and possibly more than that may be required at the site itself.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Might the second stitch be common: and it is that you attend to the four limbs' ends—the neck and legs of the cistern (which may refer to a surgical procedure), using a needle with delicate finesse and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has entered these four extremities (hands and feet), reduce the needle of that piece from which you are working, to ensure that the wound cavity upward rises due to this intervention partway down into the ground, so that suturing is done with strong cloth as in such bandages.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When there is a pause between any of its stitches, it's about the quantity of the main body part in question.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch is known by men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	E am such a suture was done where the patient, who resided in his belly and had been sick on one bed with major internal bleeding (from two palms inside the wound), due to bowel disruption internally or externally; therefore, you reduced that which the intestine had protruded through for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And within the spaces of fifteen days or so onward, it has been consolidated and healed therein, with care taken for movement therapy as time goes by; its condition is being discussed in their arrangements.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E other doctors had not healed him; and the wax that was in a place where it wasn'thy to be applied nor did any medicine touch, perhaps cured by magic light twice daily for two days while submerged in honey water within the lamp.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two kinds of surgical threads according to what has been narrated by Parola.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with stitching the neck and insert the needle from the cut flesh into the wound area,
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters into the navel and in that manner it traverses all of one's body, holding where you have inserted it with your hand; then make to enter also into the other extreme part of my limb from which came out the needle at departure.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have had your effect on that which has entered, then make another entrance of the same in that extreme end of the body segment from where it originally came into this limb; and let the external cavity of the spleen here present be penetrated by the other extremity of that very segment.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When the tool you are using permeates that which it is intended for, and enters into its cavity at the end of this limb where all of it goes in,
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Here begins the procedure on this side of the patient'se chest, and take that out to where it belongs in that other place above (presumably referring back to a location within the body), then withdraw that needle from there; likewise withdrawn is what comes outwardly.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And apply another poultice and other, and apply such anointing within what you have already done according to that example exactly.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum total of this sewing maneuver is that you stitch the skin with a thread in which wool has been used to make threads for hairs; hence, you must perform one suture on the part of the extremity of the tail, and leave it until it's completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second type of suture that Gualia dictates, and this is by word and recommendation from him/her; it's what you should use to stitch such middle parts as they are skillfully sewn together by competent healers for their natural fit. Apply another part made or prepared herein on the other extremity of that same body part, following Gualia’thy instructions accordingly.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you keep the needle at your designated part from departure, and push that into the departed portion of it there in this place, and turn over the two ends of the catheter; then rotate the needle so that penetration occurs through both ends of the catheter.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	When you rotate those joints, and allow some of the lodged parts within to enter back into their respective cavities in two limbs opposite each other relative to the body'dict:
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than simple sewing and it's for which previous memory recalls.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is called "The speech of Guiliel
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if the discharge is thick and mucus from the stomach has been rectified with two needles, so that you insert into these areas several threads (suture), beginning at this inserted thread where you must introduce another one according to those sutures which are sewn onto their chests tightly.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When there is a disturbance in the abdominal area (belly), it becomes difficult to sew here as compared with other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the healing of medicine for children be considered a cure for other illnesses.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	When the cause is when you continue recent labor at their sanctified place and alter that with which air changes it (i.e., during intense physical activity or exertion), return the intestine/hernia to its cavity, placing your hand over this area so as not for it to protrude outwards on top of its natural covering skin.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the humors and they have entered that which is at your present time within, causing pain in joints to become hard and swolthy of fields; let them be consolidated by poultices and watched over with care—and for this treatment similar as those used for other maladies when it has been healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Mayhaps if you do not have the medicines present at this moment, rest here for a while until pain begins to subside and change them today as directed by you or in teaching moments; provided that you are healed from these remedies when plagues become simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin will communicate through injury to the principal limbs, then submerge wool in warm or scalding oil (or vinegar), and pause it within the spaces between joints and legs where insects may enter/exit.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, they often come and go, when touched lightly it becomes cramping tightness at that place, especially if the obstruction has entered into its cavity, causing a penetrating outflow of pus.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Be aware that this one, which is from a large intestine (boule), heals quickly and effectively compared to those within the small ones (smaller bowls).
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When attempting difficult healing for that which is called "gegunu" (likely referring to an inflamed joint or lump), it does not receive cure by poultice placed in all; and this occurs due to the large number of veins present therein, as well as their size within those same areas. Moreover, because of its subtlety concerning that body part' extrinsic nature (possibly referring to how easily affected or spread throughout), and proximity to nerve structures.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what comes from the soil is fabric and you obtain that which has just been woven therein, then with your current thread reduce those bulges on a piece of cloth to where they were before reduction.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If space has been passed and black or dark substance has entered therein, then you should stretch that faithful hand over the spot where it is degenerated, in order to make the flow of blood return.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here is the line by line translation of the text:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when you have inflammation in the bubble (bubo).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When you hear a disruption in the intestine and it is small enough to be returned inside with cups of water at once, then approach that which was causing pain in your belly due to percussion of the lancer (a medical instrument), being old pus or an ancient abscessed fistula formation accompanied by bubbling action within you.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Now you apply the treatment to him and it may cease subtly within itself; as long as the focus of healing is maintained in that area for its solidification.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	E you have already secured the location firmly, applying pressure over there where an evil incident occurred in your belly; and no longer allowing such malign accidents to occur within their digestive tracts filled with food or drink, placing them between bathing and exercise routines.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when experienced healers find that while in the budgum (intestine or hernia), it is required as per this methodology; take for binding large caps, and adjust the patient'thy lips accordingly with those bindings. When you clasp onto them and tighten your mouth around these bands, detach only a portion of that which has protruded from their mouth above the cheeks (offering relief to any swollen or exposed areas), it remains attached; thus prevention is achieved without dissolution.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And if you want another measure of the first one here and there according to the quantity of all the humors in the body, do not cease making them into appropriate measures for each other as required by their proportionate amount.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Return that and its contents to the cavity, and remove those attached appendages within it so that the hernia will heal in itself; do not harm any of them for the malady' extraneous benefit (to prevent additional damage).
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced by a thin thread which comes from the patient's animal-intestinal thread, pushed in with a needle; and you hold onto these intestinal ends of threads, wrap them around your finger, place one end on their body part (likely referring to where they were inserted), insert this into pins/thorns attached to that area piece by piece, reducing it as the disruption occurs.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This incision for stitching is only a second means of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	May it be so if the child is large and wide, mainly if in one of the small intestines, then not a simple matter but rather subtlety involved, and there's no cure for all at once.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You understand that when all young and apostomes become weakened and develop ulcers, they are not consolidated or healed by a complete armband for any length of time without detachment; wherever in the body this happens universally it is known as an abscess to us.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	E fistula according to truth is a tightly woven, hard, white material of which there is no pain and in which the flesh heals as it would with ordinary puncture wounds; therefore that softened flesh grows again (i.dict), namely pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is wet for those with moisture in their bodies, and if the dampness has dissipated within some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved herein, and it varies in amount and thickness; it's both plentiful and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here is the line by line translation into English:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes and their symptoms are medicine in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	When you have thus made an effort to understand the treatment of this abscess which is caused by surgery,
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Here is the line-byse translation into English:
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore this one of these fistulas that is according to the current illness belongs to diseases difficult to heal and does not receive care or occupation; it requires effort and lack of knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth to the wound for which no treatment has reached here as mentioned, and you hope for healing from it, then take up arms or iron, and if this abscess deepens further after your inquiry, seek out whoever it may be related to.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then seek that subtle lead buried beneath your body which lifts and curves due to its own curvature.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an obstruction in the opening of the ulcer that causes horror, it is not within your power to attempt over it directly on yourself.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now apply the poultice over his body using your own poultices and rubs from their bodies; through which moisture is carried by those other poultices and rubs of their bodies.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood upon all these causes and see them clearly as if they are an apparent fistula or in joint spaces near (or far from) the connection point of nerves, arteries, veins, or any other locations where it affects you personally, then proceed to treatment according to your confidence:
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And when it dries out according to what is said by the physician of him/her, and hold back that which flows in that filtration and what has arisen within the body (from decayed flesh or organs), and from food residues or impurities absorbed into the body during nourishment, take care until it heals.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May it be that the fistula is of deep length and secondly rectified; then you must insert that into the prepuce as far as possible according to your reach, cleaning all its corrupted parts entirely; apply wrapped medicinal pills inside therein, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped tight.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	When some humors that have entered need to be purged for a few days through the cavity of the fistula caused by decay, thus acute medicine acts on all such humors within the space of time in which they are expelled from the caved area of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Return that which is within in wax that creates healthy flesh inside while it heals.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this remedy, then you should apply a second one as recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the cause of fistula is within us and you must certify this, then inquire about that very dry one as recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause related to vein or nerve or primary member issues which we have already mentioned.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If you discover your bones and there is any decay or blackness within, then remove that which contains the rot completely; take care of this substance so it can heal inside where it resides.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If you are not healed and still have to brace with the dressing as before, then understand that you have not reached total recovery from corruption; hence immediately examine closely again and perform carefully both purification of the wound area and cleansing above it at the lower end, and restore what is left.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, eat; but if not, then understand that the decay is deep within the body core, which has not yet been achieved, and hence you must lay siege to that as well.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bone is decayed or can be pulled out by you, then now pull it out using delicate forceps as required for the matter.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If your bones are moved (possibly indicating a condition like rickets or osteomalacia), then exquisitely extract all of them without leaving any cause to weaken your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May if any contradiction of the moisture occurs in them and they have not fear or mistake within themselves; then inspect those ligaments or bones herein present, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to use the bones of your hour (hips), then rest on a bed that moistens the mud wherein it lies and place thereon until those very same bones, which belong to cartilage and sinew, enter into their environment again. Keep the softness intact so as they are not consolidated; build up the section you have carved out in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having feared (if you are afraid), place your hand over the pot of boiling oil above it or under Egyptian linen and among any other oils they use when stretching those bands/ligaments, which will then separate from their bodies as a result of these actions.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	May it be that there is a great bone obstruction with the bones of change or appearance similar to them; and what has been ruined from within may only last for so long until such time as restoration occurs in their flesh, at which point he will return this corruption back inside where they belong.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the part from which it has come is great and if rot (corruption) has already reached the bone marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close that place where corruption came in order for the whole thing inside this location brought by corruption to be inserted. Moreover, once closed, take care so that what was placed therein is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you recommend that they go into their thighs so as to ease and assist with your work.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of age around XXX years old experiences pain in his knee, and the mucous material from the disintegration inside the joint causes significant inflammation or abscess formation within it; this condition is not due to external factors affecting him now.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And when the focus extends due to errors made by doctors within that time frame, and they have extracted bodily materials causing pain in it, their cure will be carried out slowly until the fistula is healed, with poultices applied on this wound where everyone applies oil or moisturizing substances for treatment.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after several doctors' treatments for over two years, there was a focus not on these fluids but in the arts of healing.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And here is where their cushion and materials run through this large channel, and already the patient'thy clothing was completely covered and its color was lemon-yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then insert the attempt into one of those devices, and ensure that the attempt reaches the mouth.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Return and examine quickly those instruments and turn them over for all parts of the bedchamber (which refers herein broadly to various aspects related to patient care).
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And now you have cut and incised into one of the bones within which I had dislocated it, having crushed and deteriorated that portion already corrupted inside where there was implanted in the cavity.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Adorn you should collect what was discovered about bone from my examination and preparation of it.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And when it was not in the bone but that specific degradation which had been cut off and sealed up, there had already been a reduction.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Return your hand for the restoration of health by medicine that strengthens over long periods; it is not yet fully restored.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Return and explore further on the second part of the bone above its initial discovery, and continue to apply force to the bone without interruption.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And when this fluid appears before me as that corruption, and I have performed the fair healing of him/her and restoration is not yet restored;
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And now you have discovered it elsewhere and proceeded to restore the rest of it piece by piece, until an inch has been restored inside, at which point that part was extracted from its marrow, and then they were re-established using medicine, thus consolidating bone healing.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	Here it is not necessary for repetition in the operation of limbs and joints; instead, focus on the disposition of the humors within them and their tolerance to pain and fear of death, as they will act throughout all hours due to excessive evacuation syncopes.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it heals completely, and nothing remains in the hard flesh of bone; good fortune lies with how you place your body within its own limbs, restore their vitality; and conversely there is no backlthy movement during walking nor harm from any cause for him.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May if the bone is protruding in that area where you've been manipulating it: then take hold of that second by this method—hold onto its sinew and tighten it at the extremity of that which has come out, stretching that first thick cord; place that third over the flesh on what remains of his body so as to draw back the flesh towards the divided parts until you reach where you want to make an incision. By doing this, you will avoid cutting through any remaining flesh there and leaving it exposed or damaged due to your cuts intended for treatment purposes only.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When a blow or strike is applied timely on the face (chin), when it's not forbidden for the sword that does not corrupt the flesh, then do so without hesitation.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	When the saw is used on the damaged area slowly and if it appears in the cavity of the bone' extruded due to damage but not apparent at first glance, then another grinding tool should be employed for further work.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decayed and not prominent, it is one continuous division at another place; thus deterioration occurs in all parts of the body where such a breakdown happens—here must you discover the entire flesh: apply force immediately (to stabilize), and pinpoint that first part from which the continuity occurred.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And as for the seam at the site of decay, it is small just as we have discussed.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If decay is in the joint, open that corrupted joint, and cut off where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If decay is in the continuous flow of joints, it is not by chance but due to something else (likely an underlying medical condition or cause).
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or on the skin/face, it's difficult; however, if you seek out where this decay appears and remove that portion using any means within your power to do so, then correcting such a condition for yourself can be done without causing harm when not against nature (body) itself.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Be aware of where the screws and saw teeth are meant for these bones according to their situation, as well as how prepared they should be in terms of size (grossness/smallness), flexibility (subtility), length (parvitation), hardness (duricity), and rarity; so that whatever tools you prepare will be suitable for this specific operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	E understand that this operation concerns the specialty of the tool with which you are dealing; when you have yourself as great and comprehensive knowledge, not only about these instruments but also witnesses in matters of diseases, then you already possess what is necessary for your treatment according to the needs of the patient.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And when you have formed in the body of this chapter, use these simple tools for your procedure that will be experienced by others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw: (This line is incomplete as provided; it's likely
Forma de autra serra:	Shape/Type of other cautery: (Similarly, this line appears to be request
Forma de autra serra:	Shape or Type of Other Cautery: (Again, as the sentence is incomplete and la
Forma de autra serra gran:	Type/Shapes of other cautery large: (This translation suggests that there might be mention of a
Forma de ray:	Shape or Type of Ray: (The context implies this could refer to
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Its head follows the shape of a star key'nail (assuming 'cap del ray' refers to an instrument used in medical treatments), and its points are like those on staple nails: presumably, sharp or pointed tools similar to modern hypodermic needles. This line suggests that there might be specific designs for different purposes within the context of medieval medicine — perhaps indicating how certain
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It's not about convenience but rather that they are meant to be rubbed on the joints when corrupted (possibly implying physical intervention), or it is a large-mouthed vessel: This line likely refers to an alternative treatment method, possibly involving manual therapy for "corrupt" joints. The mention of 'large mouth' might indicate some sort of potion taking place in
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape/Type of larger cutting tools among others: (This line indicates that there are various instruments, perhaps surg
Forma de razori menor:	Shape or Type of Smaller Cutting Tools: (Here the text is asking for
Forma de razori lat:	Shape/Type of Razor Linear: This translation requests information about a linear-shaped
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape/Type of other cutting tools also used for treatment here are the ones made from stone and steel blade respectively; these shape or types refer to instruments like saws (stone blades) and knives (steel swords): This line suggests that medieval physicians utilized various forms of sharp, potentially curved stones as well as metallic cutting tools for their medical procedures. These might have been used in surgeries, amputations ("punhal descentment"), or to manipulate tissues
Forma de lu:	The form of Lu (presumably referring to an individual patient
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 The shape of his scrotum in which there is a concave curvature.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of alternate shaving instrument:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of other curved limb's shaving method:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small scissors like an attempt:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of cutting tool with which bones are set in place:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of alternate instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another instrument; this resembles a sharp tool and its tip is compressed here between the bones in certain joint regions.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of cut that corresponds to the level at which bone is pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	E is the patient's body part bent into a triangle and has an acute (sharp) nature.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and somewhat resembling the causes that have been mentioned of wounds and incisions and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the joints of limbs and bone interlockings.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are softened or because of internal/external causes; when you have treated that corruption with these medicines and the cure does not relieve, sometimes the corruption proceeds to a limb which is touched by no cause at all - then insert this member into the hole made for it so malady escapes from there due to greater damage than mortality or malignity.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the name of that person, is their limb was blackened where it has been lanced or where bleeding occurs inside that body part which they carry with them and spread throughout the entire body; therefore, you must know this within yourself.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And if it is caused by the disruption of certain causes, such as scorpion stings or lead poisoning or dysentery and appearance-related factors,
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the decay or percussion is in the said limb, then cut and do not give space for the decay to enter into it.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	When you access the cavity, then make an incision in that part of it near the fireplace, and do not give space for decay within where smoke enters into the bracket area of the fireplace.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that occurs within your arm in the joint'supremeconjunctions_, then trace it into the crotch area inside the armpit.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another decay and time takes away the joints, then in that case it is the death of the humors; therefore administering a different cause for cure depends on the amount of vitality.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When there is a swelling on the body of the foot due to its deterioration, then insert it into one of the nuts (possibly referring metaphorically to inserting something firm like a splint or support).
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you climb up on the leg, then cut it entirely through.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May you enter into the cavity, then incise within it at the junction of the intestine.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already reached the intestine, it is not an increase but dissipation in him/her, and he/she must remove the malady from death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	E the method of inserting or sawing your limb is that you tighten one ligament at once in the part where you want it inserted, and another on its location; extend the minister's (doctor/surgeon) a ligament to all parts as needed, stretch out other leagues for them also. Separate the flesh between two lath sticks within which everything will be fully revealed before anything is implanted or cut into it. Apply and insert or saw accordingly.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is placed over all parts such that it does not touch the affected location and drains away from malady-related injury and applied bandage wound heals properly:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If you soothe the flow of blood when working on it, then cauterize the wound immediately or pause and place some powder to restrain the bleeding; return your attention (as a doctor) into treatment as soon as possible.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return its injured part back to where it is connected by proper means and take care of that within which healing takes place.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you recommend to him that which enters into his body here in the foot, this matter about which I have spoken to you today, what has happened to it within your foot due to cold and is assembled by fire from the hearth.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When that decay has occurred for the first time within your body as a whole, take care of everything on top of it (the entire leg).
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Here comes the translation of the source sentence: And thus that home prepares for themselves medicines to go towards the limb where it is tormented by pain and heat, insert their foot into the joint, and heal therewith.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Once in time that physician has caused harm here within this body of his patient'dict.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now it has come upon me and I am compelled to reflect the excess water that rests above the surface of my medicine, purify the body' extraneous matter; there is no more external accumulation moving towards this area within myself.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When he is removed from me and returns back to his earthly state, having had all of it prepared by that same house and cured completely, he restores himself to my care once again.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This sentence translates to: "It has not been healed by this accounting but serves as aid for what causes this illness and signifies its meaning, accordingly the treatment.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of care for the navel and quality of enema administration with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess forms in the hard parts of the body and its duration extends within which a collection of diseases occurs, it is cut off and pierced through; disease enters into this opening, similar to how one would introduce water with their hand (a poultice), using a thin cloth beneath as catheter. It does not reach beyond any further corruption nor enter the bones or nerves/tendons—it calls for suction without inflammation in the bone or nervous system, and it is not termed fistula:
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Even if there are spaces within that infection spreads to any part of the body, it is then called a fistula and will not increase.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure for him is that you immerse his entire thigh in it and mostly when it' extruded as a cloth (serum) and held comfortably so he does not stick to the location due to its decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	May you hope that the belly will stick and that such deterioration has not occurred due to any previous action, where there is a face in the navel, then tend to this with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es que consideras al sinu," and if it is great, and when you smell the brake (cathartic), which contains oil, wine, honey, and salt received in Egyptian medicine, adjusted on a vessel, poured into the area where the medication will be applied, so that its essence reaches the melting point.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Return your own water that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse this place within him, strengthen his orifice with its liquid, and keep medicine inside for as many hours of need.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Return that which is outside, and let it flow for so many days until the curve of the belly has been purified, and the modesty restored its moisture.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the ulcer cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ashes of charcoal water, then cleanse that with water and honey mixed three times, also wash it with wine and honey mixture; because of the property of honey to purify and cleanse, mostly when excessive dryness and stiffness have occurred.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have given some drinks and feel that the belly has swelled up, then cleanse what is in it which causes the flesh to become loose therein.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And if you need lids of wax and oil dissolve them here, or use some medicines and ointments that have already properties they possess in the treatment of these substances within their course through the intestines; what do we apply.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the fluid in the rectum is stopped where it should not be received by the catheter, then you must gradually increase that small amount and pause at intervals covered with Egyptian or frankincense oil inside until it has been increased.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the opening is sufficient, then you should attach the lips of it with stitches and place as much quantity in there so that when using the clyster (enema), it fits properly inside.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the patient' extricated from their bowels is elevated to the parts above in such a way that it causes pain in those areas, when the brac tightens within the curve of the body where flesh has been generated therein, then this also contributes to the discomfort.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to dry the cavity within the bone as you wish, then pierce that which prepares your limb for binding and ensure there remains nothing inside the bandage that could cause discomfort in your limb.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	E apply prolonged resting remedies on the comfortable curve of this patient'setup, extending them over their cloth garments.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Here comes the translation of each line from Old French:
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that person who is over the flame of the joint (which warms up at any moment), preventing moisture from settling in their chest area, where it can become lodged and cause issues.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	For that you know if what flows from the bowels is hot or cold and indigested or properly digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you should take into consideration the location of that fluid in it (the body), if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medicine lasts in the manner of this treatment and sticks to what is placed on the body'softhey (likely referring to a poultice or some form of dressing), once you have it, apply the remedy now or tomorrow morning; when removing the grease/dressing, change your cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May there be spaces left in the channel where subtle viruses reside; do not despair for its adherence, as healing occurs within these very channels, and it is precisely here that disease originates during the generation time of flesh tissue when illnesses manifest themselves.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the swelling in the belly has persisted for days and is not reduced (the abdomen does not shrink), you will understand that there'dictates no adherence; if it takes a long time to achieve this reduction, then apply decoctions of medicines accordingly. And when these remedies are wet with their substance and excretion, they should be dried along with the dressing used for suppositories (suppositories).
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when that appearance comes about while not moving or lying down on it, apply heated ointment to where you have inserted and used; use franincense, myrrh, unguents, powders, spread over the hot substance thereon as well as above the drape and gown worn by him who has been made ill.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, then you will understand that corruption is in its early stage within them (the patient), and investigation into bones or hard limbs/tendons; at this point, treat it as a fistula. As instructed above by superiors.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of cure for corns and cracked nails added and digit cutting.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When the disease has spread from this wart on the patient'seither foot or head, and if it extends in other places as welland when treatment is prolongedor during healing timeas for an ulcerous lesioncurative cauterization of a chronic soreheals rapidlywhere hands are used to keep pressureon affected areaso that intestines do not protrudeoutward and the blackened skin surroundingthe wart turns darkblack.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have obtained that same water which we discussed in the division and do not prevent your care from proceeding, then drain off all excess moisture with iron (draining out humors), and afterward cauterize the wound with said water, for such treatment will be beneficial.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May the bone be and the wound heal, and their additions go back to the body's parts, beginning with bleeding that comes from where the instrument pierces flesh, which will then push it into place while keeping pressure on said area until whatever corrosive medicines have acted within its limits; meanwhile maintain care for this bandage inside as long as healing is complete.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May it be that if the decay is already present in the bone beforehand, you must insert and extract your tool from there because at no time can a diseased bone heal itself within it.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the wound and contusion go into the said area, then you should trace that part according to its memory (or recollection of past events), and take care for it so that it heals completely.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If upon the toothache there is percussion or probing pain, and at that time intense suffering occurs when you cut into the groin, then clean the area with salt on the skin overlying the transverse abdominal muscle (spleen), ensuring it does not enter deeper than where the tooth pulp enters - this is why a severe throbbing pain arises from an excess of flesh in place after cutting into it; therefore, take care that such location yields fluid with sensation.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May adjust it herein among the healthy men who are lean and muscular in body, fleshly complete with bones and skin alike.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When it is in his nose at the joint'dict or when it is inherent therefrom, this may be due to its natural presence in the nostrils of those who are ill.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not one born from these dry nuts become ill and he who is born at the joints severely suffers gout.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Of those who are fat by nature, their section is light and it'dict that you must insert the thick part into the spleen stone (calcium).
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May those born at the joint of origin find healing difficult; therefore keep yourself protected from it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May those born in this place eat nuts (possibly indicating specific dietary advice), which you have inserted into their body through the mouth and placed inside the hollow of one of those convenient instruments, paying special attention to ensure that what is put inside heals properly.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May consolidation which occurs between their movements or due to home births they did not experience themselves, or through cleaning up children'dictor infants', causing dryness inside them; thus when you secure that consolidation within where it naturally returns, these individuals recover.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the given medieval medical treatise:
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If there appears to be congealing in the hand'thy location, then dry that congealment as it becomes ready and adjust according to the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From weakness of limbs, they become swollen.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	When varicose veins are present, and the swolthy, melancholy humors flow into the limbs of the body, primarily in the hollows (craw spaces) where travelers or workers rest their legs, mainly at these locations:
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now administer purge-cure for the body of black fever several times to induce vomiting and apply pressure on the patient'thy vein named 'vega.'
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	1. May the cure be their iron and that it is made clear and drawn out therein: one method is for it to become transparent (or clarified) and entirely removed;
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return that one back (likely referring to some substance or patient being referred), and command it/her so as not to consume the black foods which bring forth their illness.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cauterization for varicose veins when they become filled and return to the malady area.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation according to this method: when you raise the cushion of the thighs (camba del malaute), if it is for pressure on the skin, place it in water and secure the cushion underwater so that they wrinkle up and the veins become swolthy; or if exercised without bathing, then the limb will blister.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Return the tongue tied and scrape out the vein from its entirety up until where it appears according to feeling; this is what you must perform each time that pain descends into darkness (depression/blackness).
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	When you exhale from your throat that white thread is tightened around it.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And take your instrument and insert it into that space which is raised and situated under the chest, holding this device in one hand for an hour at most.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Return another section of that same section and scrape the area just below where the vein enters on its respective side; for three days have passed since then.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Elevate that and incise it in the second part of the foot arch, and lift/elevate that within which is for the next segment of the foot, lifting/elevating it above where it lies over that particular one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Here comes the sentence for translation:
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey and extract and elevate (presumably referring to some form of treatment or procedure), then insert a double-pointed needle made of iron, thread that through the inserted needle with it, and lift outward while turning your hand over in entirety within which he lies.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Egad you that it is not cracked; if indeed it has been broken, then it will be painful to lift and come up over the groin for that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the entire atmosphere is outgathered (meaning when all of it has dissipated or cleared), then rest upon the place where the woolen cloth was immersed in water and oil rubbed together for healing that being inside.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the flesh is contracted and has twisted formations around it, which we have not mentioned before, then cut along that entire area of contraction in the body and enclosures, placing your hand above where you slice so as to prevent the flesh from being lifted up while removing it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Guard your limb so it does not enter the vein and does not trouble that area; serve diligence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient in which he suffers is as follows:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No one is admitted to the bed as if they were arrows or sharp objects that would harm the vein; and because of its large flexibility, even a subtle spleen can insert into the vein through its subtleness; we have excessive bulk in this place where we reside.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hollows of lands that are down here with Al-Ategi on Arabic land and dry, barren lands where neither grass nor plant grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And when it is generated in other parts of the body such as cushions (or pillows), here begins another occurrence or manifestation thereof within these areas, which means that additional symptoms appear on
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And during the gestation, it is decomposition that appears suddenly beneath the navel accompanied by poisonous snakes and worms, as well as slimy creatures being born between the belly button area of her body. This medieval medical text describes a grave pregnancy-related complication involving dangerous vermin entering through an opening in one's abdomen during gestation—a situation that would have been seen with great concern at the time due to its potential dangers for both mother and child, given limited understanding of obstetrics.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The signal of the approaching birth is this inflamed vein in your cushion—and you have ruptured it, leading to fluid leaking out; and at that very location starts flowing another blood vessel associated with said broken-down area which resembles a plant stem rising. In translation: The expected arrival or labor of the unborn child is indicated by an acutely inflamed vein in your cushion—which you have burst, causing leakage; and it's at this very site whereby begins to flow another blood vessel associated with that broken down region which appears as a plant stem-like growth. This line indicates medical concern about the rupture of an abscess or swolthy vein in contact
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when it appears from the womb, you take and wrap your arm around that one of its legs—which is made entirely out of lead (or metal); then enter into another dragon's body within said cushioning material; but do not smell or touch this suspended object. The original text describes a situation wherein the medical practitioner handles what appears to be an emerging newborn with caution, suggesting they are dealing potentially hazardous materials—perhaps metaphorically referring to lead objects possibly representing fetus-related complications that could endanger both life and health. In translation: And when it comes out from
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Whenever there are movements of fluids from any cause outside the parts concerned, enclose them in lead and cloves for that purpose.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it extends further, then you make an incision in the wound and wrap it up; not making that cut inside where pus is already out so if you do make a cut at this point, contract and insert into the flesh to cause abscess formation and inflammation.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that which is drawn out slowly and removed piece by piece, must be taken outside of the body without causing it to twitch in any part of the limbs.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein in men who have it for the length of their palms and fingers, I have already reached ten finger lengths.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If inserted during the time of their medical care, insert the needle into the patient'dict body and pierce that long obstruction in the joint area until all accumulated fluid is expelled from within its matter; administer putrefaction at this location for several days as part of medicines. Carefully attend to these wounds.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes has tortuous passages, and mostly when it appears at the joint of the leg or on the leg itself, where they come from various instruments used for incisions (or "orpichis").
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	So take care of that ache as we have discussed in the division and with what has been mentioned earlier.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the removal of worms generated under the skin and called cattle disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named nowhere in any land as a malady from beasts due to continuous movements and it has very little of what lies between the navel and the flesh, which moves throughout the body causing displacement of the abdomen contents upwards; its limbs are shown within each other whereby rupturing the belly button.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of him is due to the putrefaction of some humors with worms and snakes, and lice and roundworms in his abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	Here comes the text translation:
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	When you intend to heal and remove it (the condition), only if you must use your walker and appearance of the patient while on it, then tighten what is above it and below it with dry strength, so that when you stretch and contract this area as needed, removing whatever has come out.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a blow to the flesh and it' extruded, then cease cautery over the place where life resides; for this can be due in part to decay of what causes corruption within that space which has come out with them hereby being discussed.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May if that being reaches the head prop (top) of the bowel, it will be very tight above the area where there is strict constriction, and secure over you to remove it; watch for when the intestine uses its own means or medicines used by doctors to evacuate putrid bad humors, and guard against foods that generate decay.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From suffering above healing begins.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is known in our land as increasing and it causes pain in the upper body parts, which can be transferred from one limb to another (member).
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	When you see that second one who recommends it to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called a sick woman to the village, and found her arm with a small inflammation in the brachial vein; you applied pressure for an hour, seeing that it was moving along as if alive when shifting from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And now it enters that place of pain and becomes fixed in the muscle, here we secure for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Return correction in the other limb until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And advise me that I should turn around the whole body as it comes, and be extremely careful of both exchange with my limb movement in each other' extrication is highly necessary due to changes or movements between different parts/limbs.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E you have already seen it come down into your limbs according to that manner, but you saw bones where there should be no pain causing movement between parts of the body.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not there be humors in women' extrication process?
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Even you do not think it is water but because the woman was of heavy blood and from dry parts of her body and veins revealed, in this appearance that altered wind flow manifests itself.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have thickened veins connected to the body during this back treatment.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to heal the patient and they feel that pain, at this time it does not appear as if you are there with us who have discussed earlier; now stand firm over them and dry their sweat quickly so that no internal effusion remains, then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Might it not be the case that if you do not time your treatments well with pills and poultices, then attend to removing discomthy from the body swiftly and excrete those expelled by winds, applying such medicines as putrid tablets and serpent-based remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of stones (or impurities). The text likely refers to a procedure used in medieval medicine
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	The stones (sagetas) are diverse according to the species and in which parts of the body they enter, for their diversity is that among those with large points, small ones, curved or concave shapes, dull sounds when moved, indicating solidness; also among those with three angles—which could refer to specific anatomical features like finger joints (with "languages") and elbow regions ("elbows" implied by the term 'astela' which is not a standard Latin word but might be referring here).
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here is the translation line by line:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the serpent'seer enters into you and trespasses on the bone where it is above your brain, violently striking down with its forceful blow, causing darkness to fall within sight (blindness), dizziness, groaning in the hollows of breath (coughing from chest or abdomen pain/discomfort), inflammation and tongue complaint (swollen tongue often associated with mouth ulcers due to excessive acid reflux as per medieval understanding of symptoms related to gastroesophageal reflux disease - GERD), confusion, vomiting like that from the humors entering into you (similarly indicating severe nausea or 'vomitus'), and being expelled along with moisture resembling damp snow around where there is a deposit of foulness within your body ('humidity in white form similar to frost/snow, which might suggest internal wetter conditions like edema), the snake-like entity has descended into this place.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if signs appear on your thighs, do not attempt treatment or extraction of the stone unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	May the hips of the seat when they come in the chest be close to the left breast and held firmly therein as a cause not for breech birth (not indicating an abnormal position); likewise, its movement resembles that of the poles worms crawling through dirt soil, carrying specks; these are signs of cold in the extremities, feverishness, and syncope; therefore you understand where death has taken hold.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	E when the chest has been pressed for medicinal foam from swine and their colonic appliances have shifted colors, exhaling great spirit and demanding a bellows of air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the swelling is in the skin where it covers the waist, and the pain is from the small backsides, then there will be a great piercing pain accompanied by difficulty breathing, which does not affect all of the body'se muscles at once.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If it is in the stomach, then a strong vomit from some improperly digested food arrives therein.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If there is a stone in the belly and it is fixed within you, then some opening of soil or cloth may be made to remove the stone, but there is no hope for its extraction from inside.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the stone is in the bladder and there has been an expulsion of urine, various causes have affected its parts that are now outside, and severe pain occurs on the abdomen; thus, it may be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May also be with the face, chest, and shoulder blade, as well as shoulders and attendants of members, thighs and spine (of both sides), neck, clavicle, rib cage, hips/cushions on legs, limbs' appearance parts – all are saved according to major dispositions when the lance does not pierce veins or arteries nor is it venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend that they have seen of these teachings, so as to indicate through them the way of curative treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in the patient'dict home there was an excess of tears from their eyes falling into the nostril space at the nose tip, and I extracted it out elsewhere; with aromatic herbs applied to its other parts, and healed without harm coming back to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extract from the source sentence for translation: Extracted another saw to his eye in its hole, touched it gently with one's finger and found that it was hidden therein; this extract also belonged among sharp swords of Turks, like a lion without claws.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Senate convenes, it does not happen in its own hall.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extracted from another home in Carthage which was caught in the sea and whose seed is Arabic – that's where I took it; now found among these guides of yours, already submerged in the water there; thus you carefully insert into it, remove some more, until healed the man from Carthage.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extractions were made from a man who was lodged in his stomach; he considered that it would be death due to this cause, and so for thirty days without change over him regarding their dispositions, attended the extraction site and became cured, not falling ill there.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: In which home may I find some bedding in their two legs, and solidify it there, placing a fire above for several hours until the swelling in the thigh' extraterritorial space is reduced.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man comes with his face chased and strengthened is the soil where worms are crushed, not causing pain here nor making them appear to us.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted from the body of their king who was being searched in my nose location and had already descended into the seventh stage with a small one remaining, all concealed within it.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	Yeah was called for his care at the setting of thorns within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And now you have grasped the small creature of the womb, and inquired about its subtle form; may not feel that which has been pierced by the sharp end of a needle at the extreme part of the womb.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Amplify this place where it was treated for atraction and digestion, confirming in me that this is the site of satiety, over which pressure will be applied.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And not an accident occurs at that significant place where the cautery has reached; and you continue to hold it there with force for days, until one day I feel my nose touching it and recall what happened.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And so you place the acute and corrosive medicine on a gauze pad for up to two days while fever persists, then apply that very substance directly onto the tip of the needle, which firmly sticks to the metal.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here the adjustments will be made in the space for treatment within which I shall see the extreme part of the saddle appearing before me, and after four months pass by as time allows according to this urgent medicine.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Here are the translations line by line:
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you recommend that I understand the quality of extraction for some herbs, which rules and meanings have not been disclosed herein nor comprehended by me in my narration or understanding; these parts and definitions are unknown within this work.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The skilled craftsman compares little over motions, and where it is present there'dictors absent; atrophy of operation new and novel instruments must be used for extracting external causes when one suffers from illness.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so it is said that splinters are not lodged in the parts where they are fixed, but according to two methods: either through contact with the location of entrapment or by opposing the other division.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When someone enters through that place or descends into it and is expelled from there,
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not heed the medicine during its hour when taken, then have it consumed daily within which days to purge the meat that is in its environment, and cleanse both the intake (refers to taking medication) and excretion of oneself.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Even if you are fixed in the chest and do not vomit with treatment on hand (indicating symptoms), then apply this warmth daily for several days, and it will be gone.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey the doctor'se prescription for taking medicine daily, then when you pierce through the circulatory circuit in that bone of entire division, it will enhance said region due to the treatment regimen, and extract such matter from therein.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the stone is lodged in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the chest's cavities, appearing there from these accidents which we have heard about it, do not attempt its removal and leave that within whereby their essence align with this internal stones; but if the stone pervades to the spleen, death will be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the stone is not fixed on the bone itself and does not enter into the joint cavity, rolling out of place over days without any cause from these accidents, then your engineering in setting up the stone within its seat (the joint) and here will suffice.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If there is an obstruction and you do not remove it by suction (extraction), then administer draining cups in the area of inflammation as recommended herein, with care for the location where it should heal.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the stone has been struck into the place of pain and is causing distress in thought; if you feel this touch, question who or what caused such an agitation, and then address that entity as necessary for your treatment today.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot operate on it due to the contraction of the flesh and lengthening of veins, where neither nerves nor vessels are present therein, then proceed over the flesh inside which can be expanded for extraction purposes.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If the patient has open wounds where his blood is coming out entirely from one of those cuts, and if you cannot stop the bleeding on that part due to cutting or pressure applied therein; then take measures over it as needed: treat the flesh in which it's fixed throughout all parts he can reach.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any location, use your hand'thy strength and forceps for all parts within which it has formed; subtlety is necessary to ensure that the pus does not break apart and remains extractable with great difficulty as well as during its removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot bear that of your time, then lie down for several days until the parts in his body return to their normal position, and repeat this action as long as he is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May it happen if there is contrary flow of humors within you, then apply the remedy we have described for healing in your head.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	So that you make the swelling go down in such a way as to allow the womb (uterus) its natural shape and position again; this may provide relief.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If it is not within your power, then administer what you can for its figures (i.f., provide the best treatment that one can afford).
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Mays the tools that have been removed from other parts or any part of it has proceeded outside to create an extra opening in said tool by feeling its position under one'thy hand and lifting/pulling occasionally, so now you hold onto that; henceforth take note (or continue holding) according to how much force is exerted with the tweezers.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then twist your arm as per contrary action until the pus enters into the bone and increases within you therein.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, then leave that for several days until in flame (or heats up).
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is from the sword in that one, then drag that out with force.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May it be that the rod has been struck and you wish to administer an injection, then insert your instrument into her or his cavity if she/he is deaf so as not to push inside their abdomen in the groin area and forcefully propel the needle there.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the seat is concave, then you push that substance firmly into it, whereby the seat becomes imbued by that very same thing.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the poultice is drying out, then you should gently compress all of the flesh where it actually lies, as much as possible with that which remains moistened; and apply this carefully to what seems necessary at times.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or ribcage, and you touch it so that it presses against what's therein (possibly a foreign object), then apply pressure on that area; if possible, securely fasten whatever has entered to prevent damage to veins or nerves. Remove the foreign body from where it is located, clean thoroughly, and treat until healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps are by which fingers (or tweezers) are drawn out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs, like saws when they take them over the bed to prevent being laid down.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those are various motions, large, small, and numerous, according to the magnitude of the joints and knees' weakness, as well as the width of the body fluids, and their restriction in movement.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of expulsion push present in this limb with the pain of fever to ensure that its interior is drawn out from within itself, and a blow provided by it:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of driving out sound extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	aych in such a way that his interior is urged out into the hollow of the saddle and propelled by it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of which the patient customarily undergoes cauterization, located at the base of the sixth ribs (where they are attached to pulsing arteries), mentioned herein: herbs found in both temples; and veins present within two teardrop vessels formed by twigs called aspexiantz, prepared on warmth near the forehead region, along with veins located at the extremity of the nose. Additionally include guides placed at the neck (col), lower lip's underside; upper lip below and inside it too, known herein as lingual arteries; and vessels referred to as algelic ones: all these are included among mentioned structures for cauterization procedures by physicians who treat joint pain caused by cold humors.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that have been cauterized in the breasts be full; from those is one cephalic and must be tied with wild thyme, and this they call "the vein of all limbs," and the domesticated thyme's vine they name it. They refer to it as the abdomen’se vein or "belly-vein", which has been cauterized in its leaf; called by vulgar language, “abdominal vein.” The arm's vessels are tied over the fireplace and this is where lymphatics reside. It lies between these two limbs (thighs), forming a pair of vines.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh are three veins; one of those is for the curvature of the lower part of the leg, as in wildlife (deer); another is called saphenous, located at the junction between the body'dictor domestic; and there is also sciatic vein situated similarly. In this area other like-veins are associated with them.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of the veins that are attached to the ears is ancient and migratory, causing sores and ulcers on the head in old times.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the surgical knife in your hand now; that is what you insert, and place it gently into the vein within where the bladder expels fluid to the mouth.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand above the vein and artery, incise into the vessel where it enters below.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the intestine is equal to the quantity of two fingers adjusted or enclosed by liquid, make an incision from above so much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength (or health) at the joints and ensure that it remains inside where healed, within those areas which have been made well again.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the free consultation of them, there was already a treatment performed on those individuals with their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Major arteries of the limbs become old and evil, as well as excessively full blood flows to the joints due to constant lubrication during surgery (flebectomy).
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And according to what you should recommend for them, constrict their thigh within which their veins appear in response when touched, showing the pulse of their limbs with a touch; and at this moment, your effort becomes apparent.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Raise your penis above the vein as directed here, and insert the clyster needle nowhere else but in these lower parts; then introduce that amount into those vessels according to what you require.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return the hip joint to its position and rest it on top of the vein for an hour; pause over that spot where there is tightness or pain in the abdomen area, holding your hand until healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now it is time for their memory recall, and of that one' extrinsic attachment to the free area.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore, the bleeding of phlebotomy from the vein of the forehead is applied to the bleeding of the cephalic vein associated with ancient facial maladies and migracing and putrid sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the bloodletting that you should perform is as follows: so that the thigh muscle tightens its vein within which appears, and take up the instrument from which this form belongs.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point where it protrudes from under that vein, and strike upon it as necessary in its positioning according to what you desire; tightly hold this hole of the hernia so that it heals within while held there.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the vitality of the two veins in the eyes cause obstruction within themselves due to tears and discharge from them, leading to facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the cauterization is that it tightens the patient'thy chest with one bandage and treats those same ones; you stand on top of him/her.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Here is the line-by-line translation into English:
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bloodletting of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent diseases, as well as headaches and migrareas, appearing on the face mostly when old age approaches.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this cauterization is that it tightens the patient'se neck and places your hand on their nose as far down as you can reach without feeling any pulse here, where suddenly blood begins to flow again afterward.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you finally apply your hand to the small fetus and make it run down from the sanction according to what is needed; then take care of that one with gentle restoration methods.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of finger amputation from wounds lead to contraction and removal of syphilis and other diseases, as well as treatment for harmful sores that bleed like a hemorrhage when touched.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of that joint puncturing in those is such that the humidity hardens within their colon connected by ligaments; and it rests on the head of the patient'suponerant (assumed to be a caregiver or medical practitioner), with the swelling above lying upon an extension.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Here the patient is being treated with gradual elevation of the vein to its elongated extent, and as needed (whenever necessary), pressure or tightening applied thereafter; similarly done for other veins involved.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Return the ligaments and strengthen the veins to prevent arterial narrowing from becoming focused on the limb, allowing rest in the bed wherein sickness is healed by its young (or patients).
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The action of cauterizing the varicose veins improves small abscesses and sores in the mouth and gums, as well as bad ulcers inside and around the body:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Here comes the translation of each line:
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	May you doubt quickly and don't know which one is the greater or most obvious among them, then think of the greatest part (major) and its visible manifestation (pus).
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears that veins are present in the underside of the lips,
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May it be customary for them today to insert and place arteries that are in the lips of late,
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the veins that come from behind the tongue be prepared for craniotomy to access the skull area located at the back of the mouth, in cases of glossopharyngy (disease related to the uvula), and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	Here is the translation of each line from medieval medical treatise:
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And now apply pressure on each of them; be careful not to press your hand into those areas where the blood flows through.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And when it comes to the selection and division of these fine and subtle species according to the extent of veins and their narrowness,
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mirrored footbath:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Those veins are full and noticeably thickened vessels coming outwards; open them to those containing large stones inside.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs catgut surgery:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This forceps is of lesser length and subtle delicacy, and it is suitable for the puncture of small veins that contain clear ichor.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of phlebotomy on the basilica vein (one of three veins), which is drawn out from diseases that come down into the belly and back, be obtained for this purpose.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When the barber arrives for bleeding that patient and keeps watch over them after it' extrication from there artery puncture site by means of a barber lancet (i.e., flebectomy), provided he takes care not to harm, since just now his blood vessel has been opened; if the procedure is done incorrectly at the bleeding point made during lancing, that very same vein will be injured and spurts of blood may occur so as not for him who performs this operation with hands shaking.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear for apparent manifestation, then you should keep what was laid down and move it to another place; or bind any limb of yours that shows signs thereof; perform cauterizations at the end of your arm where symptoms are evident. Should these actions be necessary while we continue our discussion here:
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you wish to perform the surgery on your patient'dict, then move down to where there is a tightness in the arm that allows communication with the area of the wrists; place your hand over their vein which is part concave for amphorization (bloodletting); apply pressure here and dry out this vessel. Also take care not to disrupt percussion within these spaces around the artery location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you tighten the bandage after applying it to the place where you've sewn with thread, that area becomes inflamed due to blood vessel expansion, and therefore causes discomfort therein.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If at times the sanction flows out during flebectomy with mercury from a child, then you understand that it is of arterial origin; and if your couch and pause are placed over this area for long spans; place your couch and pause therein too. If the blood has detached itself, periodically moved away as much as possible, tighten your arm and hold on to that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard the humors of your patient'dictly, and be fearful above all else not to let them wander astray within these days until they recover.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May it not be detached, and if you do not have medicine for it at hand, then insert a needle into the artery when necessary; as its extremity is contracted, the sanction (ligament) will tear off, grasping that part with fist force, taking hold of one end securely on the spot where the vein has become constricted and compressed by the other day's swelling.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction has detached itself (if it does), then apply that water to which it had proceeded, for memory of the place where dust particles have become separated by pulling apart (the sanction).
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The translation of each line into English is as follows:
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the venous bleeding is conveniently performed through the upward rising of blood from below the head and parts above the body; hence it consists of branches of both basilic vein and cephalic vein as we have mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then draw out (or ligate) the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The action of cauterizing the jugular vein is to lodge the sharp instrument in the head and alleviate humors' diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Here it is: In this place, if you wish to lance the bloodletting with either olives or myrtle thorns; they are safe for all veins and do not harmarteries nor nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May you therefore need to perform the procedure of cauterization that prevents your forceps from piercing the scalp alone, and secure it at this place while not disturbing it unless there is an initial percussion indicating some movements over that specific area where the cauterization takes place.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Mayhaps even if the cautery is applied on soft bodies (likely referring to internal organs or delicate areas of the body), there might be nothing noticed about that particular application of aplication.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May be the quality of that incision and those accidents where you must consider for correction in them.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le first of them out of which you know that bleeding is not administered but for the sake of health maintenance and hope, as well as caution against illnesses; where it should be done in one of the veins located within the groin—specifically, the cephalica, femoral (fusca), and basilic (basilica) veins—and during breakfast time on Monday or Tuesday evening before dinner, with consumption as necessary when signs indicate repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When surgery (flebectomy) or third-day dressing comes after the first use passed through three hours of today'supon,
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May cauterization be administered when there is necessity and convenience either in the morning or at night, always and throughout time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to perform an enema for any reason and the goal is to cleanse their clysters with a lemon-based cleanser during the procedure if there are closed fistulas or openings where blood can accumulate, so that these do not flow into the clysters which are inflamed, as they only affect secondary body parts.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E none of the patients dare directly enter sacred and cauterous procedures or obstructive humors like phlegm in their body, nor evading illness within which these interventions are required; rather a cautery is considered appropriate for colic pain, vomiting, abdomen issues, multiplication of worms, threadworms (intestinal parasites), and the entire cause dissolved by your care that affects their body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	When considering subtle shifts of humors within the body and if the sickness is due to thick (excessive) blood, foods and drinks, as well as medicine when it'se possible for such fluids to flow back into them:
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	When bathing is permitted for any cause or due to exercise that the sanction must be subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the bleeding from the patient in their chest is stopped for an hour and a half as we have discussed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in his seat of affliction are present causes, according to which men commonly use fragrance and aromatics along with balms and substances as per their possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the surgeon on a thigh that has been put in or one of those already scheduled for lithotomy (surgery to remove stones).
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And extract the limb, and rub that with their hand three times; and strengthen the ligament of the joint by wrapping it around for three turns.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	When the constriction is fresh and not due to entrails (internal organs), or when it's excessive, do not allow the flow of blood; otherwise, prevent movement in those parts of the body affected by heat/congestion: if it'thy a recent swelling that isn't caused internally within thee belly wall(female gender indicated but applicable to male as well), or when there is an excessive build-up (swelling due to fluid accumulation, not internal organs like the spleen), do not permit blood flow; if it needs cooling/reduction, then restrict movement in those parts of thy body affected by
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	When addressing the constriction (swelling), consider that if a bloodletting procedure was performed and wounds were made into those masses within where veins are dilated/enlarged, they should be addressed with care as indicated by their symptoms or condition descriptions. The text suggests careful handling of these areas post-bloodletting to manage swelling effectively while acknowledging the patient's specific complaints related to inflamed and enlarged vessels within the affected masses (likely referring to varicose veins).
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The practitioner should apply a poultice to the site of their bloodletting carefully using just enough oil as appropriate for treatment purposes; and pause at that point on the side indicated by symptoms/signs (likely referring to where varicose veins are present), above which performed bloodletting, so it may retreat slightly. The pulse must be felt over each affected vessel—thin ones wail like a string when bled upon and contract as they cease bleeding; if the poultice touches these thin vessels (indicative of varicosities), one should stop immediately with their tool, remove it from where veins are abound or excessively present. The text conveys that care must be taken not to press directly on a vessel—doing so may cause bleeding if the pulse is strong and contracts once pressure ceases; this implies awareness of varicose conditions possibly requiring delicate handling during treatment, reflective of medieval medical practices regarding bloodletting.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, it is that which causes the surgeon should be firm and solicitous in all these reasons.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is broken or the thigh falls aslant (indicating a hernia), do so for a day or two without tightening the bandage, lest you exacerbate the protrusion by applying force; nor enter the bath during this time.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	When one performs an enema if necessary (perhaps referring to relieving joint pain by expelling humors), then do so accordingly, maintaining pressure on the area
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If you discover it is small and subtly occurs under your touch, worrying that the quantity may come forth as intended (referring to concern over expelling too much fluid during an enema), then perform the rectal irrigation in the second section of this treatment guide and adjust with a little bowl at hand. The location becomes erect by only small applications under pressure; when it does, you have successfully achieved what is sought—a position suitable for further intervention or relief as needed.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	May you see that already there is an apostropthy (implant), and do not touch it here anymore, for no reason will excuse; pause over any division of the wound'dicted by oil, which helps relieve the body ailment.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place for oil (or other such substances).
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a great abscess is formed in the location of cauterization and continues to ooze for days on end, mostly at that which has not been kept moist but rather wet (likely referring to an open wound or puncture site), then apply pressure with a damp sponge soaked in water and salt over this area where your finger is pressed. A small incision will be made here for one hour, during which time the abscess dissolves away.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up (the) blood from that vein of said patient or another vein, as appropriate for it, complete the task with such means or other venous sources.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is darkness or green sickness in the place for a few days, do not mention it; and if you wish to pause over that which causes inflammation or dissolution of myrrh or black bile (humors), or any cause related to honeydew from pests like insects or frogs.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically removes warts and prominent areas of skin incision from beneath the base (or foundation).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore rest your hand upon that one, and if you must apply a compress on that one, it is an evil humoral elevation; hence be mindful of any cause we have mentioned herein for which blood flows strongly from the sanct (arterial) vessel.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if anesthesia is applied in the fluid that causes fixation of the location and this provides care for another treatment within which it becomes healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	When you remove part of the sancus according to the patient'dict quantity and color, as it appears on the sancus itself.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black (indicating a dark or possibly venous disorder), then you lay it in until seen by him who asks for your aid; and if thou seest it gross, lay it back wherein thy hands can easily perceive it – as when an abscess appears swolthy.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	When someone with thin and weak legs requires extraction of blood in a session (likely an ancient form of bleeding therapy), it is then that the puncture of veins should be expanded, both large and small ones being targeted for this purpose.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	When someone is suffering from diarrhea, it causes pain contrary to that person'dict and makes them weakened by frequent bowel movements.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best when it is administered through a venesection (venous cutting), not by pricking.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This incision made by surgery is saved from the flow of blood and nerve inflammation, and it was placed in a good and safe manner according to tradition and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is inflammation of the complexion, then bleed it out through an incision performed with myrrh or spiced wine infused as poultices using pepper, cinnamзу, ginger and cloves; or a fragrant and odorous poultice.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you have convulsions and it is caused by the evil spirit of motion, then induce breathing in drinking water infused with an aromatic substance; apply such fragrance to one'thy body part at that time.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When using other causes mentioned in the division of colic for expulsion,
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Whoever intends to lift their arm and dissolve their blood according to its passage through which lithotomy is performed by expulsion (usually for stone removal), with the flow of urine being bubbly, allowing it to evacuate small amounts gradually over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May those who wish to use their arms and strong backs do so for up to seven hours or nine days after the first surgery.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May who wants to pull the limb of their body against where it has turned, so that such an incident may occur on the second day or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May this body part where the sickness has been cut and made sharp lead to fever; which originates from within its wounds during a fasting period, with large amounts of blood loss that amplify bleeding inside until syncopes occur, ensuring you maintain all conditions necessary for surgery. Place your hand over this body part' extramartially (referring here likely to the legs or chest), so as not to cause death during syncope; because when surgeons are ignorant and negligent at these times of fasting, they may come across such cases.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you wish to undress the arm and evacuate stool according to schedule, when its clot has already formed in the vessel, and difficult pain from the rectum occurs under this urgency; it is too much for me.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the bandage applied internally; or draw it to be its hardness coagulated in the vein's infusion room; or pause over that of Tiberian alchemist, or Sagesonne’s one, and compress this with a heavy cloth within where the blood has escaped.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is swollen, do not touch it lest the swelling increase.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to induce defecation according to the natural order, there is no excuse; therefore, sit on that part or in another arm and vein as needed.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the arm'seat" is cut down in the location of the dark or navicular, when not anesthetized or operated on upon, it consists of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bleeding operation for him is that his malady enters its place in the tailbone where it becomes swolgy and causes blood vessels to become visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Return its strength to that which is bound by the narrowing joint (gout), and apply pressure along the transverse plane but not longitudinally or laterally:
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	When your incision is broad and it' extricates that which you operate upon at the joint, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeatedly apply pressure in the tail end and make the blood circulate within until you meet your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would be excused from bathing in the tail of water and your legs are rested therein during times of youth.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And by performing this operation on the vein, it has been made safe for all other veins and nerves that have not had a pulse flowing through them yet.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	E penetration of the small intestine'dicts relief for abdominal illnesses in the belly (fetus).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the fingerloin, for soon these tendons of the dry legs will show signs.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return your hand in the tail of the vein and allow the bloodstream there to flow smoothly; if you do not return it there, then the blood may clot at the site of the varix, which is prohibited from circulation.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the sanction is extracted according to necessity, pause over the vein and salt so it'thy not congealed together completely; as if you were performing in one continuous operation.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the strength of that surgery on her left side be for those illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	When it seems during the operation of his legs as you did with them,
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore apply a poultice or soft compress on the bandage and foot sole where it is attached to your ankle; this will be better and more soothing (as for medication).
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If a smallpox appears on the face of the body, then you must protect your nerves that are near it from being affected by the smallpox above its surface on the face, and pause your incision there until you wish to proceed further with it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	In this given text from medieval medical literature with linguistic characteristics of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here is
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If the intestine is forbidden by sanction, then lead your leg into the tail of the bladder and let the bowel run within that space until it has been emptied out (evacuated).
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cauterist makes a mistake during the first session, repeat it on their next visit as they will feel relief in that spot; do not fear diseases of the nerves, but rather be wary of spasms like we've mentioned before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	When there is a sign of illness from the other foot's sole upward.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	From the sciatic vein, it is situated as we have mentioned regarding the tarsal bone of the patient' extrinsic leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The strength of Lu's fracture healing is due to bone setting when it becomes sanctified through the procedure.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears at each time that you can do so and according to the direction, then apply pressure there either by insertion or sectioning, which will leave no space left for them in those areas.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: She is in great distress; if you worsen that situation, a pulse will appear on any part of her body, and it appears between the thumbs and fingers on each hand.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let blood flow as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return these two points (the constriction and pause) above the location of incision and tightening to heal properly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	De windsage and from those very substances that are used with it (the ones being referred to in context).
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	When joint pain is caused by corn-like pains or rheumatic issues, or gout (likely referring to uric acid crystallization), it comes from the body'sinternal cav
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	It is a disease according to their manuals as follows: one of them involves cutting and removing stones from the sancus (a type of stone or calculus that forms in joints), while the other involves puncturing wounds where pus may form, which are considered sources of illness.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This type of joint inflammation that you puncture or incise is according to their manuals a fever (implying infection) caused by heat within the body - which could refer metaphorically to infectious processes like bacterial arthritis. In historical medical practice, "foc
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	In the treatment of joint pains where stones (sanc) are cut out and extracted from various parts of the body according to their manual, they perform as follows: in one location within this type of inflammation that is punctured or incised these actions occur—they remove stones; one halfway through the head at its neck joint with another bone (indicating potential surgical intervention); and from above down below between two columns/sutures, presumably in a location associated with throat discomfort. Additionally: on the chin underneath where pus forms near or around the mouth; using spoons as implements for this purpose—implying manipulation of materials to treat these conditions; and then over an area related to fever (presumed here based on context); from two sources, involving nipples/breasts ('alohoster') – suggesting that certain body parts may produce pus or be involved in the inflammation process. Moreover: with tools made of bronze ("brasses"); using nails as implements; and over a hole (which could imply an opening for treatment), this indicates specific points where interventions take place during their healing practices, which aligns closely to ancient surgical procedures used by physicians in those times for treating joint pains thought to be caused by blockages or accumulations of material within the body.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	When phlebotomy is performed to remove the evil spirit from blood that infiltrates small vessels within the flesh, and for this reason it should not be extracted through these veins; nor does one dare when effluvia (phlegm) or other humors are present inside any malady caused by accumulation within the entire body.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May it be necessary to provoke sweating for illness or continuous fever, and apply that immediately at the dinner time of this day and night here in its bedroom during sleep or anytime there is.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and it occurs in the feet: this cause affects men only when they ingest for vomiting or excessive consumption within their own bowels; these consume themselves inside their faces and heads (belly) and chests—and raspings occur on their face and forehead as well as darkness and heaviness of mind, also in the mouth where taste bud becomes inflamed with thirst, leading to spitting out phlegm or expectoration: this cause increases sleep multiplicity among those affected; additionally during rest they pray for relief from various accompanying symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	So when it happens for any of those reasons, especially if it occurs on the third or fourth day after passing, they command that wind diseases be considered a serious condition and passed through within the first three to four hours of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the vitality of headwind is that when it grants gravity to the head and descends into the humors, perhaps this causes expulsion from all parts of the body. However, if such exit occurs throughout the entirety of the body, then its evacuation should be addressed.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This pressure is in the location of craniotomy for the head (or skull).
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not permitted that one uses it who has a complete cold or where there'thy clogging (possibly referring to the body), which gives great harm to him/her.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Through which I use that thing, and in the crowns of where ill humors freely flow.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May forgetfulness come to those who are still upon it; and as you command the bellows operator to make their hand rest briefly on the wound'dictor plate at intervals of time, they fear losing memory.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May windy from the lungs is in place of bleeding puncture: and by this means confer on asthma, and constriction of throat, and cracking of lung partitions, and cough.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When covered with a small amount of wind (perhaps referring to steam or gas), if it is paused for some time, it produces weakness in the limbs and abdomen.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the wind-chill from the alchemist alleviates headaches and eye pain, migrating to relieve pain in the teeth'supreme areas; it is at the site of dental extraction (tooth pulling).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the bellows not to press on your hand so that it does not cut an artery and cause blood flow,  
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	When the wind causes discomfort in the chin and gums, corrupting their appearance due to illnesses present within the mouth, they appear at locations suitable for dental extractions performed by those who are here with lips like these.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	When cholera occurs on the sinews (possibly referring to tendons or other soft tissues), it is cured by applying heat therapy, which restores its warmth/healthfulness.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanded by the bellows not to proceed with incision in scraping away flesh, as long as there is still meat on the location and nerves and blood vessels remain intact.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This is where wind enters through the nostrthy and affects both the sores of the buttocks and the putrid ulcers; here begins:
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the windlass to be a strong breeze and that it is earth-derived, for once in powerful sections of its turnings, then apply subtle adjustments with fine chiseling as finely carved out.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May slight breezes from the cushions for gradual manifestation, which drag out all pain in the body and relieve old pains of rheumatism and menstrual cramps; they cause menses, relief to both sides (of the abdomen) and dysuria (painful urination), remaining at sites suitable for cauterization or excision by physicians.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Even though they purify all of the body'dict and cause fainting in a moment.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From coughs about healthiness it is given for wellness as from those of the doctor' extraneous cases, and with them they support both legs and chest where their hands are held tightly.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And cease repeating it and continue until you see the location reddening and swelling, whereupon grumbling of thirst arises.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	When you scrape and suction repeatedly on each part of the body, pay attention in readiness to its disposition (the condition or state).
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that house of tender meat with rare pores is not scalded and left undressed, so the place will not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When directed by the bellows maker (the one who operates a device similar to modern-day blowtorch or forge), enhance the incision and apply pressure firmly until it flows easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is swolthy, then apply treatments regularly, and in the first treatment, open up the channel of subtlety to the sanction and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May come in the second for the acquired knowledge of extracting the thick pus.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is dungy (impure or unhealthy), then cut through the clean belly to continue with healing.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And at last, when we extract the small stone from each other with just one incision or cut, it suffices for us to perform an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a sick body part, cut it out with the knife of extraction; and if this is our patient'thy large organ, then let us proceed by cutting first before anything else.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of cauterization in which only the depth of the spine is concerned.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the thong is thick, hard, black (indicative of decay), and your pores are streaming downwards, making the clogging points softer, more unblockable; if it's summer time, apply honeydew oil or crushed violet juice, pomace from grape skins, chamomile decoction, or sage; but in wintertime, use nettle herb extract, lemon balm infusion, yarrow tea, or hyssop liquid.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If there is excessive thickness, beware, then apply honey, or oil of basil, or oil of aloe, or myrtle oil, and according to their appearances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the bellows is made of large pieces of tendon, do not use oil on it; and where these locations for breathing are applied with this vaporization substance (hot air or steam from various water sources such as hot springs, sulfuric waters, well water, or bathwater), they resemble those places.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And it is from which the illness comes due to moisture, washing their breath with water made from myrtle and sumac, or similar substances directed towards them.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that source where the excesses are thick, wash their noses with vinegar from old wine or water of juniper berries (juniper) or thistle flowers, and in appearance they resemble these things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	When the windscreen is kept away from bathing, and when it receives appropriate application of what has been applied in the bath for an hour or two, and also rests afterward on the windscreen,
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that wind-drained blood can flow before venesection (bloodletting).
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the patient' extradition: if it is either the fan or that which has to be used for draining blood and clearing out phlegm from above him/her (thus chest), who may have heat rising upwards and inflammation, consider causes of coldness such as vinegar with honeydew acetones, indigo extracts combined with mustard seed oil or egg yolk emulsion, sage decoction, and lemon balm poultices.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Pause in their food intake and drinks such as boiled eggs or meat broth; these along with freshly prepared vegetables belong to them (the patient), which is suitable for appearance/complexion.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that which the complexity is feverishly bled in warm broth or almond milk with honey and spices, such as sumac (which has a distinctive smell), it's recommended for him to use little beer/alcohol consumption and eating habits. Restrain from consuming legumes like peas and cabbage, along with grains, pulses, watercress sprouts, ducks, chickens, fish, which should all be paused in his diet until Lent (a period of fasting).
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in the day of ventilation and bloodletting he drinks more than food,
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	When given to patients in some hours before attending home physicians (either apothecaries or traditional healers) with musk, decoctions of musk itself, during this time period for the main body parts to be comfortable and sanctioned; not when they experience pain.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May these wind-caused pains be stopped with stops placed on the belly and gout, in the locations of the joints, and under the breastplate, where none of these limbs will experience cutting or scraping upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	It is not for these reasons but due to the attachment of bile from a member, as when there are blockages in the gallbladder and spleen's channel; they use it with windy poultices applied over the breastbone and umbilicus; this rare substance dissolves the vaporous flow within the body part, resolving the pain caused by these flows.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And is halted over the hollows when acidity increases in their swolthy or pus-filled areas; for due to attraction, you strengthen and remove the accumulated fluid from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When it seems that there is a breeze blowing within those compartments, specifically on the belly and chest areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These breezes are administered with suction only, and some of them at the fire's light.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When dips in water are fully administered for the ailments of the belly,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is for that the bladder becomes full and contains much fluid, such that only water alone or in this liquid where plants are added suitably contribute to its release.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of applied wind: it is the extent of two drizzles according to what we have formed; and the quantity of powder is the size of a palm, and in its location on the body, at the place within the circuit where it circulates, the quantity of this substance, as small as the amount contained inside one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Its pain is caused by excessive bile or thick yellow fluid with large edges like grains of wheat and lion fur, which do not allow the body part to maintain its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever mercury or iron passes through underarm or foot (the reference may be a localized inflammation), then the burning cautery is held over the focus area.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great wind that we have recommended for it, and a small pill from among those second diseases and states of him who uses them.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When liver stones and enlarged veins are more prominent than those of youths and large vessels,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of applying fire to the tip of a burning iron over the edge of this opening on the limb is such that it directs the flame towards where there are congested veins in the region of the swelling, so that the fire does not spread along these areas and cause damage to the patient'thy malady.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Here it is translated line by line:
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply heat according to its nature, and repeat that if there are excesses of what has been applied from time todictorially:
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May it be administered through a vase in the plague of fever, where there is no transverse or disruption wave and only water flows into it, held over just one limb at a time.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it happens: The more inflammation there is, the better, so that much water can be absorbed.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii. (This appears to be an annotation or reference marker
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas (snakebite) are not administered on limbs but where possible positions of the soot application cannot be taken because they are small like teeth and gums, or when a bone is exposed, similar to nose and face; i.a.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those bloodsucking creatures that are found in the buboes on swolthy skin surfaces:
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Return the bowels to their cavity, and place your hand over them so that no cause can come out of there within those days in water which they are thirsty for, and evacuate the body through phlebotomy or enemas; return any swelling inside the hernia back into its space, and make sure it is stopped up on themselves.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When filled and when it happens.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to suction out the location with airflow, then more refreshment may come into effect.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash and apply warm water here, and it will be rubbed off.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leg of the sanction is prolonged by bleeding from the sanguissuguas, then a wet cloth comes out (or rushes), and you press it on to prevent the remaining blood flow inside.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the sanction is multiplied, then sulfur has been sprinkled on it three times, or small balls and resembling things from their causes sharply (as punishment), until the sanction falls apart; or pebbles have been placed there for them to adhere to that place, and the sanction falls apart.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, bleeding of veins, when possible, change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If blood reflux is prohibited from suspension, then it should be drained at the freshest possible moment or leave a needle in place within that area; and secure them pauses, so when I feel any such fluid now present.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice over those areas, sprinkle some ash or salt on them and apply it immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Ayssi begins the process of restoration: from recovery.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the practice of medicine; it concerns restoration for a broken bone and joint displacement.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, know that the wise physicians and quacks boast about this chapter of our medical texts herein presented, those who at some time did not regard free men as such nor read these letters themselves.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Because of this reason, we are deprived here from the knowledge of scientists; and for a long time I have neglected it altogether in any case—and not until after reading the books freely by ancient authors, while studying their understanding, do I extract that science itself.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Return or adjust for experiments and studies throughout one'se lifetime.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol primier.	Capital first.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summed up and collected from the bone fracture itself, which is necessary before starting to recall the members broken by it or any of them that may be involved.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cover then that we speak in the introduction of this chapter about the matters concerning the sermon, and understandings within these chapters wherein during comprehension it is forged both artists and craftsmen upon the truthfulness of such topics; thus you (the reader/student) and they know how to recognize or learn from this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so it is said that when you experience a fracture or dislocation and twist or sprain (whatever the case may be), if there's no specific reason preventing treatment, then proceed with cauterization as needed for these injuries, whether they are freshly acquired wounds, severely bruised areas, or during intense heat when inflammation is severe.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And when it returns back to its original place in accordance with what is customary for him, at which time of day this occurs?
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone breaks begins to be repaired, it is necessary that the malady' extricate nutritive foods rich in meat and large portions from which their viscous nature can nourish them; similarly with wheat bread moistened in water, rice, legumes of all kinds (beans), milk yogurt, fresh cheese, grains big or similar to these things for those, making coagulation necessary after fracture repair through the use of leeches and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You understand that bones crack when they are present in the first region of the body and among those who are weakened, it is impossible for them to remain continuous and become solid according to their nature due to drying out (loss of humors).
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Even nature adjusts and contracts within the broken bones of any part caused by excess like gluten in which you adhere and tighten what'seems to be conglutinating masses inside, where venom from strength or firmness is present as if a fire for digestion, so that nothing prevents one from performing their duties.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary to pause the foods of humoral excess that bear weight and thickness, as we have mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motion diverse according to different types of bone breakage.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	E understand that the instruments of bone breakage are various according to the variety of limbs, for a broken bone in the thigh is different from a broken bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the chest differs from a fracture of the bone in the arm; seemingly all other parts have their own variations.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And when it is time for memory of all types of bone breakage, separate in its own chapter from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion various types of bone breakage in himself/herself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	Every special kind of trouble is felt differently in restoration after the patient' extrication from their specific locations, as remembered by them themselves.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Moving title of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For this translation I had to make some assumptions about the syntax and vocabulthy as it is not a standard medieval Latin but rather an early modern language influenced by these languages:
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	So when there is no visible twisting or bone fracture upon touching the joint and limb with pain without causing great suffering to them, here it means that there is likely not a break in the structure.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Here it is translated line by line:
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	E realizes that the place where it arches and does not divide into two or another which does not arrive at its seat, when you have healed the entire part of their body as per your hour attending to those who come for an abscessed wound incursion.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an abscess occurs in him, then leave it for as many days as possible until the abscess subsides; and apply heat to that part on which he can stand up or move his body.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	When you understand that I have restored and massaged him, he feels as if his bones are in pain where the wound was situated.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Return that which is strong when it arrives with memory of him/her.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Might it be necessary to extend this broken limb bone (from the hip or foot), if so, use your hand; alternatively, if the member is small, also apply pressure with yours; and if there are tendons or a single tendon involved, hold them firmly.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When you touch it at that moment with your hand and if herein ye perceive any other cause, correct whatsothy have found by the extent of thy virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive extension and compression, as the physicians advise have been used frequently for accidental cauterization during their procedures, or may cause contraction in the limb where they've observed fluid accumulation through their manipulations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	From those who are small in arms and leg like the body and face of these people, it is necessary that their covering be a thin drape undernethy subtlety.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who are heavy with the thigh or couch, wrapped in a hard and durable cover, where the belly band connects the great and strong parts of all limbs at their joint points so tightly that they cannot move inside it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the procedure, take care of your bowel movement afterward as it is convenient for you, over the location of that fracture three to four times around/below its member; and tightly hold on a small part of the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Return the splint to its positioned place on the site of the fracture and a tight bandage that will not allow your swelling at this location where you have immobilized it.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And lengthen you within the location of the break with a few inches (a small strap or bandage), and gradually loosen the tightness until most of it is taken away from that place.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And if there is a space between the bones of the spine or clothing where his curved nature (the curvature due to fracture) lies within it, then he does not pause in that place for any reason; otherwise, he rests with gaps.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Return the padding over this other bandage, and place your hand on these wrappings gently so as not to provoke inflammation or infection if present at that location; apply it for several days, and keep yourself still upon those strips.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Here come the splinters of hemp cane rake, and are formed with care; or they may be made from wood, or bamboo stalks; each hook according to this shape and size.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thick and a small one is used for the other splints; its length corresponds to the extent of the limb's greatness and littleness as per the injured part - and firmly press upon those splints according to your first bandage placement; this pressure aligns with the location of the fracture, and whenever you extend from where it is broken, that same alignment occurs.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	When the threads (or sinews) are thick and thin like leather, and if they are large, then with tools used by sharp fingers during operations, it is a great mistake when this stricture appears at equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And if it is not suitable with subtle instruments to proceed along these waters which you wish and where there are spaces between bone and bone of a day'dictated distance, do not attempt passage through them stricly bound by the water flow.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the abdomen is led by the bones of your limbs and there's a tightening in those places, delay briefly placing pressure with something as hard as a lion or woolen pinch until it does not cause harm/injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some injuries are broken bones and there is a rupture in the spinal cord; come to mind at that particular juncture of this section'se place.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	Here comes the sentence to translate: You understand that when all of a member is broken on the first day; this causes pain where it'm big and you can not place your hand over there until days seven or more, according to your certainty about the coming of abscess cauterization.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how these restoratives help the patients who suffer from breaks and dislocations as well as twisting injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of immobilization post-fracture repair is convenient for complex movements and mostly in the legs and genitals; it's not warmth or fever: powdered hemp must be used, and bone marrow from flour provides movement within joint spaces.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When comfort is provided with him as well, but if that same book of humors becomes unbalanced (i.dictory), then the comfort will not be thick nor delicate (not soft or subtle); and use this one accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Other maniplation of fracture and dislocation and twisting: recipe for asafetida, lapidanum, acacia, enula, and migra, which are ground from the pestle and mortar of every old dragon's tooth; also myrrh and aloe vera by an ancient drake. V; ash grit and chalk powder together amounting up to twenty pieces in total, sown into water or agar gelatin when scales are fractured as part of the malady complex; employ this concoction for good composition restoration, healing broken bones limply bound by tendons.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other medicine of embossing that comforts with a fracture and twist: mixture of white henbane extract, myrrh from the same plant, cinnamaldehyde (from acacia), gallnuts of Armenian bole (x; myrrh again v; also cinnamon bark vi).
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are crushed in the mortar and ground up, they have pillows, they take comfort measures with water or an album (possibly referring to a form of compress), and their administration is carried out accordingly.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of the splints and bones apart, causing pain in those places, with a drawn thread that is tied tightly and immersed in wine and oil; it is placed over these locations:
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this cast it is not for restoration and pain relief has been applied directly through caustic application and removal of pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other plaster that restores the wound: hazel tree bark shavings and poppy seed glue, mix them together to make a healing plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of the plaster applied provides bone fracture restoration and when you want to resolve ingrown toenail: recipe with ash from olive wood, pillowcase, flower petals of violas, wheat flour, all parts divided into three portions; they are crushed into powder and mixed in water here.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut, then soothe that wound with the water of cumin or some other liquid from there.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Autotherapy for healing a first-stage ulcer requires: an infusion of barberry root and wheat germ, along with honey, mint, majorana, flowers from violet and chamomile plants; all crushed and mixed in water taken from spring or well or boiled water (according to the quality of the limb and rest), this entire mixture.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras never dictates for his free time unless he is restoring you, and not using wax or oil as a cause; recommends that one travel between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia have seen that there are pauses on the broken part of them and their causes where exsiccation occurs due to warmth absorbed while bathing with myrrh, grains, and substances from those same causes recommended by him/her.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Here is the line-by extralanguage translation:
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the amount according to which you break and separate (the ligaments), is that it causes pain or bleeding not at all from its place; if so, do not wander about for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you feel severe pain or pressure in the location, then bend over that spot at once and apply a plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If at times the ulcer and swelling and pain and inflammation are already present throughout the body, and indigestion requires bandaging or constipation treatment, then repeat what you have done for the patient in their entirety as before.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of the causes mentioned above, then wait three days or four at most (or seven), and some measures may be taken for up to twenty days after you notice them during the detachment process; until the fracture adheres, as we have said.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	When it is necessary to adjust within the tightness that you may also have in your first overall stricture, and securely fixate on the abdomen'thy portion of what belongs to the melancholy humors according to when memory has been restored for them.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you find the fracture location and dry it out so that nothing remains to heal, know well that nourishment is forbidden to prevent recovery of this; therefore apply water vapor from yourself daily until these things are done for it; compress slightly with a bandage on three days, allowing fluid intake through food.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May those who heal the fracture of another limb not restored when dined upon and it is only repaired according to its twisted nature, as per their operation, which constitutes a great fear, and if rightly done would expand the Ancients in times unrestrained by food or war.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And they have not seen any water from them for that reason it is reasonable why there was no application of water on them.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capital Second Sentence: When a bone is broken in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The spices of fractures are motes (points), and their figures are various, the causes distinct: some bone breaks due to impact on a space, which enters into joints like elbows or knees causing pain if present in the arms as well; when an opening is made within this space by percussion with fingers ("osteopathic manipulation"), it allows body fluids (humors) inside these spaces where they can accumulate. This type of fracture, characterized by its absolute elevation or displacement from normal positioning, is called "lifted dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	When these joints are broken or severely injured (large or small), and the cause of this is due to impact or fracture; they suffer from concussion or splintering on stone or cobblestone pavement, as their appearance suggests.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This break or the one that has already entered into the periosteum (the layer surrounding the bone), either on the face of the bone itself, or in these broken bones' marrow - whether it is large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when there is a fracture in the bone, it occurs at the fineness of hair and thus this particular type of fine crack or fracture in the bone does not have a name.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it is pain in the bones of the joints when they are covered with phlegm (humors), similarly as feverish sweats appear on top of the skin'se surface.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So with all these hard fractures fixed, they are bound together like separate planks.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this fluid returns to its place, in that location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And examine all these remedies for detection of them and their attempts at dealing with the decaying flesh upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And when such special veins are discovered on the bone through which it has been struck and withdrazymed (bruised), they are avoided, held over lightly to prevent a blackbone breakage.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	When treating fractures consider the wounds of the humors and if through those accidents you see signs that indicate fear (like vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscesses in joints/limbs, syncope, acute fever, pulse rates and groans), these symptoms do not contribute to healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If an accident occurs due to misguided things (or bad habits), then you begin healing the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause is that pus has entered into your meal with you and at those times when it appears in joints during days twelve through, as soon as possible study its position within the bone structure from morning until evening twelfth day completely.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If during summer days you press your elbows on the patient'dict knees throughout the day, they believe that this causes damage to their pancreas and triggers incidents recommended by us.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already reached the brain'dictum (covering of the brain), and it is made up of small fragments and ardor (inflammation or heat due to injury), then you must insert the broken pieces as instructed by me.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	When you lift the head of the hernia and observe over the bones according to what is customary and natural for your body image, so that it lies flat on the hernia.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you feel pain in the bone to detect its fracture or osteomyelitis waxy swelling, then hold yourself near it with water that flows within and out of it; this will allow rest for the inflamed area inside where there is relief from numbness. You are secure against the flow of pus (sank); begin infection treatment at the site of bone damage or excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When it is second in a pair of operational means.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One of the reasons is that you insert one lancet into each tight area such as this way: and here it goes like so: Insert another lancet for these areas with a little less than what was previously inserted. This is how it should be done:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Et apply medicines that have been previously applied below for the second time.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	When they use it for gentle tapping on the joints, in order not to hit the head and lead that way:
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are hard and sharp, then when you administer injections into their circulatory system, these tubes (syringes) do not penetrate deeply.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	E for there is no name assigned but these who pause the bone of the thigh until it reaches below where the head meets with water (referring to joints), indicating that this point being round or a small margin on top, prevents submersion and passing through the hardness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these many ladders as needed for each part of the body, provided that they are present in all parts of your brain where sharpness resides; quantity should correspond to the degree of precision required by this aspect within those regions.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	Guard your utmost caution that the incision does not touch any cause of inflammation.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone goes through it and if separation continues at that place in the wound, they extract what comes out there; things like marrow and blood from within the hardened fluid inside the bone itself, which seem similar to knives, but also pus may come out.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If there is any small or loose part of the bones, then take that which makes it easy for you to remove from them what must be done with your instruments; and care for those things made of leather and cloth on which we work.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E percusses over the joints of a parted body at once allow bones to move freely during rotation, and you are secure in your pancreas that it will not suffer an accident under any circumstances—this applies if the physician is ignorant of their men and women; indeed, even while asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any additional cause related to the patient' extricable bone in their joints, insert that of it at its extreme part by means of said instrument and free it; because once liberated from his woe and fear, he finds relief.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and where it has broken or become detached is its facies (face), roughness occurs along with fine points therein; hence you must remove that roughness and eraddict those fine points using what you have prepared for these purposes in various quantities so as to be able at any time to administer them appropriately throughout the body where they are needed, placing each dose straight from your tools according to when it is required during your surgical intervention of the broken bone and restoration of the patient's figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any small cracks or breaks in the vessels and subtle fractures that require treatment according to what has been lost for correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because they have not been educated about all of these things in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	When we have shown great breaks in them,
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you remove the bone, wrap that limb with cloth as much as there is pus and immerse it in olive oil; then put another folded or tripled piece of cloth on top and submerge both in wine and olive oil so that no pressure injures him. Apply treatment to this sinew only for as long as the patient's fluid last, do not strain it but apply accordingly based upon how much fluid is present; treat with what you have applied above directly onto its tendon without stretching (only applying according to the amount of effusion).
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	When you make powder of these medicines and it is dry (if they are), apply them over the ground/earth; universally, administer in this entire medicine which has the property that prevents consumption and biting.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here is the line-by end translation:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And when there is pain in the skull as it is being crushed and primarily upon approaching the treatment of this person, consider that you may have accidents here too; understand then if sorrows attack all over his body afterward.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not alleviate the blackness but with medicine that is administered below, and it causes such darkness to be relieved by this medicine, then take some honey and oil in parts three, and apply these drops on their clothes; and place thereupon a cloth over them. Moreover, securely fasten those remedy packets above the site of inflammation with care for healing purposes as needed.
Capitol .iii.	In this translation attempt of an ancient medical text that resembles various
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When a nose is broken, it implies trauma or injury requiring attention and potentially restorative measures by healthcare professionals:
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Understand that the nose is not broken as such but rather divided into pieces by external force, with one piece being nasal bone (perhaps referring to septic fracture), which can be seen in radiographs; it's neither shattered nor subjected directly to impact since its breakage and deformation are consequences of twisting or compression.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the bones is broken and you insert a small object into its nose (assuming this refers to setting up an external fixator), secure that fracture at the indicated place on top of it, beyond where the foot ends, until returning the nostrзу back according to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	If this is for your ease and make sure you do not harm it during that operation on the patient'thy thighs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the break is in the upper chest bone and does not move towards it, then cover what has been broken with a piece of wood from where that part lies (the injured area).
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two parts, then make it appear as much as you can.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if the wound in your thigh is healing on the first day of injury, then that'dicts well; else, apply rest for seven or eight days as prescribed by inflamed area treatment (cautery).
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here the text translates to: Place a sheet of fabric in the patient's nose if there is a breakdown or fracture; apply splints where needed, filling up until it expands beyond the size of the nostril opening. Here are my line-by-line translation and interpretation:
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some days she enters through the nose, in a place of bedclothes, punishment given that it is wrapped in a lion'supreme cloth; and when her broken nose was forcefully put on and her malady not forbidden to breathe,
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do so nowhere and with whatsoaless purpose? (Here the text may be somewhat unclear due to archaic language or possible translation issues from a medieval medical context.) The phrase "fay aquo" seems unusual as it doesn't align well with
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you apply a warm application poultice to the nose or chin with honey and oil rubbed on it, or an infusion of some kind (possibly referring to herbal tea). This suggests using heat therapy along with natural substances like honey for pain relief. The line is advising either heating up a paste made from these ingredients directly onto the body area in question — here likely used as remedies against
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not apply the poultice (which likely refers to one made from farina of sage and pepper mixed with alum powder), then coat that area with flour taken out of thyme seeds; place your hand over it, avoiding any possible cause. This indicates a different treatment method using specific herbs—thyme in this case (sometimes used for its antiseptic properties) combined and coated as an alternative remedy to cover the affected spot on one's body where poultices are not being applied directly; with hands over, they aim to prevent further issues. The passage suggests a traditional home-based approach using locally available materials before resorting to more direct application
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If you have broken bones in your nose or if they are dislocated (implying that the displaced fragments can be manipulated back into place), then cover those areas with appropriate instruments as decided upon for them; and apply it therein, taking care of whatever fluid represents their essence within this body conditioning process. Here a practitioner advises to use tools specifically chosen by oneself (or presumably another medical professional)—to delicately realign any bone fragments or dislocated structures in the nose with these instruments; afterward they must apply an appropriate liquid, possibly representing blood for clotting and healing properties. This line is likely a complex directive from medieval medicine concerning emergency treatment using basic tools to manage traumatic injuries by restoring natural positioning of bone fragments or dislocations through manual intervention—followed by further care with specific fluids (blood, possibly obtained internally
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you suffocate a patient by pressing their nose, then take care of that wound with these very good pus and insert tubes (likely for draining) into it to ensure complete healing.
Capitol .iiii.	Given that there is no text provided for translation beyond "Capitol .
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	The phrase in question, which appears to be a directive or description of an action related to the treatment of jaw fracture ("mandibula
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone has cracked and is not yet broken in two places or curved towards each division of teeth, if the fracture alone does this without breaking apart completely (not "trincada" which means actually broken), then its knowledge should be light ("leugiera").  
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is broken into pieces, then it'dict that you administer extension of parts according to proper positioning so that healing may be possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you apply pressure to the wound and hope that it heals with silver or gold threads (or copper), then pause over the broken jawbone fragment, as well as a doubled cloth wrap placed on top of it; also place one pad solely along the length of the jawbone fracture—this is what you hold when dressed in your clothing and apply afterward without destroying.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When commanded by the malady (illness), let it rest and find peace, and stop swallowing its food bites (small portions of nourishment).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If the figure has become distorted in any manner, then you should apply pressure to that part on the third day; and correct what is already altered from it by applying a poultice made of chalk, egg white, or cornmeal paste, placing this directly onto the affected area with your hands.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is placed on him and the position of his bones remains unchanged, let it be so long as he recovers strength from this brokenness; for after three days such a break can generally begin to mend.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another ulcerative condition occurs, apply what we have discussed for these previous wounds inside the patient until it is healed and that ailment has been alleviated as well.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is freshly formed bone, consider whether it has separated from or been displaced by water (representing blood flow), and if so, apply that same fluid to where those fragments are within the skeleton during its treatment in this context.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the poultice of the patient is dry, then increase it according to the amount you need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed those swellings, and if they do not disappear on their own, then apply dressing made of plaster to that area; otherwise, rest upon one of the supports designed for this purpose until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Given that "Capitol" is not an intelligible part
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When you break (or fracture) the sternum when hunching over, it's time for medical attention at a restaurant/eating place:  
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When repeated heavy lifting of the dish leads to a broken sternum (fractured clavicle), it is classified into one of three types:  
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it's broken (fractured), separated in two pieces that do not come together spontaneously without surgical intervention; or if there is an open wound, and treatment at the eating place/restaurant will be difficult; or when a child has suffered such fracture.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the operation is carried out in that way, it means you make two servants present; one holds his hand as an assistant and supports the broken sternum there where it's fractured, while the other extends the chest over that divided area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Here is the line by line translation into English:
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion persists for days, then you should apply pressure on the abdomen with a cloth or wool as needed; and raise your chest and contract your shoulder according to what is necessary; elevate and compress the area where pressure was applied until relief occurs.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the extremity of the shoulder blade to the parts behind it, then by so much it has come down to the sternum, and covers its own mass on top of the chest muscle in a great migration.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And when you press on his muscles at the joints while the shoulder bone is elevated above them in their sockets, then correct that fracture and apply pressure with those same tools onto the tender parts of him.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel bones of the neck and shoulders sore and painful, then cut over that area to alleviate those sorbings easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then you will create an incision on one of those which has been applied to it. Place a pause briefly at the sternum's structure that serves as support for this implement; and herein lies its form made from either wood or iron:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It appears that this text is from an old medical manuscript and attempts to describe a treatment procedure in the context of medieval medicine using terminology influenced by Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French languages:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of it be as far as you can for surgery; let there be times when nails are taken out with forceps and one digit is large while the other is straightened.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the stone you have inserted when extracting the seed is wide open and there are signs of suppuration (infection), then adjust the lips of the stone within it with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the displacement is slight or you fear an abscess formation, apply poultices and pills according to the amount of separation in the flesh.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you have an abscess that needs draining, then apply warm cloth and oil on it, and pause over the area where the action occurs.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the rigidity of bone when it is suffused and swollen be bound tightly with wheaten flour mixed in albumen (egg whites), placed over a block of lead to maintain pressure, held by hands wearing leather straps that are long enough for proper grip; additionally wrap the binding twice around both bandage and splint at their location above where fracture occurs. Then apply hand wrappings with human flesh as padding beneath it while rolling outward along the leg bone's column, continuing to massage those areas of tenderness on lower limb and upper thigh; after that enclose all this in cloth drapes further covered by a stone tablet subtly shaped into three thickness layers with an elongated form. Wrap these together at the fracture site, ensuring it is not concealed under your clothing when you move around.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Return the patient' extrusion from underneath their abdomen to the chest column (belly button area), and gently tap them there, so that it will make him sleep in his belly one night at a time within these small intervals; thus allowing for this person’s helper of hands/body on top of which something has happened—either raising the fractured shoulder blade to elevate muscle or lifting up their arm by where something occurred.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	E does not release the ligament unless it hardens or inflamed in that spot within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	When you have seen the face of him to water (indicating fever or inflammation), adjust the plaster accordingly, tighten it at the narrowing and restore and allow for clotting of the shoulder'se bone fracture.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Strict and comfortable according to the measure in twenty-eight days, some complaints may occur among healthy individuals at that time of year.
Capitol .vi.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English while considering
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The phrase "Capitol .vi." appears incomplete and doesn't provide enough context to offer a precise translation or interpretation, especially in
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The provided fragment "Capitol .vi." seems like an incomplete sentence that likely refers to something discussed previously within the text, possibly related to spinal restoration as suggested by context elsewhere in your message ("Spatula tart es trencada"). However, without additional information or a
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	The text snippet you've provided seems like an attempt at translation from the medieval medical context into English, although it is somewhat disjointed and contains language that may not be entirely accurate:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Even out the powder of honey and egg white, apply it over him/her as directed by the size of the entire or partial spreading tool (spatula). Then place a double-layered cloth pad on top; adjust according to what is covered by the spatula entirely or partially.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May it be that when the stone is concave at some of the locations on the chisel, then you grasp that concavity with your thumb and press down hard (like pressing a lion), and adjust the stone accordingly to ensure equal thickness.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from above, away from contraction and the firmness of the spine within that it does not become weakened at its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, strengthen it again with exercise for as long as its swelling from its location has subsided.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When you lay down your malady upon its seat (its place or location), do so in a way that respects and maintains it there, indicating perhaps
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The translation of the provided phrase into English would be: "And the spatula is restored in xx days or x.x." Here 'xx' represents a numerical value that should indicate
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Thus when this number is completed, you will break down the ligature (an instrument for binding or securing), and understand that it's safe from fear of damaging those bones which I began not to worry about at all initially. In context: Whenever we reach a specified amount—be it in days ('xx') as mentioned earlier, with '.x.v.' likely representing the decimal equivalent '0.5', or some other number altogether (as indicated by placeholders)—that's when you dissolve any binding
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed to the place of bone and apply forceful pressure with hands quickly (and hold), secure it there, as we have mentioned in regards to fixing the fractured sternum's clavicle joint if necessary here: This suggests that once immediate care is given by applying direct manual intervention at a specific location on the body—likely involving gentle but firm handling of bones and possibly immobilization with hand pressure or splints, especially for more severe injuries such as fractures (as referenced in connection to healing practices). In English: If you go directly to where the bone is located and press down quickly with your hands, hold it securely put there. We have already discussed
Capitol .vii.	The phrase "Capitol VII." likely refers to a specific edition or volume
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Regarding the restoration of the chest bone (sternum), it implies that there's already been discussion on how such an injury
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The thighs some times are broken down in the warm place of him and they may move there with movements that his limbs undergo, perhaps due to their cramps and injuries.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When accidents occur and the patient's bones are broken or bruised, causing great pain in their body, coughing, fever, headache, strong weakness, and sickly feeling; these conditions become apparent inside the fractured bone and they cannot be hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of him is that his thighs are placed on their two legs with a gap between the shoulders; and to the muscles he is tightened as in more than two positions at once, subtly engaging during the operation according to all possible manners conducive to recovery, until returning the figure of the bone.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke the dismemberment of that which has decayed or protruding (which causes pain at this location), then you must break apart and remove the impaction, correct what has caused your illness by applying medicinal intervention; furthermore, if needed adjustments are required on the face for aesthetic reasons after healing is complete.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The text following this reference likely continues with
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When beaches are broken, the restoration of these coastlines occurs. This could involve natural processes like sediment transportation and sand dune formation
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Those who understand that the breakage of coastlines happens in large areas, and not just at specific points; furthermore, it is through these thick limestone cliffs (or bony rocks) where their arms are unlikely to be injured towards those fractures but rather as they pass over them. This translation suggests a focus on understanding that the damage affects extensive strets of land characterized by heavy rock formations and advises caution when moving across such terrain due to potential hazards, not just at points where cracks or breaks are evident.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Upon learning that he/she is not afraid of his feelings while under investigation,
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for healing the fracture as far as possible according to its nature, let it be immobilized and tightly bound with splints or metal if necessary from that onwards; apply this treatment when needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the backbone is descending into parts, it causes severe pain and piercing sensation, similar when one cries out in pain, and for this reason you must put on a bandage; difficulty breathing occurs along with cough, vomiting up motion, and these symptoms require difficult treatment.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	E already the Ants are working in that powerful movement.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Here come their saying: coverings that they take from the swelling and inflammation caused by bloat (dysentery), so that the belly becomes full and extended, causing separation of parts beyond repair.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we consume this water to ensure it is not the cause of generating an abscess treatment if you do not suffer from arsenic poisoning; and if you already have suffered, here too helps with the arsenic consumption.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E disseran aqueles loues que sia pausada desu ventos e apropoque su coito am fortitudios; et es semblant a ratioçao, ma empero tenon tento que la ventoza atir les superflutatz al loc per la debilitat.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Their patient said that where it is covered with wax dipped in oil, there are puffs between their back and abdomen when wrapped for the second round of tightness; apply care to his pleurisy caused by food or medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the groin (belly) is strongly contracted and does not suffer, pinch it with a lancet for puncture; fear over the belly as they break through at this location, discovering what has been broken from the coast that was torn earlier—this instrument precedes memory of which care allows your hands to facilitate ease and remove (extract) that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	When we adjust the lips of the patient if they are swolthy, for comfort and to heal that which is inside them.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you crush the stone of an abscess, then insert and press your fingers into it and place them over the spot to heal the inflammation with the fluid that covers the abscess stone.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When it is positioned over the bed where it rests, so that it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol IX" does not provide any context
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The provided text appears to be in a medical or surgical context, discussing the treatment of vertebral body and column fractures, likely referring to cervical (neck
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	The text in question seems to be discussing complications following vertebral body and column fractures (which likely pertains to the cervical or thoracic region of the spine) with a particular focus on those resembling, but not exactly being, intervertebral disc issues. Here is an attempt at translation:
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When you have applied poultices to the abdomen and waist for knowledge if it will heal or not, then consider that if your pains are already softened and stupefied and dead without being able to extend them nor with strength in those places where tightness occurs due to knots therein holding needles—those points; you understand that they do not cure, for it is mortal at the times of dispositions.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If the same is felt in those places and through pinpointing or piercing them, you will know that the bone of the skull is saved, and these humors are healed by care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see that the vertebrae of his back resemble water and wish to know if it will heal or not, then pay attention to his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you find that the patient is already soothed, apply those waters to their most parts and when they are on top of their two feet, wind breathes in and digestion acts according to its will; some may recline over their two feet and urinate or not be able to hold it back. Be wise as this could mean death, therefore do not attempt further treatment at all.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May if you do not cure any cause of those things, then that very thing is worse and more painful.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of it is that you perform the application of a caustic applied on the spinal disc compressed or eroded, possibly with mustard plasters from housewives' ovens and others for several hours until such time as this same remedy calms down its action.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And when a comfortable cushion, which exists for comfort and rests upon that very limb where pain resides within so it may heal, instruct the humors to take repose and tranquility therein, ensuring they do not sleep on the part from whence the agony comes.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you have cracked the bone or any cause that has already separated from it, cover it with cloth and press on the area where the bone is; adjust the wound lips of the patient's body if large, suture them if necessary, and care for those affected by greasy ointments until they heal.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	May your bone be broken on the top of the hip joints (hips), and it is the day of the hernia; then when you insert one hand into the left side below in the belly (belly area) to fix the broken bone, taking care that this does not happen again above where possible by means of a cushion or bedding. If indigestion occurs from these actions, rest over them with bandage and pillowcase; also strengthen your body at those times if necessary.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel splinters broken in the flesh, then touch that area and stabilize it; for healers apply such remedies only when previous treatment within which they are cured has taken place.
Capitol .x.	In this line of text extracted from a medieval medical treatise with mixed
De restauracio de la ancha.	The phrase "Capitol" in this context seems like it could refer either to the physical capital
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	In this interpretation of the original medieval text:
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of him is that you spread your hand over whatsothy are on the broken figure, which represents his form or body part in need of healing.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only in one limb of him/her/them alone, then you should clothe that second part which he/she/they dress when entering through the entrance gate back into their normal body shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is long or already decreasing to parts, then you shall cry out on the patient' extraterrestrial (possibly meaning internal organs) within where they are being prepared for healing of that very fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	When you have numbed that area with plaster (impression), pause over the splint made of wood or bone, and press firmly on the location where there is no fear of a crack for fracture nor removal of the screw.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The convexity is where the water accumulately fills that which narrows it according to its equivalent, and commands the malady (illness) to sleep on its chest or backside.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May you alleviate the affliction with caution, then cease stretching of it and its restoration within until that which has been applied soothes the affliction; return to the patient'supremacy again, applying pressure over what preceded this second. And strengthen your effort when healing occurs thereupon.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you experience pain in the bones or they are fractured, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (This line appears as an identifier or
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	In the treatment of barista'sfracture." can be translated to English as: "The treatment for a coffee shop employee's b
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Your sentence in Latin reads, "Adjutori is who is between the shoulders within the top of the shoulder." The translation to English would be: "The adjutant is someone situated between the shoulders at the upper part of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	The sentence in English reads as follows after translation from Latin to your context-based instruction related question: "If it's broken, the restoration of him/her is done through one of two methods; which you grasp with a stick meant for pulling out nails." The implication here seems that there are specific healing practices or interventions being referred to—likely some form of primitive medical treatment where manual tools such as sticks might have been used.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	E they are strapped in two places and hung from that raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Here follows the limb over a cushion; place your broken arm inside where it will reach the tilting of its joint at this warm spot, to which is attached the curve of the staff.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another action is that the hernia rises above the pelvis and suspends its middle from the neck of the patient's spine, two servants command it with their fingers where there is a fracture in them; one touches immediately while the other extends to the part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish the extension to be strong, then lean over the fracture with bandages and on those other bands, let each of the two servants stretch their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the limb'supremacy,' then make sure that one ligament rests on the joint and another holds the break immediately away from it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is directed towards the groin area, then it must be bandaged over that spot and on top of that hip joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "English it facilitates and soothes her, and as much more is applied according to good application, thus strengthens that which has not been injured by aplication.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you apply cautery for an abscess, leave it inside the seventh day, and place a stitched wool pad on top of that, resting there until another application of cautery is done, then tighten that bandage around it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the sheet and strength on the assistant'thy arms to keep them in place as shoulder straps, provided that none of these causes any harm to their bones.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	When it is necessary (and) they use tweezers/pincers.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength over the bones at which I have mentioned as constriction of the capital joint,
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your tightness is at the location of the break loose or unbound (i.dict "la stricuta" refers here likely to a bandage, cast, etc., and being in such condition could mean that it
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the break is shortened (i.dict "lapsa"), which may refer to either movement of a limb or reduction techniques for a broken bone, you have lessen
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	So if at the time when you restore your limb to its proper condition (which may involve setting a bone or adjusting bandages), then do so accordingly as previously discussed with them about stones and tightness issues. Here 'stela' could refer either metaphorically, perhaps in reference to splints used for fractures ('fracturas'), or it might also be taken literally if the context involved actual stone devices employed historically within medical practice (such as certain types of
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear articular effusion or require a reduction (referring to the management of joint inflammation that often accompanies gout, and 'articular effusion' here is synonymous with fluid accumulation in a joint space), then make adjustments to tightness and splints within six days as we discussed. Here it emphasizes prompt attention to changes or complications such
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Therefore, consider the ligament in its entirety for three days to prevent dislocation or inflammation at the site (emphasizing immediate and comprehensive management), as well as prohibiting food from interfering with excessive tightness due to dietary causes; accordingly adjust each day according to what we have discussed. Here 'liament' refers specifically to ligaments, which are critical in maintaining joint stability but can be strained or damaged by conditions like gout. This highlights the importance of a holistic approach – considering both physical treatment and nutritional advice (potentially dietary changes) as part of managing health issues such as those associated with 'gout' which, in
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If there is nothing found on examination under the linen that causes it (the condition), then do not remove the bandage but apply it for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his malady of the thigh rest on his two legs, and their hands be over the abdomen.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the assistant'thy cooked in wool all at once, and consider throughout the day whether not the figure of the broken limb is dissolved or if there remains a softening ligament; then correct according to your will.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the meat of the malady according to their order today, so that it is subtle during mealtime; and cover if they are fatty in nature.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom of the assistant and on their bed, they should be strong for X days; furthermore, when weakened, it is necessary that baths are given along with ointments applied using oil which correct such condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If there is a fracture that has become tightened (set or healed with reduced mobility), do not attempt to loosen it from where the ligament and screws are inserted, until after several days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	In this translation task involving an ancient or medieval medical text that blends Latin with
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The provided line appears to be in a mixture of old Romance languages and possibly archaic terms related to medicine,
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Translation: The arm is composed of two bones which are called the small and large focal points; these refer to the little finger's head (the smaller one) that receives nail pressure as its name suggests, and the other larger point where it becomes detached due to a sudden parting force applied.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	Only when the larger or smaller fire is broken only then do they break up steam engines.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire below is broken, then restoration of it becomes difficult for him/her, and healing also takes longer.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the fire of him breaks down at a distance (presumably meaning that he is far away or separated from his source), then the injury to him becomes bad and recovery for him is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that bone of it was broken into two pieces or shattered.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Then if the bone that is broken it's the smaller one above (the skull), then it is convenient for a doctor to restore it so little extension can be easily done while they are unconscious.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May if the great fire is that which has been struck and caused you (the patient) to be moved violently?
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two fires are joined together, then when you pause their extraction forcefully,
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of your hand must be restored and extended over a limb, place it on their legs' parts (presumably referring to fingers or arms), as well as all others doing so; put each other's hands accordingly. The malady is placed centrally under an inverted cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	When a hernia is present under or beyond it in the body, so that the humors do not worsen.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Extend the arm of the departed patient slowly above their head or along the spine; another minister extends outward as if doing so.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Return (or position) the doctor's hand inside the patient'thy bone that has been reduced, following its best shape as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone structure you have caused it to crumble completely at its place by your action, then make up for all of this with your virtue (meaning strength or moral integrity).
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in it a separate stone that pierces the navel and is not within your hope for its restoration, then you must act upon it according to our instructions herein described.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May if the fracture is in a young state (meaning fresh or recent), you will find pain localized to that one spot specifically, and therefore take care of it immediately.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you have applied cauterization at the patient'se restoration site, then tighten with cloth dipped in olive oil and white wax between delicate care and firm handling; secure this same fabric over that precise area where the application of caustic has occurred; remove said wax afterward using plaster paste made from powdered hemp mixed with lime (chalk), then pause, placing staples on it so long as healing continues. Here they have applied cauterization at a patient's restoration site and tightened the area carefully while monitoring between delicate handling and firm intervention; secured this same fabric over that specific spot where caustic treatment was done to assist in repair, with staples placed on it until further notice for additional support during healing.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	E be aware that the bones of the arm are found in major positions or a fracture occurs at one focus point or two foci simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the translation of each sentence from Old Spanish-influenced medical text:
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here is the translation of each line:
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and its softened (or swolthy) joints today.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If you have any cause that requires correction, apply it to the affected limb and ensure that your application of pressure continues until that discomfort ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Le text provided seems like it could be from an old medical treatise with elements of Medieval Latin and perhaps some Old French or other regional languages as well due to the similarity in vocabulthy used across these mentioned tongues during medieval times, which often share common
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the contraction has become softer and bone is returning to its place with a resemblance of normal functioning again, then you must correct all moisture from your body as a whole through proper treatment by yourself or under professional guidance.  
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if nourishment is prohibited to prevent harm to the member due to excessive tightness; when this happens, ease that little and soothe it for as many days until such time as they receive their necessary nutriment, strengthening them afterward.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If there is not any cause for that which has been mentioned about the patient'thy leg, then do not expect to heal it within the next twenty days or so from those causes.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Return its position in the groin for its active motion disturbance and let it sleep on their backs.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You understand that this fracture is restored in either xxx days or xxxii days, and everything depends on the complexity of the injury and the disposition of the humors (referring to bodily fluids).
Capitol .xiii.	The provided text appears as if it were transcribed from Middle English or Old French
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	This sentence seems to be in a medieval Latin context, likely referring to the treatment of wrist and finger bones (the "pinch" being colloquial for one's hand or fingers).
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You understand that when there is a break in the wrist and fingers (implied by "the pinch of the hand" or "pinches"), it's not to pity but rather careful attention required for their healing. Here, 'endeve fractura' refers to dealing with such injuries ('to deal'), while ‘atricio motas veguadas’ translates roughly as consistent care and vigilance in treatment – the
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you treat the wrist or hand fracture (injury), it's essential that cold humors follow their natural course and are removed thereafter every ten parts of equality—and place your hands over this stretched area to prevent further displacement. This line speaks about managing a bone injury with traditional remedies, suggesting the use of heat ('natural course') as part of treatment after an initial stage (which may involve some form of cold application or restraint), and then monitoring progress by assessing it every ten parts – possibly referring to body segments divided into equal portions for
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Apply the minister (treatment or physician) to extend broken bones and ensure those within are well-aligned – this is what a skilled doctor would aim for in repositioning fractured limbs, ensuring proper alignment ('congongizio') during healing. Here 'o ministro' likely refers both to the person treating you (in English terms) as either
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Watch if compression bandages and splints are used instead (as an alternative treatment), rather than allowing for ulceration to develop; place a stopper there below according to the area's extent – you have already wrapped it in linen or cloth ('drape'). This suggests monitoring wound care, particularly when using immobilization methods like bandages and splints. It also implies assessing how far an injury extends before applying treatment dressings (linen), which speaks about post-injury management with non-pharmaceutical interventions common in historical medical practice to prevent comp
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	May it be if the bruise is in the parts of disintegration and seems like drape fabric, then make its corresponding thread tight on that spot with your hand (the malady), making sure to pull firmly as well so long as you are holding onto it there; this makes for a strong link.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Where the body lies on the cloth in which it rests, thus applying it to the palm of your hand: and tighten that second one around it.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the extremities (parts away from the center), then stop pressing below and above on that part of the body with hands in palms, so that it becomes protected; also pause the tightness, as you turn your hand between the joints where the ligaments are.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break the bones of the fingers and toes (digits), then if it is your finger that has been broken, straighten it as best as possible using pressure with your palm, and pause for a short while there on the small splint so that the fracture can be elevated and not swolgy.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be so that if the fracture is in those places mentioned here (the hip joint), or at this place, or in the earlobe, or around the ankle; and they are all broken down continuously, better to stop over these small stones just as when we have them there on our feet.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider it in your restoration process and apply that appropriate cast or dressing – as is done during the operation – whenever you encounter a cause of this condition described herein.
Capitol .xiv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide text for translation
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	The phrase provided translates as follows in English, concerning the treatment of a pubic bone fracture:
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are worn down and declared according to what is converted into motion from above, towards the upper body position.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of him is done so that the sinew is tightened over the fracture and another bandage placed immediately afterward; the humors are pressed down on his abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Extend the minister fully according to the quality when the fracture occurs at the bone'moment of impact location.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	May it be for the benefit of the knee joint' extrinsic ligament placed at the party of the patella, thus extending its compartment and allowing another fragment to heal properly outside in case there is a dislocation.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the dislocation is due to cold or rainy weather conditions, then it will be treated with ligaments suitable for dampness and its extension shall occur in the joints immediately.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here the doctor applies a bandage to the two halves of the patient' extrinsic limb until you reduce it back to its natural state and joints are well joined by good union; provided that there is not spinal cord compression, which would affect an appendicized member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If there is an ulcer in you, then let that day be the time for its healing after which it returns to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strictures of the patient are painful: they wrap over the fracture with a hard bandage, folding it twice or three times until excess is removed; and then properly apply the wrapping so that it reaches down to the ankle and knee joints where their limbs meet.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Here inserts long rope between the thigh and leg piece provided by the donation of parts for limbs' extremities, where they will turn around on the thigh and leg pieces as needed due to excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return your hand'se position above the area of that crack in the bone they have suffered from, and keep pressure on one stone placed over their shoulder blade (from which another is resting).
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return and fill the empty spaces between the sheet (drape) and thighs to ensure that bleeding stops (coagulation).
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here begins the constriction of tight swelling from a bone break in three or four layers around the site of fracture; and as you move away from the location of the fracture, your constriction becomes lighter and softens it with moisture.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Here is the translation for each line:
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Here comes the translation of each line:
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone of which you have touched, then cover that second one if it's possible for you; otherwise, press on it and cure what has been remembered before its healing within your reach.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some precautions for this pelvic fracture are taken now as we have mentioned in the assistant and on our arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even in the process of restoration in such a manner does not heal the leg that has been immobilized; and if it is restored alone, another application must be applied thereafter on the other cushion, as claudication will still occur from that limb.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	E understand that the hernia is tightened in forty days or a few months and all of this depends on the complexity and other available means/resources.
Capitol .xv.	In translating this medieval medical treatise line by line into English while attempting to
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	The text appears to be in a Romance language, possibly Catalan or another vernacpective dialect that incorporates elements from Latin and other nearby languages like Spanish, French, and Italian as
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The sentence you've provided appears to be in Catalan with an archaic and potentially erroneous structure that borrows elements from various Romance languages:
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If you have broken the bone of your patient, it is not just a crack or break in their parts; rather, it'thy fracture and healing involve mud or dirt, which constitutes its entire state of feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	Restoration of the patient is to be done by applying moisture that has been broken off from their parts, added together and joined in such a way as can possibly fit into equilibrium and simplicity for use or treatment.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Return compression bandages and pressure over that round stone if you feel weakness from it; apply firmly above to prevent the stone'dict motion downward.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	E return to consider all the arrangements that have been recommended for other fractures, as well as proper application of cautery and simile in those who need it to enter so they can be healed from this accident at hand.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (This line seems like it could be referencing
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	From your fragmented text, I can deduce that you're referring to the treatment of a femoral shaft fracture in Latin-
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You've provided a Latin phrase related to the femoral shaft fracture which I can translate:
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	When you apply vinegar to the two bones of the arm, and by this means heal your limb along with its internal restoration, then his operation here is complete.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are fractured together, then the cushion becomes divided into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the bone is being twisted subtly, then the cushion becomes parts of Denton.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If your bone is fractured and you should quickly treat it, as those causes are not under your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Return treatment extension and flexion of the joints according to that method.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	May God help us, if the crack in the coccyx has caused spasms and pain, then apply pressure here with your willpower.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you engage with tongs to perform the entire surgery, then take wooden pincers made of pipe that are paused just after those causes where operations have been stopped in soles (days), and these tools will be used as saws. Apply them carefully only to what was previously touched by hand lice or nails from palm trees; apply the touching part according to its length, following the arm's length, and insert into it quickly after dipping those parts in urine (after rinsing with water).
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Return their pains to the three points of pain and at nighttime in bed, which is why it' extraneous movement towards either right or left limb is not allowed, for good measure/purpose.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a lance of wood is administered according to the length of the couch, and it is placed on the couch in such a way that maintains its ability for motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you apply it in a fracture, and at that moment is properly done.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii." - This line appears to be a reference or
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	From the breakdown of the ankle and the bones of the foot, and the phalanges (toe bones). The sentence in English would be: "Fracture of the an
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 From the breakdown: "Al talo (ankle) does not suffer breaks in total; however, some bones of the foot may experience it severely—and toes seldom get broken and instead bruise within their joints." This translation conveys that while ankle fractures are significant injuries on their own ("accideys"), they can vary. Some smaller structures in the foot, like bones (osses del pe), might not break completely but rather suffer severe damage or 'bruises,' which affect how joints move and function within these areas of injury ('mes de disposicio').
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot break and sometimes those very same bones are lifted between them themselves, then gout causes the patient' extrication from earth prepared for such occasion with antidote (prepared in advance).
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Here comes the translation for this medieval medical text:
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Return pressure and stops below, and apply gentle compression on the abdomen within this small chest-like container where two covers are placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Return strength to that part of the body with its structure being stretched out and wrapped in cloths; address other origins for which poor digestion may be causing this, such as these reasons you have covered beforehand (referring back).
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage; you will crush the bones that are out of joint, whether they be fractures or dislocations, and in those cases an operation is necessary with knives.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If you have opened their thighs for treatment, then restore those areas and anoint them as directed by me in the restoration of these parts.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If the joint has been cracked in two or three places, then pause on any one of its parts covered by a lion-skin wrap, and stretch the table under the chest part of the body, keeping it on top of one of the legs of the table to ensure good grip.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not overlook the reasons mentioned to you in other injuries we have discussed, and I shall address everything related to this water-induced incident.
Capitol .xviii.	The given text is clearly written in Middle English or Old French influenced by Latin medical terminology
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	This sentence appears to be a translation of an old, possibly medieval text related to medicine and is written in Middle English with some Latin influence (indicated by "e" as the object case ending for masculine nouns). The phrase seems to describe fractures involving different parts
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone of the woman is broken, it should lie in that position wherein it's slightly inclined towards the region between the two halves (the pelvis), and its hand held behind. This line indicates an old medical practice for treating a fractured pubic bone by placing it carefully at rest with supportive positions and handling to aid recovery, likely before modern orthopedic techniques were available.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And place the matron on top of the bedcloth (the cover), and pain is in her joints already, as if she were pregnant; also apply pressure to the woman who has been struck down, lifting each part of her body gradually until everything that came out inside returns there while being held during labor.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Here applies pressure on the two of them (presumably referring to parts being treated), and when urinating they reduce discomfort through facilitation with urine; then return that second in accordance with their will, and bring back again what is first.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Translation line by line into English:
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take one oval and tightly place it over the patient'thy area using a hollow reed; insert the bladder entirely into its container so that when inserted, the bladder inflates within the container, which makes the fracture heal.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Return it is filled with bandages and stays for several days until healed inside whereby the patient recovers.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of the pelvis or thigh are broken, administer to them here and now (the) water that we have recommended for their hipbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the joint in the home is broken, take honey from an ox's udder, and apply it to that area; place your pause over this layer of cloth wrap, covering it completely, and keep covered for three days or send these along with others who will help care for you during this period until healed.
Capitol .xix.	In translating this medieval medical treatise line by line into English while trying to
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When bones are broken in children, their healing process is generally faster compared to adults due to the presence of growth factors and cells with regenerative abilities that facilitate repair
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to the place where you cast the fracture when it comes in children, and mostly if that bone has grown considerably like hip or shoulder joints—or similar places near which one feels comfortable as their own body parts (which they cut out for casting at such time), then treat them similarly hereafter.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the child flies away (refers to an infant or young patient who may have wandered off), then you must hold them back in your arms so that they do not scatter further and cause more trouble unless there is another reason for their escape.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When commencing to repair the fracture on that day, do not extend it further unless you encounter suppuration (infection).
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you apply cauterization if there' extruded swelling (possibly referring to an abscess), and after treatment inside the patient within one day until it subsides; by then do not introduce anything into them on the third or fourth days, otherwise bad accidents may occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is fractured and protrudes above the navel, then you must reduce that which has broken off therein with your hands for ease of manipulation and a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be due to extension that you are unprepared, and the equipment of your patient is at their sides; then reduce this area with yours own hands as far as possible, using iron for its length which can range from seven or eight digits (fingers), and according to the size of the swelling, apply pressure accordingly. Therefore, it becomes necessary for a doctor who needs to compress these three or four times based on what is required in their overall treatment approach during bone healing/recovery.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And whether it is relief or a slight discomfort for that reason the comprehension should not be disturbed over what happens there during surgery.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it happens:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E it is commonly known in Greek as "Labra Volantis Atelares," thus, a small cushion or pad is used.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that reason which is stopped at its end must stand raised on the bone' extrémity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	In a resting period where bones return and joints are anointed with some kind of apparatus (likely referring to cushions or supports), here comes the first source sentence:
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so you should grasp the limbs of the fracture with them, and if the patient' extruded limb is delicate, do not take that instrument for good correction; rather insert therein such an implement as it has power to hold liquid (i.e., introduce a suitable tool or device).
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone of all that we have recommended, then separate and remove from there what comes into your vessel from those abscesses which we advise upon; or cut off one piece of it using any saw at your disposal.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Return that which is hard in the bone and small nails;
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and you maintain that reduction in the groin area; thus when you confer great benefit to the hernia, be aware that the bone should not return to its natural place.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and the cloth dipped in a strict black wipe comes into contact with the skin, especially if it's summer, and you do not place it on dirt or any other cause where oil may be present to prevent injury such as cutting or corrosion from occurring.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Here is the line by line translation of each sentence:
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a looseness of bone (perhaps referring to osteoporosis or some form of softening/weakness in the bone), unlike other types of fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the patient is heavy or bad and you fear those harmful accidents upon them, causing pain in that area, do not pause over those pillows; perhaps it may go to the hard cloth cover of these supports where they lie rested therewith.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once or twice a day the patient begins to experience chilliness (bear), on that very cloth where you have placed them resting with cold applied above their heart, apply warm compresses as per our custom for treating illnesses; provided there is liniment and herbs along with this remedy.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Ensure that you loosen and consider the worm in each day, morning and evening when it enters inside so that the limb is prepared for treatment according to this manner.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the child passes motion for days and their trousers do not solidify nor detach from them, then you know that small objects are inside where they can be found by searching within the garments.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (presumably referring to joints or sinews) that are separated and extracted, the ones that cannot be further removed and cause limb pain when placed back in position—these should you insert according as it is within your reach.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you have pain in the joints or ligaments, then it is arthritis or another type of deterioration and putrefaction, so that breaks down one out of those fluids which are necessary for healing as explained before in your medical booklet.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	Of the water in which I am speaking and presenting my case: when large bones are broken, they protrude from the thighs and hips as if belonging to them or their helpers, without fear of suction by this fluid; maintain such within a fortnight (20 days) or three weeks at most. And should you see it while doing so, then take care for that creature inside—if not seen yet: continue caring until the object is completely removed internally and death has been prevented due to poisonous effluvia from this fluid; therein lies your task during those days of observation or weeks of treatment.
Capitol .xx.	Capital Section XX (assuming "Capitol" refers to
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	From the scaffolding of healing that you build within the wreckage of any bone fracture:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Movements are guided in the healing of this connection primarily at the joints, and they shape the figure of the body part; firmly forbid doing so with its own operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Now consider if the binding is recent and apply to that place these medicines which have tightened your joints yesterday through bloodletting (leeches), cupping/suction, serpent venom, crushed shellfish, or white wine; in order for some of those remedies partially or completely take effect on their own strength, rest them there with a sponge and press down gently.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Extract it gradually over a few days; and apply heat therapy alternately on that area until the swelling subsides. Or place iron directly onto that bone surface, as iron has properties of expelling all accumulated fluid in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that the knot has been turned and twisted therein is necessary to provoke that which comes out of this place, cut away excessively superfluous parts from its upper section whereupon you should remove such by means within so as it may return healthier; attend hereby upon what heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Given that this medieval medical text is constructed with elements from Latin, Italian,
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the bone heals after being set and properly aligned according to nature'dictions of Roman medicine, it is restored with care in its subtlety and flexibility as prescribed by their guidelines. (This translation assumes that "Capitol .xxi." refers to a specific section or page within an ancient text discussing
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, it follows the Roman methods for subtlety and flexibility: these include multiple reasons such as improper use of ligature (which constricts nutrition to the limb), excessive tightness in places where the suture was applied; or surplus elastic bandaging which restrict movement beyond necessity, along with pain sensations within the cavity and for purgation purposes.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Care for the excess water is to drain it away from the body and make the patient's blood tender within, and apply bathing; administer gauze and tendernthy balm on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply pressure on the limb so that it draws nourishment back into its natural form, either by allowing blood flow or continuing with poultices immersed in water to restore vitality.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the care of fractured bones when they are being straightened and you are forbidden from performing any action upon them:  
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you have healed the member' extraneous curvature and bone fracture of it, and its form is regained by water balance within the body, however this does not prevent said limb from performing natural movements; do not fear that person whose existence comes about due to new cracks in their previously injured part.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	May also stand as the tools of doctors and innkeepers, which they perform here within our treatment; this action is seen with great fear by those who have lost their lives because of it.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	May joint and tendon inflammation be recent, the cover in which their hips are submerged is where herbs that soften them can be found; alongside these should also come watercress leaves or radishes from above with mustard seeds and peas like those—to apply it as a plaster to alleviate inflammation using well-prepared dill, or linseed meal mixed in hemp seed flour for application on this area; if these are fatty drugs that have been ground into powder with mustard seeds and applied similarly by means of olive oil gauze—these act as consolamentary remedies named among the pharmacists.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And when some liquids are dissipated by continuous exposure to heat from the warmth of fire and motion is given throughout the entire body in all hours,
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May it become difficult and turn into stone, prompting the need for its care with iron tools if that part below his cessations (anus or rectum) is protruded outwards continuously, and excess fluid beyond what'dicts necessary from this patient’s joint has accumulated in small amounts under those fine bones, which are then addressed through relaxation while exposed to the sun.
Capitol .xxiii.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of Latin or
De sermo en dislocacio.	The provided phrase, "Capitol .xxiii.", appears to be a reference rather than a
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	The translation of the provided medieval medical treatise excerpt into English is as follows:
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when you bend the patient'thy joint too far and force it back to its place immediately afterward; if done promptly, there is no need for apposition therapy as quickly intervention prevents complications in reducing the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so that there is not too much moisture or exposed in the hour of apothecary' extrusion, frequent movements bring about cramps and pains to come.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When you have cooled the patient down and after restraining their apoplexy (fever), place them in for cooling until recovery from the inflammation occurs; then bind the affected limb to water couches and oil, and reduce it for ease of movement.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every part of it is cured with what flows from where its memory will return in that place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating from Old French or Medieval Latin-
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	This line is translated into English as: "Concerning the treatment of jaw dislocation." Here, we have a medical context discussing approaches for managing
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The translation is as follows:  
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	May when the detachment of it is slight, in its major positions returns for itself a little bit.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and finished, then immediately apply reduction to their limb, without delaying in total.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce him (the patient), especially if both jaws are dislocated, apply external waters of the coccyx and oil inside where he lies until reduction of both occurs, at which point we have what you sought for.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are swaddled again, with the patient's mouth still closed and not soothed, place polished cloth on those pills of drape, and wax and oil rubbed; this will ease their jaw muscles.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Here is the line-by extralinguistic translation:
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And when it is administered easily, and you do not work on the opening of the mouth for food consumption and drinking until the jawbone is numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at once and they cannot be converted back into place during the episodes, then ongoing fevers are endured continuously, and with great force you will aggravat the abdomen of the patient's malady (ulcer), causing purified blood.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it again, then realize that I have lost it; and follow the course to which I am subjected in these days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the limb'seam
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the chest due to its continuous motion; and occasionally it becomes dislocated at the lower end, which is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of him is that his malady ascends upon his two legs and extends their bands.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Return the place where your hand rests upon it tightly compressed by you again; they will return thereafter.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	With pressure applied over that plaster and pillows, tightly compress it there.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Might the limb that is seized by the hernia continue there, not being dislocated on any day; provided it has been reduced and secured as we have explained and as per your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the line to translate: Return your pace over that bandage, and apply pressure and extraction; command the humors to attach firmness and rest within so it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	When this healing method is applied at a location of the patient' extrinsic muscle, when it has been separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context for translation in medieval
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	From the reduction of muscle dislocation, it can be translated to English as:
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You understand that the muscle is not dislocated but rather in one of three ways: when it becomes dislocated at either end of movement or just after movement begins.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	Here comes the second sentence to translate: It is about being dislocated from above in the muscle, and it hurts here; it does not concern the joints behind by the shoulder blade, nor those ahead due to nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is a displacement and departure of the body parts beyond their titillation, mostly in those where veins are thin (thin-veined areas), dislocation occurs; possibly even there when muscles contract with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And when arsenic is applied by touch or crushing to the home area and the patient' extruded tendon has been apomedicalized with caution, it is compressed as needed where already displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now that you have bled out what has entered above while being overseated of it, proceed with its healing on yourself.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the translation: When dislocation occurs at the joints after being jolted; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and its counterpart—thereby identifying differences manifested within them; thus, grinding down in the peak of the affected muscle where it connects to a bone head (olecranon), which cannot be reduced back into the joint or relieved entirely by any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If you have a displaced knee or shoulder, and you must handle it gently without fear of harming them further.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation it is felt a light reduction when it becomes cold and the malady enters into their abdomen.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	E the reduction of him is for the minister to lift his body upwards into parts above; and after that place your hands firmly on those joints, lifting them therein until they regain strength in their position, and then pause briefly so he can return gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May it return if not already done, and when dislocation occurs within days, the swelling of the malady will be submerged in tailwater (likely referring to a type of water used for medicinal purposes), and administered with broth made from linseed (flaxseeds) that softens and lines the intestines along with fenugreek seeds and honey dissolved in this water, which is then given.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to reduce that second of this malady: then make present a long home belonging to it and located in its abdomen; immediately insert your muscle into the affected area quickly through the hernia, lifting upwards until the hernia is suspended in air. Another servant at once takes out the mass from between the patient'thy thighs (where one has placed a cushion), and another serves on their legs or chest while holding their hands.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the hernia is loose (expanded), then I will place that which causes it to be suspended, thus causing a return of its displacement immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of reduction is as follows: lay a long staff on which there are figures drawn upon it, similar in size and detail to a mortar'nel stone (not too thick nor subtle), positioned atop thighs immediately after landing; place its head underneath the length of the stick, keeping the hernia aligned with the stretching out along this part. Extend your arm over it from another body part for strengthening and maintain alignment until quick return occurs to their proper location (rapid correction).
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If reduction of him is difficult for all the reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment as follows: grasp a stick with the length that extends to two cubits, and hold it at an angle of four digits from the ground level according to this method.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Ensure that there is a cloth or wool cover over his head, so that the malady does not reach up to the belly button (navel).
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Accordingly the arm is placed on a scale according to latitude, and the hand extended over each joint area, while another holds it from the other side until their meeting point arrives here now.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the limb'dictum is completed according to any manner that is possible for you and wherein you pause occasionally your stimulated sperm of wool fleece in quantity; thereupon, a plaster prepared with millseed powder mixed with egg whites over all muscles so as they may be revolved upward, along with the bondage attached to the chest which is connected to the collarbone and secured firmly (and should not make any noise for seven days).
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When the food of the malady is reduced in quantity and comfort enters into the body, then restoration comes to you.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	When food is given in larger amounts and some kind of motion occurs, and therefore if it closes and does not soften, then already heals.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	May it be that if the joint is dislocated due to humidity or for another reason, then in such cases three kinds of treatments are administered as described in the book on treatment methods.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this pain is here and the ligament and joint are not closed after seven days of binding and casting reduction spells over them for some time, they will not be fixed in place nor can that arm go up to its parts above, but you know your nerves therein which lie at the head of muscles or their extension/softening; thus it shall never remain immobile.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation that is felt in their pelvis and breastbone or parts behind them, reduction is done by force and extension until they return to normal positioning within which it happens.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And when it is applied in that place of other tightness, and cure within which it has been healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you increase the gravity of healing in the limb and delay the patient'se movement, it is necessary for phlegm to be bathed regularly until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: This appears to be referencing an issue or a point
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Curación de la dislocación del cojo." Translation: "Treatment of the dislocation of the
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Care for the shoulder joint which is dislocated; it's dislocated in all parts but mainly between and behind segments; when you attempt adjustment of a previously dislocated shoulder after any form of manipulation or touch, this manifestly becomes evident because the joint curve (concavity) makes bending your arm impossible without pain affecting that specific muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When the restoration of him is possible, it' extrinsic parts—the arms and legs are extended outwardly; doctors or attendants will stand on his hips and shoulders, pressing gently at the joints in their hands so that they can return to place (i.e., back to normal position).
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the joints nearby, then return it with a hand that folds back into its place until you feel contact in the groove of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If dislocation does not obey reduction, apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It is that two ministers stretch out their arms, holding it by the hands to prevent excessive extension from occurring.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And turn his/her arm completely around, placing the long cloth or cord over it on him/her, holding their hands.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, anoint that with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint and apply pressure to allow for retraction; return the joint by applying forceful massage within this action.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And it is separated; and therefore if the joint is formed in that place, then separate its ligament here and apply that to it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not strengthened, then apply the plaster and bandage repeatedly until it is extended outside again within several days, and take care of that as well.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you apply pressure on the area for reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then administer moist warmth gently and friction subtly until it subsides; when resting over the joint, that' extruded fat cell moves around inside - be applied to bone during daytime and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	When you enter through washing in that which is bathed (likely referring to a bathing process for cleansing or healing), it so
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And pause over that damp and cracked cow hole at the edge (referring to an area where livests like cows might wet or soil their living space), stand on it steadfastly for some time, then make sure that which was once moistened is now disposed of properly.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (Note: Without additional context or understanding of medieval
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Regarding the care for a joint displacement between the arm and body, it is at/in the joint where this occurs. (Note: This translation attempts to convey meaning given that medieval Latin often has different vocabulzure and grammar structures compared with modern languages like Italian or Spanish). Here
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The displacement of the joint in/at it occurs some times (malasse), and its reduction is delicate; however, this also applies to other joints but especially where swift action at dislocation onset or when an apoplessic condition arises—where fracture has set. Here we mean that immediate attention may be needed if a displacement happens suddenly because it could lead to more serious complications such as bone fragmentation (apoptlesis).
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you suspend the joint between the thigh and buttock on a table and have the attendant extend this area, while the doctor places their hand or palm over the impending joint movement to push it back into position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Mayhap when the palm is resting on her stomach, it should be positioned with two of them over a table to extend and reduce; if dislocation has preceded, then place one under her so that its belly sits directly on top of the table, thus keeping the doctor's chest above any impending joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon enough, all is well; but if not, that part becomes inflamed and must be treated without delay; do not hesitate to perform the reduction of the patient'dicted pain as quickly as possible since these symptoms will persist for days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Must the joint according to its curvature; and there is no cause in Maelwain, but it has been softened and cannot be strengthened—for you understand that nerves are twisted or slackened, and not hereby weaken, but rather with cautery provided for treatment will I confer some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when the pressure returns, place your hand over what has been applied to you, and keep it pressed for days. Also cut off its head (if necessary), wash it thoroughly every day; likewise cleanse and exercise that part of it where the cushion is placed.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	May it happen that the patient' extrinsic movement is stopped and pain occurs in his tailbone or joints due to some weight gain, until he feels relieved (alleviated).
Capitol .xxix.	The provided text appears to be an instructional passage from a medieval medical treatise
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Regarding the treatment of displacement injuries, here is the translation:
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Alcune volte they are dislocated throughout the entire body.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a joint is dislocated from either side of the hand or abdomen, then tighten and push the dislocation back into place until return occurs.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Hold up the head of this person and suspend it above where they are dislocated, leaving it thus for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Return that which is above it into its cavity, and place your hand over what remains there today.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When soreness does not cease, then that second story tells us to keep it away from the day and night alternately, doing movements when necessary, so that fluid stays within those days until relieved.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems like water (indicating a condition related to fluids or humors), if it is dislocated in the belly, bring that element together with this first operation performed into the body so that it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it appears that fluid (water) is coming out at other parts of the body as well.
Capitol .xxx.	The text provided appears fragmented with unclear meanings due to its mixing
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Based on your attempt at translating the line, it seems like you're referring to a phrase about treating disc displacement of the vertebrae in two
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in your back or neck is dislocated completely and immobilized therein, it's beyond treatment; then death enters into the spinal fluid as a result.  
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So that it has been swolthy at the back parts and there's no burning sensation remaining.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure for him be that you will consider if the yellow humoral condition of infancy is not a curative nor redemption from this illness.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May return to those who treat or examine them in various ways; may they already instruct on the methods of curing through eloquent speech, from which I have returned and explained using different instruments provided by these individuals for demonstration purposes.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E dic that in gelation where you cool down from there is not healing or recovery for that, and it seems like two locations are affected.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From that one is not healed but only by what you apply directly on their two, as recommended for the water they have drunk.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	It is that the swelling extends over the patient'se face downwards from their neck, and it spreads quickly through the body such that their chest does not get wet or moistened by it.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the sword and does not leave it in a pit; another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The doctor places their palms on the spine for strength within which returns, and adjusts their own weight over that same table, ensuring proper alignment of themselves as well.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	May if it does not return through this form, then take a table of which the length or width is three feet, and carve into the wall where we mentioned that the malady (illness/disease) has its location at the end of this table' extrémity.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Return the pillow on the table to the backbone (sacrum), and have the doctor press their feet onto the other end, so that the vertebra is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to bind the wound that has been turned upwards here; and it is necessary for you to keep your head at least part of its length above the patient's waist, which should be below the back end of two staves (the lengths being one arm long), with their heads also positioned downward towards the ground on both legs by means of these same staves; and such that there is a span between each staff—this has already been done in some part within any staff where movement occurs, and every piece firmly fixed to the ground so it does not wander.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When one has a staff in which it is turned and twisted between the two sticks of the pair,
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a defect wherein it forms the staff'suponendo una dimensione di "palma" (mano) in acqua, and in the two other staves they resemble that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here is the line-bydependent translation:
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And for each joint and position you must have one appointed who holds the joint as its place, and the doctor manipulates the spine in accordance with what has been said hereinabove.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes for gout treatment:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And apply it where we have mentioned before, and allow the excess of nourishment inside so that it may heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any threat at the site of healing within a day or two after treatment, it is recommended that medicines are administered to moisturize and cleanse the wound area for an extended period; this has been advised by us, and such administration takes place in that location with a layer of plaster.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of hip joint dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You understand that the joint between the thigh and the muscle does not easily separate but rather dislocates so slightly, and you do not injure those places where other small joints meet with curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the large is dislocated according to four ways, it can be dislocated at the divisions of the bones, or in front of them, or behind them, or below them.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is dislocated at the joints' extremities, and seldom in between or behind the joints.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	E when the dislocated limb is at the parts of pain it's long and hard put down el dedo to reduce inflammation from what was sane, thus not allowing the mal aligned thigh to bend its knee or for the foot tongue (hand) to move outwards towards apostema cautery targeting location where healing should occur.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And if that person' extraneous displacement is located in the parts beyond, it means these accidents are contrary to this misplacement.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	Even the one to whom you have caused dislocation at this time spreads out under the cushion as a second complement; yet their pain does not double in the joint area here present; if it extends and cannot be managed over these parts, then urine is retained within them, and an abscess forms on the patient's body. And you must walk with the aid of your toes at this point.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May reduction of these spices for this dislocation is what you consider, and if the dislocation is ancient and longstanding, as already administered by your own treatment here at Rome according to its arrangement; hence there will not be any more miracle in that cure. And so we refrain from hoping for a further improvement within that old remedy.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In which the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, then turn your head to realign that part and extend it back to both limbs (upper/lower parts), left and right sides respectively; once returned this way you will not need other forms of treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May it be that if the issue does not return in this attempt at healing, then those who prepare my remedy must make sure to deliver and spread out the pillow I placed under them just now or on their bodies; another servant extends the bandage from above as they press down with their hands swiftly; firmly secure a strip of cloth over that spot so it stays in place below while stretching, then hold onto its end by hand where necessary.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	When it extends from this place (the area being referred to), or where the shoulder joint is located towards the breastbone'dictor of the shoulders, or between the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae:
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	When all of them experience extension within a period that allows the humidity to rise up and break, it is time for their body' extrication from the ground level due to excessive moisture in the air (implying an imbalance or overflowing of "humors" leading to physical manifestations such as swelling).
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This specific type of extension occurs in all four (or people/groups referred to). Here is the translation line by line into English from Latin-influenced medieval medical terms:
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns by water that we have mentioned, then be silent (sir); otherwise, it is necessary for all special waters required in one'thy own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of oneself, when it is dislocated, and its displacement happens at parts divided by ligaments/tendons (this connects thigh with chest), ensuring that the hernia sits on one'thy own back; and taking pause for the tendons between the shoulder joint in that place where the head of the scapula meets the socket of the arm bone, holding them.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister with great pressure applies the arms of him/her on the large hernia in the thigh and extends it forcefully until that one returns to its original place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular substance is of yellow bile that causes this member to be reduced, compared to other substances.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you are able to stand on your feet and not obey the entrance herein of this special kind of healing that is present in both legs at once with strong ligaments (leg bones), thighs, calves, ankles, holding them together firmly, then:
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of the body is proportionate to four cubits in length, and when the hernia expands as much as two cubits, then so it shall be with each respective limb.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And raise the patient'dictum (presumably meant to be 'patient') up on their chest, so that it is in its place; and let his body length from the ground equal two fathoms (approximately six feet).
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Command a strong youth that reduces the head of the thigh, and have another young man suspended therein; yet another young person will reduce the hip joint back at their strength, so quickly it returns to its place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it is dislocated from the anterior part, where the hump of the belly protrudes according to what we have recommended in the abdomen's jelly-like state; and its sinews are placed directly on the swolthy belly and chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Each minister extends to his/her portion, and the doctor holds it in accordance with the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if you heed the revival method, do so immediately; and if not, pause over that attentively until we have what has been discussed in whispers through this warmth.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayhaps the thigh will press upon our knees so heavily.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When dislocation occurs to the parts downstream, then cover that change with leggings and pause there on my hand, which is placed over the groin area by myself (doctor), describing what happens next; and I stop pressing this one limb against another while pausing at the part of joint movement.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the parts behind (the hip and knee region), do not let the groin be extended to these areas; they have a resting place on solid ground; those who cover it are there because of hard causes, as we mentioned earlier about its position relative to two broad surfaces—it should now stretch outward over its face and ligaments likewise (meaning without any pain); thus, there is no need for further intervention.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When a compression is applied over the location where pain occurs in the joint connection,
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So that the reduction is complete as instructed—and the term for 'reduction' does not concern you, but rather extending cushions from below (the thighs), once those are adjusted and when the leg massage extends beyond its scope, then understand that the corresponding limb returns to place; thus ensuring the wide band is not protruding in any of the parts. Keep the swelling at bay for three days or four by adhering it with an ointment/bandage as needed.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the ligaments and bandages as they are compared with each other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those lumps in the patient'dict state, you realize that the dislocation is already fixed, and thus let the hump go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of suppuration (infection), then return and apply that bandage according to your first technique, and leave it on for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Return that part of it, and allow it time for movement on these matters over several days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Since I don'thy provide translations directly from capital letters or Roman numerals
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The phrase "Capitol" followed by a sequence of characters and numbers does not seem to be an actual text in any language that I
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated according to three movements: it has been dislocated from the parts above (forearm and upper arm), downwards towards the digits, forward into the chest area – these are considered anterior or frontward sections; but not in those directions that come after them. Essentially, this means that if a shoulder is dislocated, its usual range of motion has been altered due to displacement from specific anatomical positions: upwards towards and above (like raising the arm), downwards at the level where digits are found or lower than (such as moving wrists below their normal positioning when extending arms forward) within one's own
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of a shoulder being out-of-place is for the humoral to apply its cushion upon the hip area – this implies that when recognizing if someone's shoulder joint has become displaced, you should command or tell it (likely referring metaphorically here) to position itself accordingly. This line advises a practitioner on how they might signal an issue with alignment and movement of the humoral element—often associated in traditional medicine with body fluids
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the movements of the shoulder is achieved by manipulating (correcting) the humoral in place – ensure that it can extend its cushion, if possible above; apply your hand to hold down both thighs and pause with pressure on the back part of the patient's body. Additionally position two more servants: one extends their palm over where bones meet at shoulder joint (the acromioclavicular area) for support – this is believed to help strengthen it, while another servant expands its reach inside as long as the humoral remains in place above the patient’s arm. This intricate guidance underscores a hands-on approach where practitioners use their own limbs and additional objects (possibly symbolic or actual tools) for external manipulation to realign joint structures, with emphasis on maintaining specific positions while applying pressure strategically across various areas of the body related directly to shoulder dislocation.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And it is his duty (or role) that their cushion remains attached at the thigh joint, not laboring without rest.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Return that and fasten it to the thigh covering therein, placing those around one bandage for three or four days, and applying them accordingly.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Not use the humoral fluid for walking on these days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of it is excused from you, then apply strong extension on the ligaments which were described in its previous treatment for the joint health.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol .xxxiii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The translation of "Capitol .xxxiii." from Latin-influenced medieval medical text into English, focusing on the treatment for an
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The translation of the given medieval medical text into English regarding treatment for talus (ankle) displacement:
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The translation of the given medieval medical treatise line by line into English would be as follows:
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	When healing of the patient is through ease and extension at hand while returning inside where it belongs to go back.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the treatment comes as per its complement and you fix the hips rightly using a strong minister from behind of that body' extrinsic position in this place,
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place yourself on the sole of your right foot belonging to the patient'dict body, and also rest your left hand at the location where their belly button is situated in the hollow of the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Return the leg to its position (the third), and correct it with your left hand for two movements, bringing the foot back into place using the heel of your right hand; thereby moving the patient'thy calf in coordination with their thigh cradle/cushion.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And thus he inserts his finger into the cushion firmly pressed against it gently; you are at the hernia (or inguinal canal).
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if he returns to health within a week or two following this treatment, and when the body becomes uncomfortable again (i.dict while lying down), repeat the operation; otherwise, that individual will not return as before.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May you not perform the reduction of him whom we have recommended today; if this is prohibited, let his malady complain between his thighs on the ground below, and place a closed bed sheet over him to prevent that from happening.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The minister of medicine holds their hips and extends either leg or sling over them that lies on top of their chest, stretching it out between the thighs compressed by this force so that his body is not drawn back toward parts today.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The doctor inserts the displacement into their joints, and another minister holds the healthy area of hernia together until the displacement returns to ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	When the dislocation returns and it is declared to you that there'thy restoration has been made, then apply an adhesive bandage strongly, and bind the foot limb to the cushion.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When you fear or protect the nerves located behind the heel, to prevent the ligament from being violent and leading it astray.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return that particular for two or three days, and if the ligament softens, extend it further.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return that item in the morning or afternoon and prevent gout by keeping it off for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If you go further into that space, it is not certain that the detachment will not be loose and corrupt on this body of yours; nor can they receive treatment at all without your consent.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply a caust to him, then provide treatment in the place where we previously described it herein, for healing and bandaging purposes until his condition is improved.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from or referencing medieval medical texts related to
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Curación del desplazamiento en los pies." This sentence translates into English as "Treatment of foot displacement (
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When someone is dislocated and they can be gently manipulated back into place without causing further pain or damage—do so with care." Here's a line-by-line translation:  
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	May it be that if the dislocation is in the upper thighs of the legs, then you must place your hand under those parts over the jawbone or on top of the table while they were coming (coming towards you).
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And set the pace of their belly with a board that moves entirely on top of it; there are two caps and tighten this structure firm for three days; also assign some rest from walking afterward, until they get stronger and healed properly.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that this text is supposedly written in an archaic form of
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	When joints or bones are displaced, whether due to injury in the young (plaga) or broken fragments elsewhere (ensems).
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of that comes about, and you pierce into the treatment of it and in its restoration, constantly leading to success against death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And now you must perform its reduction in the commencement of the cause, so that it will heal properly with an application of a cauterizing substance.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we feed it, administer the regimen that causes atrophy of poultice and heals what is necessary to us according to our ointments' dehydrated state.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If there is dislocation and pain in the separated bones, then apply pressure to those bones, causing fluid (humor) movement within them as previously described for such locations of these illnesses.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And guard and avoid according to your own judgment that which in my preaching came from within concerning fearful passages as directed by me; for this is better for you provided unto your Creator, perhaps beneficial for everlasting glory, and also health of your body throughout times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi finely grind the scales of Albuccasia perfectly as per God'dictate, not exceeding their proper measure or purpose.
Amen.	In translating this medieval medical treatise
