Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi begins speaking/talking (here "comensar" is derived from Latin and means 'to begin' or 'start'). The text likely
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, you have completed this book at the end of science or medicine (here "es derier" is derived from Latin and means 'is near'/'has reached'), which I hold in high regard as a result of your effort/diligence (implied by “la fi en lu”), through explanations ("exposicios"), statements, implying that you have made it clear to me how much dedication has gone into this subject matter. It's impressive because the book is part of surgical operations or procedures ('operacio am ma'), and even relates directly to (or possibly involves) cauterization ("es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel").
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	When the operation is subdued in our region and at all times privately, while I remain hidden from him; only a few descriptions written freely by ancient authors have been altered by me, which correct these errors and their superstition, establishing clear intentions of them and lengthening (expanding) both the art and force.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May be the reason why not to abandon our craft at this time as medicine is long and it requires that one exerthy oneself in anatomical science which knows Gualia within what he/she understands about the forms of their limbs, joint connections and separations; also knowing bones, nerves, muscles, names of these parts, blood flow pulsing places and quieting points as well as locations for medical intervention.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through Aqua Ippicus's teachings we understand that it may be small in work and primarily within the field of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we already have told you about that in the entrance of this free space; who do not know what we've told them regarding anatomy, they will fall into error and serve deadly purposes if they see even parts of these things, as those formed herein are derived from our knowledge and practice.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	Here comes another doctor who prescribes the ingestion of a large stone that had been processed in his state, and which was heavy; he pours this stone into a vessel from where it is drunk, so that by the third day this body (the patient) dies.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have called her out for removal due to the great size of the stone and its position within the bladder that led to death.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And here comes another doctor who takes a salary from our lord the Duke of this land to perform surgery; and he brings with him a black instrument which was used by him as a fracture fixer in his patient'thy thigh, preparing himself due to ignorance. He fixes the fracture on the ground using strong structures like pillows and tables, without laying down breath for it there.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Apply it according to your wishes, and apply pressure as needed throughout each day; this is when the thigh' extrusion enters the rectum hole, arriving at evacuation (implying that applying correct methods of treatment or managing such a medical condition can prevent further complications).
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And they called for him, and provided instruments to loosen the ligament, achieving calmness and alleviation of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even though decay has been confirmed in the limb, so that it cannot be restrained and does not cease to spread within while under the malady' extraterritorial influence (the external factor contributing to or exacerbating the condition).
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor pierced an abscess, and it became ulcerated daily until the wickedness of him came upon his lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the skull has been heated with melancholalgy humors; however, it does not affect him entirely but rather the member wherein he was already affected.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for these reasons, boys, it is necessary for you to devise the operation in two parts: one that concerns health and another where there is risk involved.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	So take up your weapons for solicitude and God'dict protection, and your ailments are strengthened and secured.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Here comes the translated sentence by line into English:
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When gout appears in some of her patients:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Not a physician of illness does not know its name.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already delved into this free second volume three chapters deep.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of free space, and first from the primary partitioned area.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the feet, in terms of instruments and iron tools for cauterization, what is needed therein.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second partition.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter on probing and puncturing, and of vials, and pus extraction from herbs and similars, all is arranged according to the forms of instruments used herein.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the clean portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third part of restoration and displacement, as well as the treatment for twisting and similitude to those patients within their bodies: ordered by head inside weighty forms using instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery (foc) and acute medicine and memory of treatment:
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all parts free within the body.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When you determine the quality of that poultice and its effects on him/her, and in which part it is forbidden to apply cauterization.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So that the language of cautery and its obscurity is long and complex according to science, flowing with subtleties; they discuss much about it among themselves, and I have heard enough for my needs.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so it is said that the pointed cautery comforts all of the body universally, except for two types of matter within its substance. These are tail ends (caudal parts) of its material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complexity of a dry and arid matter; they find that tools are beneficial for treating it therein, while others recommend those opposite to facilitate healing, as this condition is characterized by its quality and dryness, making moisture treatment inconvenient. Here'dictates:
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Examine that which speaks against it, for cauterization is made well in all parts of this body-drying illness where pain appears on men' extraneous limbs; when you compare the man's limbs and his humors at the focus of disease, you reduce the strength (heat) of the extremities.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Through the speech of that person, I have come across some experiences myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Indeed no cover that which has been drained and worked out in the chair of cautery for yesterday's exercise, understanding the complexity of human composition and the disposition of illnesses within their bodies, as well as the causes of those ailments and the timing thereof.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May also in other complexities there is not fear on you, mainly due to the chills and wet humors, whereupon all doctors are agreed upon these matters; they have no concern with using caution when performing cautery here.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E sapiatz, filhs, che dal segreto di guarigione per la calore del foco ed il bene della persona esso stesso combuste nelle cauterie mediche, è tale che il fuoco si trova solo nel membro in cui viene applicato e non danneggia altri membri dell'uomo a giudicare.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine that is applied burn to reach him in those parts where he lies ill and make it difficult for his sick body part as well as making them leave (recover or get better).
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the focus, due to its sublimity and beneficial substance, only exert what is necessary It has already been understood by us through experimentation and long study in the art concerning truth about causes; therefore, it excuses from lengthy discourse Here you are now present at this pause for our secret amuctions on the focus area. The quality of your operation within the body' extrusion that expels illnesses is demonstrated philosophically herein reflected upon (with) in these pads
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And wise ones know that it is best for applying cauterizations and breaks when the first season begins.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Even it is said that cautery is convenient at all times, in such a way that the harm caused by water that has been retained due to the use of cautery heals itself, and mainly when used for pains or necessary punctures, needles, which do not suffer delays because they are feared as malicious influences causing greater damage than small injuries over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	So do not touch your feet or legs; these are only valued by the common people and ignorant physicians, which is why curing with cautery cannot completely eliminate this ailment, nor can you halt its consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	E the cause is not due to excessive drinking whereas cauterization occurs in a place of medicine that changes complexity and removes the dampness which are causes for pain coming.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Even though surplus instruments are used in medicine due to the value of their function and greatness of work done by one'thy lord,
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Here may be common talk about the tools of medicine and proper use that I do not understand in Latin or other causes related to these instruments; they seem curable only through medical knowledge, neither here nor there by mere understanding without this expertise.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And from here onwards, what doctors use as medical remedies is not according to my understanding of common people and often used by physicians themselves.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if it is necessary for steel instruments (cauterizers) that are gold rather than iron be used, and this was not done only out of equality between gold and their essence's elevation.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through this reason, we place iron tools for pain relief and position them appropriately in the operation field.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And in the instruments of cautery according to these chapters, they have ordered them within the feet, so that when a patient asks for it from him/her.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	From caustics for head pain due to coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The First Article/Chapter (assuming "Le capitol
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 The First Article/Chapter (assuming "Le capitol" translates to an introduction or initial point in a medical text): This cauterization will confer humidity and cold on the accidental instrument used for these causes, which is soda and excessive airflow from breathing, applying pressure downward from head to limbs and chest; this includes prolonged sleep, dental pain, general suffering associated with frostbite or hypothermia—often accompanied by paralysis, numbness (sody), convulsions (apoplexy), and feigned conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the malady to be expelled through medicine cleansing for three or four days, depending on how much urine it excretes and its habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	When the lord commands his head to rise and places that segment between their masses on top of an erected bench, holding them there over their chest,  
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Return your hand'softhepalmtorest it onyourthumbbelowthenosebetweenyourskinnyears,andanotherservantonthylegsaswellwhichholdstheyshandsforsupportpurposeonlyneedsensurethattheyremaininplace.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Whenever the patient arrives at nighttime here (at this place), signs indicate that attempt has been made in order to heat those cauldrons of which these are forms.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return that above their seat is resting at ease, which calms cramps and contractions wherein the womb becomes slightly tightened; move it around there.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Firstly apply some salt and dissolve it on the location, leaving that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand on top of him/her in the bed, and place it there where his/her wound has been cleaned out.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the location where the snakebite is contained so that it may heal.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when a patient exits (comes out), as much milk is given them so that it may be better and more nourishing for recovery.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And those who are bleeding within the bone have their wounds sealed internally with caustics, and place them inside until any injury section of the bone is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Return its moisture that is within bone, and also for its healing care.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When others come with the cautioner and enter before entering into the strong bone within which it enters already, this is how small apothecaries are formed.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	E from that location exhales the head'supressions (or possibly referred to as "vapors" or breath, referring to medical practices of early modern times). Here is
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the worm has been expelled for a long time, and it should be cured until firmly established (implying that treatment or care must continue to ensure complete recovery). Here is what each line roughly translates into English:
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see these various cautery instruments for all, but only in learned men according to fear; and such one that you choose is better for my health when the head rises with sunrthy continuity as we have witnessed in other members, especially when the skull of the abdomen naturally swells.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The special property of pointed cautery may save and be more beneficial to me, from that stone it provides for my health care.
Capitol segon.	Capitol second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the pointed cautery of the head/capillary (as '
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the entire head/capillary there is chronic and long-lasting pain, using swords and lances and cappurges and emplastrates, among other things; primarily if any such has already been cauterized with a tool that does not alleviate it—consider whether the swelling in the head/capillary is due to strong calcification inherent in its nature. It's neither folly nor brutality for significant cause of inflammation, and thus this other instrument should also be applied there immediately.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that over the patient's head (possibly referring to applying pressure or heat) with caution, as long as the spine is divided/separated for treatment purposes using a heating device like an electric blanket or similar source of warmth. Translation:
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the ribcage and expose its extent as we have counted and sealed it with a cauterizer in the part of the back where you call upon us to perform this action—this is the place where suction has been applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand so high that you do not see the belly (abdomen), for when it aggrathyously crushes, causing great pain different from pains of other cautery on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And direct this instrument in its place, for it is where these instruments are used as a treatment for corns and headaches at their respective locations on the head; thus, here lies the method.
Capitol ters.	Capital torture.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of ancient non-antidotal cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the head or when it becomes stiff and causes discomfort therein, medicine is administered by medical professionals for treatment, which has been mentioned among remedies for diseases; without this action one cannot fully address it, hence cauterization can be performed using either medicinal acid combustion tools or iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May needles be used in medicine to apply a hot iron and take away the pain from both ends of your limbs; grasp that vessel tightly with one hand while removing each extremity bit by bit using another tool.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And apply pressure at the location of pain on the temple with one lance inserted there where it is hidden within that site of flesh and bone.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And there ensure care for that which is within it so healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you come, apply some of these burned remedies that have been written in the section on burning medicines to the wound.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cauterization be with iron according to this method: which is of this kind.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And they call it a tightening of the joints because the head (the top part) takes on the shape of a little flower in which some curving occurs at that spot where there is heat, small and concentrated within the body.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Return the pause over the location of pain, and hold your hand—so that it is not crushed which has just come—and turn the iron needle slowly by speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that has been collected through the catheter is as much as when it was inserted and you place your hand over to prevent the artery from being pierced further, thereby avoiding bleeding out (the flow of bile).
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return the wound to water soaked in salt and leave it there for three days, then apply pressure bandage on its edges, and take care that your hand is inside until healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you go, then perform a cauterization at the tip of the scalpel according to proper procedure, and keep yourself away from cutting an artery here which is not yet ancient (i.dict).
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quart (Assuming "capitul" is
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	The phrase appears to be a translation or reference related to an old method of embolization, possibly for the treatment of hemorrhage within body cavities
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat empyema (an old method of dealing with this condition), and what has been discussed in the past about its cure, if not properly addressed; sometimes when even more than just the initial salve or applied treatment for abscesses does not suffice—when the poultice is ignited within the cavity to heal it (the place of pain along a long line which signifies where that issue lies), and you rest your hand over this area while using incense, allowing smoke from burning herbs such as sage or lavender; thereby providing relief.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of jaw movement since your teeth are crooked and need chewing (mastication), so that the jaw does not ache and do not provoke nerve pain which may lead to spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of blood flow from an artery that expands, there is fear in him who does not know what causes this expansion and how to treat it—and perform the operation at once.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When they come for memory recall of the sanitation flow according to their ruling system here in this place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you feel that the patient cannot bear this illness and if it becomes necessary in their groin where we have previously mentioned applying cauterization (using heat), then perform such treatment there while taking care of the inside to heal what is within them.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you go onwards with the pointed instrument we have mentioned earlier in heat treatment for stopping bleeding using two hot coals as a heating source, better is this and further action will be taken.
Capitol .v.	Captain of this matter (or) Chief physician overseeing
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	The captain, or chief physician here is in charge of the treatment for joint pains caused by golden humors (referring to yellowish substances believed to cause
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the thigh there is pain caused by congestion and it requires treatment for these causes (suggesting blockages or accumulations), they are addressed with cauterization as mentioned earlier. This refers to a specific form of this procedure, which involves puncturing—the method described previously where points may be made on the surface using pointed instruments like cautery needles. The pain is not alleviated by mere heat; rather, it requires active intervention through these methods (cauterization and possibly aspiration or reduction as indicated in surrounding text).
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Apply the puncturing for cauterization here (referring back to needlework or incision), and it should be done across all of the thigh affected area, moving in a circular motion like when spinning with an arrow—or alternatively along any specific paths if pain is localized elsewhere. This indicates that physicians may choose different techniques based on where they identify arises from within this body part (the movement being analogous to treating wounds or abscesses by ensuring thorough coverage and circulation of air, which was believed important for healing).
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long after you have used the caustic of this thigh, continue to apply it where there is persistent purulent (puss-like) material that may be present and indicative of infection or inflammation; suggesting ongoing treatment at those specific sites with cauterization. This underscpective medical practice aimed not just for immediate relief but also
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points made on their entire body require heating and care for the locations that have been healed, then do so with caution in those places to ensure they remain healthy.
Capitol .vi.	In this translation attempt of an archaic or regional medical text mixing
De cauterizacio de turtura.	The phrase "cauzereza oti" seems like a mix-up between the Latin roots and possibly Italian
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The translation appears to be attempting a blend of Latin with potentially regional or medical jargon that incorporates Italian terms:
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid using specialized caustic for such that it does not enter due to dryness or because of nervous spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you heal that special type of torture and cleaning the thighs and genitals without causing discomfort in your treatment, make sure to use these three cauterisms for treating hernia: take a golden needle firstly, then apply small touches with its temple, and lastly combine kisses from both of your lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When you stop the pointed cautery for the contrary parts of the diseased area, there is relief only in the healing portion that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	When performing cauterization, apply the instrument at the very tip of the erect penis and in the temple where it is as long as his body length; place your hand inside so that a portion can be burned off until sufficient has been consumed by fire for what'dictates from the bone socket below.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how it goes with the cautery, and this form belongs to those who practice cutting (surgeons). Here they sit down nowads.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it be subtle that such a little excess is placed there; and where in the body there is an unnecessary surplus, place one of these as well.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for what is now proceeding within so that it may be healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII. (The numbering here refers to sections or chapters
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Caustic treatment of ancient apoplexy." This translates into English as follows:
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and the remedy we have discussed does not concern your medicine or patient' extraneous temperament doesn't present fever, then perform these four cautions: on all heads of their skulls; in the spot where hair grows atop the head, as well; within the neck area – similarly to what has been mentioned before; and inside the ears.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The operation of the cautery is said according to what has been previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized on the stomach' extruded, and may he be healed by the water that flows through you (as if implying medicinal treatment).
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The text following this reference is not provided
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Caustic treatment for joint pain caused by frostbite:
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	When given as a supplement in feasting, large and round pills are served with the food (the Malady).
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Return your head completely under the patient's waist and place your hand on their chest, where it is described in detail within the treatise of appliances.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	After some time has passed, that is when it becomes necessary for a cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	When that same doctor who was mentioned has already ordered it as stated before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	So if healing occurs through these means; otherwise, three cauteries are applied in the lower part of his head (the posterior part up to where the nape is), which belong to that portion coming from above.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And there is space between each caustic of it (the treatment), and care must be taken for the water that comes forth from them.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you increase and the patient' extrusion is tolerable, then apply heat at that spot with caustic substances; if it increases significantly, then burn across both corn areas.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Return that which has been healed within it; and use those cauldrons as they have been provided by the doctor (in reference to applying medicinal treatments or poultices).
Capitol .ix.	The given medieval medical text appears incomplete or possibly contains shorthand not
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	From the provided fragments, it's clear that this treatise discusses methods for dealing with worm infestations and healing of all body parts:
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the caulceration of the head and apply what we have discussed; return your attention to the skull'se surface, applying that very same pointed cautery where pain is felt on top of the head, as well as over all parts thereof divided by it (the division), also three times upon each spinal disc.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the illness of suppuration at the joints and if the disease itself is severe, then apply four types of cauterization to the vertebrae of the back, and insert into where there is discomfort from the neck bone's motion, raising up the swelling.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which should be healed within it, and this is for caution with olive wax.
Capitol .x.	Since I do not have information about what "Capitol .x
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	The Latin phrase "Cauterizacio de epilemcia" translates to "Caustic treatment of seiz
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Translated, the sentence means: It is not cautioned (or treated) with a heating device for the epileptic patient; rather, that seizure occurs because of an imbalance in humors such as blood or phlegm within
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	The sentence translates as: So, we must purify the patient's brain through consultation and other care measures determined during division when phlegm is abundant in its quantity or quality, and it tolerates no further medical intervention beyond these prescribed actions for treatment divisions. Here "mondifiques" refers to cleansing rituals which may have been a part of medieval medicine practices aimed at restoring balance within the body by removing harmful substances like phlegm (a concept from humoral theory). The phrase indicates that further intervention is not considered appropriate beyond these specific measures, suggesting an early understanding and respect
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	The translation of the sentence would be: If it is a child who does not suffer from medicines, administer gargarism solutions and masticatories for cleaning purposes, through mouth application over several days, with good food intake as nourishment during this treatment period. This line suggests an approach to treating conditions such as throat infections or dental issues using home remedies like saltwater rinses (gargarism solutions) and chewables for maintaining hygiene while ensthyers the importance of nutritional support ("good
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	The translated sentence would read: Raise the phlegm from the head and apply a caustic there where it has formed (perhaps as an abscess), following previous indications; another application of caustics is made on the back part of the skull, along with cauterizations at any spot upon the patient'se head that was treated. Here physicians in medieval times are guided by a specific humoral approach where they believe phlegm (a key humor imbalance) needs to be removed from certain body areas and uses caustic substances as an intervention, which aligns with historical treatments for conditions thought to involve excessive fluids or impurities
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the gallbladder is strong and tolerant, then apply that which I have described upon it, causing numbness and softening of the body over the lower back and pelvis bones.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And when it is necessary for a pointed cautery of olive oil second that came before, then do so accordingly.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	May if the patient has a large abdomen (malaude), then apply thin caution according to this methodology.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The specific content of this line is
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	From Latin, "Caustic treatment for melancholy." Here the term 'cauterization' refers to a medical procedure
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and thick moisture, then apply those same caustics that we have for arthritic joints in order to treat it (the state). Here 'cauterization' is used metaphorically as a treatment method. The text suggests using caustic substances traditionally employed for treating inflamed or infected body parts, which they believe can also be applied internally within the abdomen ('haven') in order to address paralysis associated with severe melancholy (depression
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excess and causes inflammation in the body (maelstrom), then apply what has been used before to purify one's mind according to when it was first divided ('division'). The phrase implies using a cleansing substance previously applied, possibly through intake or bathing rituals that were believed to clear both mental turmose and physical inflammation associated with extreme melancholy.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	When you raise the head of the patient and lower it downwardly as on a ladder over the circle, placing rest above that part at the top of the head where there is warmth to alleviate discomfort in those places.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The hernia is sixty centimthy wide, and it has been completely taken apart.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Return pause (rest or stop) with anointing oil; it is worthy of sheep'se skin as border material.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Es apply heat over the forehead for warmth measured by time, which causes discomfort when it is on the body.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Return it back into the warm place of their head in the neck circle, and let them go inside to be warmed up.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	E when the thigh is given a diet for the whole week as part of its treatment within this remedy, or if you wish to seal that small incision according to what has been ordered; this type of cauterization moistens the brain at equal times.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Return that spot back into its border or within linseed grease walls;
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii." seems like it might be referring to an
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The line "Cauterizacio de aygua descendent en le huel," when translated into English, means:
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you declare the water content in the body through the senses of thirst during division, then begins and gives to the belly a quantity of what cleanses the head, ensuring it for all moisture contents.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that syrup is washed down in water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And command him that raises his head and cauterizes there where the blood is located in the head; also cauterize those two at places if it's decided by a stream of water from two holes, or one hole if it’m decided with boiling water.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	When you have applied the flame for cauterization; and if any more of it flows out from undernethyou must provide some medicine at your disposal to stop it.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And when it is necessary for knowledge that which has been taken out of the arteries and from those openings, be careful with the flow of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	When some joints are burned between the bones of two or more tools, it indicates that these instruments have been used as a form of treatment for them.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii. (The numbering suggests this is an ex
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Cauterization of ancient tears or potentially referring to a historical method used for treating wounds in the eyes, possibly involving some form of heat
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When ancient tears are intensely pressed into the veins and arteries where they appear in the head's region which has been examined to find that too much fluid from tear duct fluids is present, then cauterize this area as mentioned in the chapter of water boiling treatment within the ears (which may refer back to some traditional remedy involving ear irrigation or similar therapy), and also apply a caustic agent on the head' extranous part at two places corresponding with temple bones, placing cauterizing agents there as well.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If it is for addition (perhaps implying a treatment involving medicinal herbs or supplements), then cauterize that part throughout the entirety of the groin above the small incision made by the small cautery instrument.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The text does not provide specific content for this
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Cauterization of the foul breath odor: When there is a bad smell from one'thy nose, it
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that patient who has spoken about it in division and yet does not show proper care from your medical practice, then apply the poultice (cooling agent) to the foot ulcer for three nights; also place a cloth over his head, performing cauterization on the affected area with salt or oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Return and apply that which is for caustic in two lancets placed above the hairy parts of both shoulders, a small amount:
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Guard your tool of iron so as not to injure that which it is pointed at.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is how it works with this instrument of cautery.
Capitol .xv.	CXIV. (The Roman numeral "CXIV" translates
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	With the pointed instruments for softening of eyelids in humans. ("Cautele di molificazione degli palpebre negli uomini.") This sentence is referring to
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the patient's eyelid becomes softened due to illness or moisture, there is one specific instrument for this purpose in that day’thy tool—that method of treatment. ("Quando l'epitelio palpebrale del paziente si amollisce per malattia o umidità, es una cauterizzazione speciale a disposizione quel giorno:") This sentence explains the procedure used to treat softened or affected eyelids when they are impacted by illness (disease) and/or moisture. Here
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so—cauterize that one over both cheekbones with two pointed instruments for the entire area, and they are stretched from the nostrils (nostril). ("E se volete far così: cauterizzi quello sopra le due sopraciglia con due strumenti dentati nel complesso intero della zona; essi sono allungate dalle torme.") This line describes a treatment
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And so that each lancet's length corresponds to the amount of humidity or excess fluid present, implying an adjustment in size for more effective treatment based on individual conditions ("E così che il lungo
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hands on the lancets; you may according to how much of the eyelid's surface is dry or cracked ("E non premi le mani sulle aghi, potendo secondo quanto della superficie palpebrale si trova secca o sfaccendata."). Here the instruction emphasizes that while performing cauterization on a possibly moistened
Capitol .xvi.	From the provided text snippet in this pseudo-medieval language blend, here
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	And when the hairs of the eye become parts and fingers pick up the patient'dict:  
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the patient'thy hair turns into particles that sting their private parts, twofold instruments are used for both cutting and applying medicine to burn or treat them accordingly.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the patient has a fever and their hair appears dry as they breathe out these very humors, make them elongate and moist; if you have to puncture it with forceps (a pointed instrument for making small incisions), tightly hold your hands around so that no gout enters through the pores.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when women give birth and their bellies swell with child, the head of humors in the throat is directed up to the chest, where a hand holds it as if trying to take hold (as per seal), which signifies its shape like a pearl from jewelry. It also denotes the manner or essence of hair according to what nature gives them along with their fur coat.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Return your hand pressure inwardly on the chest, undernegy cloth or pillow stuffing.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return the hot iron of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line: And cauterize over their body shape which are bound with juniper berry bark, gradually and carefully until it appears that the surface of the penis has been burned away completely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The translation of the source sentence is as follows: "The sign of sanity in this body'thy work to press on the eye lid and for their hairs being raised by a pricking.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	So lift your hand and place it above the chest area until the shield is erected within where you are positioned.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is within it so as it may heal.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If any of their bones or skin returns due to a cause and the eyelid is softened, then they will use these same instruments on that entire body part as when it was first treated initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the corner of the eye lid for a long time, then treat that part where it is naturally located and has become swolthy (swollen), so that the hair does not tear out.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery (medicine) be used as you command the humors to enter through which are elongated and inflamed, and apply its dressing in the form of a woolen cloth'mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute che les peluzze entrano dove sono prolungate e gonfiate, e applici il suo abito di drappo di lana.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here is the translation line by line:
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Place your pause (hand) over the body where the tailbone has been cured of painful stones or other liniments that have come inside to heal it, and take care of them accordingly.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to guard your diligency throughout the day so that not one drop of medicine falls outside and if your eyelid becomes softened in the course of days or any cause affects hair growth within it, repeat treatment on that location whereby the lining has become softened. Further, apply ointment for its use during mealtime when needed (for healing), and ensure entry back into the body is restored so as to return healthy formulation.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how you use juniper berry in treatment.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that humors in humans vary according to height and smallness, therefore your contraction may be due to these factors.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If there is not a blocked passage leading towards that person whom you study in this art,
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (The provided text does not contain enough context for
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	When it comes to treating a tear duct abscess, here is the translation:
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula that has been mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not perform your cure, then as per this method: command the humors to stop at their head within the body'dictions herewith; make sure one servant holds the patient’s head with several hands so it is neither outflowing nor agitated above its own crown.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your hand pressure in an oil or wax poultice on his body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Where it has been reduced and formed like a cork or sword tip from one limb's part where the caution is applied:
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go inward into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to come out as an attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	May it be better for that which is congealed in the work (of treating joint pain caused by cold humors). In this line, "mays" could mean 'may' or 'per
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then close the fistula if it is opened, and from there cleanse out (and expel) that which has been drawn into or caused within by impure matter. This instruction refers to treating a condition wherein an opening in tissues, such as might occur
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened (meaning the fistula isn't present or already closed), then labor upon that area and remove outward swelling from there. This line advises on managing symptoms like edema, which might occur in
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Place your hand over that which is heated (the instrument being lit), and attend to what has been employed therein; also provide for the nosebleed's clamping device, in order not to disturb yourself or cause disquiet within you and between the patient’s humors. Here they suggest using a compress made from hemp fabric over wounds where instruments have been used (to prevent fire hazards) while ensuring control of any nosebleeds by properly applying one'dict clamping device without causing further distress to oneself or complicating the patient’s humoral state. The line combines medieval medical practices with a concern for both safety and symptomatic relief, emphasizing careful handling during procedures that could pose risks of fire (given heated instruments) as well as nosebleeds which were common treatment indicators at the time.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	So if the instrument (likely for treating nosebleeds or similar) is inserted into the mouth during treatment, then be; but otherwise iterate the use of said tool as directed by skillful practice and leave it therein until three days have passed—and apply a pause over that border area with borders soaked in expulsive ointment to aid healing. This instruction underlines hygiene (cleanliness) during treatment, recommends timely reassessments of the condition treated by such instrumentation for up to three days before additional intervention is considered or possibly required—and suggests a therapeutic measure involving expulsive ointment which could have been used as part of medieval wound care routines. The use of 'borders' and specific timing indicates an approach that balances direct treatment with restorative practices consistent with the period’s medical understanding, wherein observation over a fixed duration was standard before further action
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If they have not healed after x days on this sharp acute medicine within which the bone is revealed and cleaned according to what is necessary in their chest,
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method for applying caustics used in the treatment of a fistula that they initially examine is at the location of the fistula, where it forms a subtle crack under which there are its contents; and you place your hand on this spot because not even lead weights will reach down into their bowels to displace those substances. Thus, when pauses (likely referring to intermittent pressure or cauterization) are applied above the opening of the fistula in either a heated cloth or water, the lead deposits themselves stay within that location and consequently heal it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have from cautery and treatment, then it will be; but if not, you must administer purgatives internally and reduce the fistula in its natural place as soon as possible when it comes to that location.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (The ".xviii." part is likely
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	From the given text, it appears to be a medieval medical context where different treatments for bodily issues are discussed using archaic language that blends elements
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	This line translates to: Frequent actions acid soothe cracks in the lips, and mostly on children's lips. In English this could be interpreted as "Regular exposure to acids tends to heal fissures or chapping of the lips more frequently observed in children." Here we
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	The given line translates to English as follows: "So when you treat those cracks that we mentioned in the divisions and do not proficiently apply your lancet, then follow this form for the cauterization of a small cutlass:" Here is a more detailed breakdown into individual phrases.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	E when it is according to the subtlety of the cauldron (body's core or internal state), its cavity will be restored as such by hand placement over the area,
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your hand there carefully where the pointed instrument reaches those cracks within it, indicating a gentle and precise approach to treating these areas with cautery by physicians or healers of that time. Here "cauteria" refers to an ancient medical tool used for numbing pain in specific body parts such as joints—likely using heat (as implied) rather than the pointed device
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that which is inside it, ensuring its healing within those boundaries or areas treated by cautery—this phrase suggests an emphasis on not just treating
Capitol .xix.	The text appears to be a translation from Middle English (or perhaps Old French)
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Regarding the treatment of an ulcer or abscess inside the mouth, it suggests that such conditions were addressed with techniques possibly involving heat application to promote healing
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the throat or on the palate there is an abscess and decay, which we address by bleaching it with our remedies as much as necessary according to how severe that condition within its cavity appears—this implies a treatment protocol using heat (possibly through applied fire) targeting where metal instruments reach those lesions. We provide care for the same issue while not overstepping or misusing healing, ensuring no further damage occurs; thus we place our flame in contact with that abscess's cavity and let it penetrate until such a time when (after some use—implied to be one or two uses) its effects are felt within the affected area. It’s important here for health care providers of this era not only treat but also understand what appropriate healing involves, ensdicting caution in applying heat as part of curative measures with awareness and restraint during such interventions—this highlights an early understanding that treatment should be both effective yet gentle to avoid exacerbating the condition.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if the disease has been removed and healed, be well; otherwise, it is necessary to discover where it resides and hold back the decayed bone as it comes forth in its course.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX. (This line appears as a Roman numeral capital
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	For the cauterization of teeth and softening/alleviation of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth become hard, and treatments do not occur for them, then pause at the top of the thigh in the chest so that you can apply fire to the form with which they will come together; thus ensuring that heat is delivered from the hearth flame directly into the center of the affected tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Return your hand (and place it there), and apply some of the cautery several times according as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here is the line by line translation:
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: (This line seems incomplete or possibly non-
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	From the context provided, it appears that you're asking for a translation of what might be related to treating pain
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to dryness or the presence of a cold/worm that does not respond well to care as provided by medicine, then there are two types of caustic interventions: one at the cow'thy borders and another on the mouth (referring potentially to specific areas used for treatment).
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterize is where you grip the edge of cowhide and iron, and wrap it over the extremity of the torture point, applying pressure to that bordered area until it becomes inflamed (or "burns"). Wrap another piece at the borders where blood has hit this spot, enveloping it entirely. Apply gentle pressure there so long as is necessary for the painful spot within its dentition begins to swell and burn.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	When you apply that certain medicine for several times until the force of the fire reaches the core of the heart, wherein lies its seat (the mind or soul).
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, submerge wool or cloth at the bottom of this passage, and place it over the sore tooth, placing your hand on top where the heated iron enters during treatment into the cavity of the affected tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Must the cauterization be done at the focus (source of heat or iron), and if there is any swelling in the chest, ensure that the focused flame does not reach the mouth of the malady.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Return the brand of this instrument to its shape, and hold it over your teeth so that the cautery becomes heated; apply some oil several times whether the pain is intensifying today or tomorrow.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When the mouth of that patient is opened by the action of such caustic for an hour, and their tongue is wiped with it at this time, then this is the form of the caustic.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if you can perform it as directed by means of caustic (which is what I will use), then proceed accordingly with that which has been indicated for treatment according to your ability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the catheter looks like:
Capitol .xxii.	Given that "Capitol" likely refers to an article or section within
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	And when it is necessary for external protrusions (like hernias), then use a pointed tool, which
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	And when external protrusions (like hernias) are formed by infiltrating humors and fluids that do not conform to the body's natural shape, you use a cauterization tool shaped accordingly; with two handles so it can be ignited at one end while held or supported near its other extremity. Ignite this device for some time over the protrusion (apothem) and stop when symptoms have lessened to that extent of relief, ensuring you leave no residue on the affected area; if further intervention is required after ignition has ceased at the site, ensure it happens before healing starts.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the apopulation is small, then use the points of the cautery according to its quantity; apply it for three days and pause over it until such time when the fire from the focus has burned out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is needed for its care; apply wax and bandages inside where it should heal.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And it is formed or made like this for such an instrument/device.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Cauterization of the wound and compression of blood." - The translation suggests that this medieval medical text is discussing procedures for treating a wound, likely through burning (cauterizing) to sterilize it and
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity enters the chest and mainly when it is inflammation of the complexion (perhaps referring to pleurisy or some form of lung inflammation), then call for evacuating phlegm with laxatives, and cauterize that which bleeds in the location where pressure is applied." - The translation interprets this as a treatment guideline from medieval medicine suggesting when humidity (which may indicate fluid accumulation or excess moisture) enters into the chest area—likely pointing to conditions such as pneumonia, pleurisy, or pulmonary edema. During these episodes with associated inflammation ("fegma's fregiditat"), doctors would advise using laxatives (medicine for clearing phlegm) and cauterization of any bleeding
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Keep in mind not to approach the gout or burn the tongue without a paucity." - The line is advising practitioners of medieval medicine that when treating conditions like gout (which they understood as an inflammat019_medical:gout, causing joint pain due to uric acid deposits)
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize that part which also requires burning at the knee joint in its lower vertebra." - Here, it appears a specific technique of applying heat or burns (cauterization) is being recommended for healing purposes related to pain and inflammation localized around the knee joint'dict
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The pointed cautery of it cuts in the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which has entered before it can be healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Captital xxiiii.: (The exact translation of this line is not clear due to
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	From the given Latin-like text, here's a possible interpretation and English translation for each fragment:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and pulmonary disease are caused by humid, flooding humor and there is no fever or sore throat (old conditions), then two cauterizations will be performed on the chest bone at these lung nodules' sites; and other cauterizations in the breast milk area between the breasts. These burns are applied according to their form precedent.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish it to be so, your cautery point is what you call for in the area of joint pain caused by arteries (assuming "aurelhas" refers to small vessels), and its form precedes this puncture technique used for such pains.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	When points are entered into those places, and care is given to that which has been introduced therein so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now you have three lances for cauterization, which can be done in this manner as follows:
Capitol .xxv.	The text provided appears as an old medical advice or guideline written in Medieval
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	In this line, the term "cauterize" refers to a method of treatment where heat is applied (often with a heated instrument) to remove or close wounds and lesions on
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's head is dislocated due to moist humors that lubricate and prevent it from being fixed immediately upon return home, then adjust its position with small movements as we have testified; once you first reduce the displacement, place your hand over where reduction was made so that intestines are returned inside their cavity. Also lift up the collarbone which is in the part of the skull involved when these joints dislocate from those on your left side (assuming this refers to a misaligned shoulder or neck).
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Returns the cautery has two heads; this is how it looks like.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And within where that interior enters into another, there will come forth the figure of cauterization for those burnings inside; and with each burning caused by urine stoppings (caps), they are subjected to cauterize.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And according to how much they try or attempt it is this way:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	E for some measures is adjusted according to this count and these are the number of cauterizations used herein. (Here "alcunas" means 'some', "veguadas es ajustat" translates as 'measures have been adjusted,' 'seg
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And place your hand over the cauterizations that have been applied herein to anchor the humors in tranquility and ensure that the member does not become inflamed during this time of comfort. (Here, "a prop" means 'and,' placing emphasis on following up with certain actions; "pa so sobre le caurtri porys cuytz am sal," refers to overseeing or monitoring applied cauterizations for healing purposes and maintaining a state where humors are settled ('trenquilitat'); ensuring the patient does not
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at parts below and it's required to apply heat herewith (signifying that localized warmth or a specific type of treatment might be needed), then cauterize over the muscle with either spike-pointed lancets or pointed caulters, which confirms joint integrity while draining humidity—ultimately restoring health to intestines. (Here "si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus" translates as 'if the dislocation is below parts,' implying that it' extrinsic and likely involving muscles or deeper body structures; applying heat ('aquo') can help in re-aligning such issues, while cauterization with specific tools (spike points for deep targeted treatment
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol XXVI. This appears to reference a particular chapter or section number
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization of the stomach. (Here "cauterize" refers back to one method
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When bile is frothy and humidity enters that part within the patient's body, and if you continue your healing actions without interruption, their malady will rise to their chest (where they rest above), spreading out their limbs and hernias; then cauterize it with three instruments: one for each joint on a single instrument, as many points according to the quantity of an individual point's cautery (as in a pinpoint); two other caustic tools from the same implement at both sides. Afterward extend those limbs and hernias that are not adjusted so they can undergo prolapse correction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery corresponds to the quantity of both ends of the pubic bone,
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if it is anesthetized by that very same puncture with which you have made yourself scared, then apply more cauterization on those points as desired; and similarly care for him so long as he remains in recovery following such treatment.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii. (The reference number ".xxvii." likely
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	From "cauterize the foot joint," it can be deduced that this line is referring to a medical procedure or treatment in medieval times
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When joint pain in the foot occurs due to moisture or excess humidity within an abnormal position where it has extruded unnecessarily from its natural place, and we treat this condition with water that we have previously mentioned herein without causing discomfort; then when the swelling is upwardly thrust over the patient's cervix (neck), three cautions are applied as per these methods in quantity by physicians at nighttime under home care.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Wherever there are spaces between each cautery according to its size and where the cautions themselves follow the length of the body' extrates fourteen times (this suggests a methodical approach in placing or checking the spacing and positioning around certain areas, likely for effective treatment).
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not add your hand with the cauterization instrument.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of fluid that is absorbed exceeds the capacity of what has been prepared from the throat'dictum; and if it remains on the feet of him/her, then they will swell, which already have extended their limbs, raise their breasts.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is how the cauterization works:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And when you have subtlety and prudence in the art of surgery, it is possible to use these cauters for treating wounds on the skin surface.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Ensure you do not proceed with the cauterization and that the instrument is secured throughout the entire spinal column so it enters all joints and reaches the hernias within the scrotum, where the cord currently lies close to; understand this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (This line appears to be referencing a specific chapter
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	When the puncture of an abscess on the bicycle is necessary for drainage, then proceed with caution using instruments designed for such purpose (interpreted
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the abscess on the bicycle occurs and you wish to know if that abscess is in the body of the bike or its covering (tunic), then if it's within the body, a heavy blow causes gravity-related trauma and pain intensifies.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the patient'thy clothing, then the pain is greatly intensified and occurs repeatedly to tire out even doctors treating him/her.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So that the ulcer is positioned on the sole of the foot; and place your finger over the site of the abscess to attempt drainage; and apply heat to the cautery already assembled, as described in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And in that place apply the caustic and insert it where necessary until all of the intestine is cauterized up to the sigmdictum (end), reaching there a diseased state.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Return that for its own healing, with care taken by all other instruments inserted therein.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Not that this form of cautery is not the one studied in medicine for a long time and used to treat many illnesses; however, we may dare some experiments with it here and there, but let us adhere strictly to its use as prescribed by medical doctrine.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From "capitulum" we can deduce that the term likely refers to a section or chapter in a medical treat
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Diyssero les antics cauteri de les rasits d'aristoloxia a plauresi fregades segons esta maniera ésser feitor." This sentence translates to: "They practiced old cauterizations of the aristolectra (high-status) wounds as described herein, and it is that you grasp long aristocratic thorns which are found in this very flesh.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here comes the translation for each line:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	Whenever you purchase your hand for a lancet (cauterizing tool), it is in the form of gallstone operations at work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And here comeces an ancient remedy that is used by men who practice cautery with iron like a ray and flames, which I place in the location between the ribs where they enter until it arrives at that ulceration and is healed as we have discussed regarding wounds of horses.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May not fear in this puncture with the needle for it soon will become healed at the site of the abscess where there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided with contextual
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	The term "cauterize" refers back to the medical procedure mentioned earlier, specifically using a pointed instrument like a cautery for treatment
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When curing the illness of the uterus (likely referring to gynecological issues), if you do not use what has been discussed as part of treatment and healing division, then there are three or four methods correct according to their figures; these all proper ways mentioned. The first one is making three or four lancets depending on the length of the uterus based upon the figure of those lancelets used previously in this context (likely referring back to a specific type and number of lancing tools).
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Between each lancet used or a small knife (and) its handle is also where we have our own touch, as in the operation of the finger on the lance itself.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Not until your hand takes hold of the cautery; and the malady is above its two (i.dict, presumably referring to areas or limbs).
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes another method of cauterization so that you will heat the cautery to two sensations, which causes displacement at the head of muscle detachment and elevates the chest where the spleen lies under its membrane, below the liver (referred to as "jazer"), in the dark evil aspect.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And when your lifting is such that you raise the penis according to the length of the body, so that they become branded instruments in accordance with the law of the cosmos.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Return and insert into both garments with fire, in that place where they enter the coccyx of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return the points of the hot iron (cause removal), and thus they are four tools used for this purpose.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you come, then apply three kinds of cautery already had.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: And now attend to the points you have placed with cautery for several days, and it may be that other causes preceding in treatment will become apparent.
Capitol .xxxi.	The provided medieval medical text is structured in an archaic form of Latin
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	When translating this line from what seems like a mix between Medieval and perhaps older forms of Romance languages, we
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	In the context provided—an archaic or historically styled rendition reminiscent of Latin with influences from other contemporary European tongues like Italian and Old French, we translate:
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you care for the wound and do not properly direct your treatment as described in division (presumably a section of an old medical text), then it becomes necessary to apply four types of caustics within the boundary of the abdomen, including one on the stomach itself; another upon the limbs—implying perhaps joints or extremities which were commonly afflicted with conditions in medieval times that might be thought akin today as rheumatism. There is also cauterization for hernias and an additional caustic above, likely on either skin (as mentioned later), the thoracic cavity—potentially related to issues of breathing or chest pains in historical contexts where such symptoms might have been attributed differently than today's understanding. Plus two cauterists between each pair of spines and another caustic at the very tip, which could signify treatment for conditions affecting extremities like fractures that required immediate attention to prevent further damage or complications in an era when medical interventions were limited as compared with modern standards.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is determined by the sharpness of the needle.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Return the inflamed points with the hot irons so that they are applied for long periods of time using tweezers or bracelets (implied by "gete").
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And ensure that the malady is drained from the patient with water collected through their body so it may be added to his necessary treatments and if he has overeaten at today'se meal, use this aid for healthy digestion.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what it burns into when used for treating the belly; that very same one, which has been previously shaped according to its antecedent form and then reshaped like an olive after being preceded by this initial form.
Capitol .xxxii.	The provided text seems like an early attempt at translation or interpretation of medieval medical termin
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	In terms of treatment for the foot and thighs, here is a possible English rendition:
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swolthy and full of putrid water as between the earlobe (auricular) and the ankle ring (anular), cauterize them on both sides with the same fluid that flows in between these points; raise your hand to perform the cauterization, but do not twist it there; lift your hand upwards for this purpose too, and never return it completely—the putrid water recedes.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lay down sickness has been cured for a long time, so that no water returns from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes which have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" is not part of any coherent
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	The phrase provided appears to be in Latin, which was historically used by medical practitioners alongside other languages such as Italian and
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Translation: When the intestines and humors within cause a discharge that releases them through evacuation (which is part of digestion and retention), these processes occur in the stomach and bowels; as for treating, one uses medicinal waters to heal without causing confinement. Sometimes when bloody masses emerge from intestines due to disease conditions requiring treatment with potent cauterizers (which act on their own respective treatments), they include a strong caustic specifically aimed at the stomach and also four other specialized instruments for handling more delicate issues, such as finger-tips or small wounds; plus various specific tools applied to larger lesions above joints.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you witness the excess humidities exhaling and ascending from within (suggestive of flatulence or abdominal distension), then cauterize that over the navel and around the hernias, firmly adjusting some on the stomach and above the inguinas. It is for health improvement where there was no previous error/correction.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	From what little context I can deduce, the phrase "Capitol .xxxiv." likely refers to section or chapter number in Roman numerals (where ".xxx
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there are old ulcers caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture and they cannot be healed without the treatment provided herein at their division (likely referring to a surgical incision), then perform three applications of hot coals on the backside skin near the joints between two small bones and below them, using forceps underne01.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food not decomposed, and if they are constipated often, then:
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation like
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The provided line translates to: For the application of caustic treatment on their abdomen area. Here's how each word has been translated, assuming "Capitol" was an editorial marker rather
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	The line translates to: When you remove the intestine (or hernia), then apply the caustic that was prepared on a spatula or similar tool. Here's an interpretation of each translated term, assuming "Quan tu abscindes atheyl" refers to
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The line translates to: Apply the fire (or heat) into that intestine/hernia removed, and last place your hand inside so that it reaches where the caustic applied goes in via the vein from which blood flows carrying pus or other fluids. This translation assumes a medical context of treating an abscess with cauterization—a process used historically to remove dead tissue by burning, often following surgical procedures like hernia repair when there is concern about potential bleeding
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The line translates to: Apply wax or oil (to form dressings), and if they become wet with blood after having been retouched, cauterize each one as recontracted; also apply what you confer for them within which the bandages are applied until healed. Here's a word-by-word translation along with some context:
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you perform a large cautery above all things, it may hasten healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual content related
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	When fistulas, which are naturally formed in the body parts of a patient, require cauterization (burning to close wounds). Here is the translation line by line:
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended for its place, and the patient is frightened by it, they heal through caution (or careful treatment).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when anyone comes with an opening in nature and it is old, illness of the body becomes wet due to corrupted humors, therefore whoever discovers this subtle touch should be aware that they are dealing with a certain amount of its depth as indicated by this attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Return with the hot iron that seems like lightning (This line suggests preparing or heating the pointed instrument used for treatment, likely an early form of electrotherapy).
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Apply that heated (or electrified) instrument into this abscess as much as you dare to attempt it (This instructs the practitioner on how to use a hot or possibly an electric cautery tool for treating abscesses, suggesting caution in its application).
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the procedure with that instrument until those joints have been scalded for a while or perhaps even two or three times as per your need (This advises on reiterating heat treatment to inflame and cleanse rheumatic afflicted joint areas, adjusting based on necessity).
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Watch out for the burning of nerves and veins—if an abscess spreads to any part in your body, watch all these places; do not apply anything until you are certain that it is inside fleshly tissue without perforation (This emphasizes caution when applying heat treatment near sensitive areas like nerves or blood vessels. It warns against intervention if the pus-filled abscess hasn't fully penetrated solid body structures).
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Cover that location where it has healed (This suggests finalizing treatment by covering up areas of skin lesion or wound, potentially
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the place is sealed and materials have been removed from sight, understand that cure will last for a long time (This line indicates if an abscess has formed a barrier preventing infection spread—like setting skin over it —and all visible foreign matter like dressings or drains are gone, one can be assured of the patient's comprehensive recovery).
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not already exposed in him/her, then you will find that they have been perverted or ruptured at his/her core (the precious parts of his/her body), due to those causes from which memory may come back when thinking about their location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Based on my understanding of medieval medical language influenced by Latin, Italian, Spanish, and
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The phrase "Capitol .xxxvii." appears to be an incomplete reference or a section heading in your text
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in the ears due to dryness or heavy breathing, and thus aggra each member of the chest area, it is covered that they apply a caustic substance over any one earlobe which has been cauterized; this serves as memory aid.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And when you quickly apply a small amount of heat with the second application as an alternative to three lengths of caustic thread (and thus they may regain strength),
Capitol .xxxviii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or content for translation in
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	The phrase provided translates from Latin (or a language influenced by it, such as medieval medical texts) to English and
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is inflamed and softened by heat or moisture that prevents malaise from retaining urine, then a caustic agent is applied to the affected area of pus on the bladder; this involves using woolen padding in its place along with other substances at specific body parts for cauterization.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Here comes the text to translate: E sí la longitud de cada cautéri según la cantidad de notes del pie; y caliente aquellos sobre la parte baja del dorso, o ambos en caso necesario para el tratamiento.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And when it is necessary for the pointed cautery to proceed as planned.
Capitol .xxxix.	Given that "Capitol" doesn'thy context within this medieval medical
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de la mayra," when translated into English, means the act of c
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When humidity and moisture enter the womb (mayra), it is prohibited to engage in sexual intercourse because they corrupt menstrual blood flow; as a result of this delay there occurs significant pain, which becomes unbearable when one attempts penetration. This discomfort necessitates that three cauterization tools are used within the womb's cavity—one placed at each site corresponding to sexual organs: in what is likened here as 'the caul (covering) of a baby', and two more located near where semen would be produced, possibly referring to areas associated with male genitalia. Furthermore, these cauterization instruments are described as having nails or points ('clavils').
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (The provided line does not contain enough
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	For treating the dislocation of the ankle, it is necessary to perform a cauterization:
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture exudes from the part of the anus, and these cause causes for its location within themself, it is called a prolapsed coccyx when compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is being torn apart here.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Now when you cauterize the patient' extraneous portion with an instrument similar to a scalpel for excision, apply pressure as they continue their movements and in such way that the treated area will fall into place within the circle of movement.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	When it is a part of those that came before in the act of cauterization of the stomach,
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not with you now, then use three large cauteries of olive wood for the cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply the points according to the quantity of pain throughout the entire spine, and take care that it heals well.
Capitol .xli.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or text related
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The phrase in Latin, which translates roughly to the treatment of a vein (possibly referring to an issue with blood flow) affect
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is in the part of anguish (potentially referring to spinal issues related to sciatica), and it's due to dampness within, treat with water we have at hand that won’t worsen matters; these are outdated or artificial pillules. Apply cauterization then to this area as well.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The action of the cautery in that place is either twofold: it serves as a medicine by burning (cauterization), or it acts like fire itself (burns).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And as for the spaces between each instrument, it is about the quantity of its bulk and whether these instruments are large or small (olive-sized or larger).
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May occasionally there be some bleeding at the site of the incision on top of the head to ensure that are four cauteries (or treatments).
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize at the place where shape was previously formed during the cauterization of the displacement of the ankle; thus ensuring that this circle remains intact and ignites throughout the entire length of the spine.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how caution should be applied when pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the groin area.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May it be extended into the thigh, then two lances of cauterization are applied to the region where the humidity enters that causes pain; and one lance is placed on the bone for four days as needed by the patient' extraneous part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the depth of the pointed cautery (cauterizer) corresponds to the length of the patient' extrusion canal.,
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the swelling reaches into the area where pain is located in the feet, then here you will perform cautery at this place for three points or four, as needed from that location.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the evil wind enters and causes pain in the groin area, then apply here an external caustic needle for treatment.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And as for you in all the cauterization that should not go beyond numbing nerves or large gangrene, it is because of herein under your neck (the throat area), where there may be no obstruction nor contraction present.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And when they have already seen one of those things that were cauterized on the bone and at last in the act of cauterization, the flame has entered inside where there was a tumor, piercing it completely through the skin.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When abdominal pain occurs forcefully from within the belly, and water (humor) is taken away accordingly.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts separated by cautioning (using a pointed instrument for treatment), then follow this method according to these instructions.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here, they apply the cautery of ankle on which this act is performed: appears like a circle made from iron whereby it forms its circuit as if within one palm; and according to the thickness of a bone'seal or small stone, should be dressed accordingly.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here enters another third element; and it is the space between them wherein lies the quantity of notes on the foot. These circles are openings from two parts, their length being a note or two in width at these margins – this is its form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Return it to the fire within where it darkens and sparks fly outwards; place it on the division of the sinew, with honey poured over the lumbago so that their joint holds together firmly.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So then you will burn that with three cautery instruments in a session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the text to translate:  
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: Oh children, of this particular type of cautery we have used for the horror of observation upon you, and so that a few times we find what observes over you.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who endure from my lancets come here and inflict pain on themselves in this place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries are firmly attached to the instruments that have pierced through a hole in the door of iron, such as when the length of their legs is like two nuts or spans these together.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between them is equal to the quantity of their body'dictum; and are open above and below, holding each other in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And lift your hand with the tool, and wipe away all the water down below it from the body'dict (water tail).
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Here applies the poultice for three days on that border where blackness from excess humidity persists, and it is applied daily with a hot compress; this improves over time.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside so it may heal.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the coccyx or inguinal region, make it stand in that place where water is applied as when done on the groin.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how gout manifests itself, and I have already written it in the treatise on medical correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and salt dissolves both parts of the division once, piercing through a new wave wherein the divided portion has been penetrated by a small incision according to how much enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Pause after the other'thy flowing water enters, and place it on that lime stone which is alive with drinkable water drawn from elsewhere; apply these poured liquids to this area using proper compression, letting out such as come downstream quickly into the lower part where they first entered.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	So of some of the remedies that are used for caustification (cauterization), apply them similarly with skin-toning and honey paste, so you can observe if they combine well together in their use.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Gualia recounts of an ancient home where the operation and care are what cure hip and sciatic pain, which is a great pleasure to be from that place, as no other treatment is necessary here, for they recover fully after just following this recommendation: frequent bathing in the river and exercise with their own medicine derived from it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is believed to be caused by certain breeches pressing downward or if not pressed by wind, then a fresh stone will fall; and the pain may spread in various places such as the thigh, groin, or saddle area, where there could also be bleeding.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When laid out for three hours or as long as the melancholy releases its accumulation of pain,
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Apply that thereon in bath and when the body of him is rubbed off, insert it into his flesh so deep within its cavity where pain ceases to exist and healing begins.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	E understand that you do not cover your body with these instruments but facilitate the excretion from the body (the carriage of waste).
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Socrates say that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it relieves its blood; and these are the cautions according to this method: wool for binding and ointment made from antidotes, applied between the feet and between the joints.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the hollow of the dry sheep' extrusion and place it inside where there is congealed blood, placing your hand over that area so that the wound does not open further.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return some water (apply heat), and do not cease applying the running of the knife until it reaches the joint, then rest to relieve pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this one of cauterization is called burns from goats' horns.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii. (This line is not in Latin or any of
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	The provided text appears to be a mix of Italian and some archaic medical terminology, possibly referencing the treatment of
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Translation: Occasionally pain is in the legs due to causes such as cramping or bruising from impacts or excessive evacuation; for these reasons, cauterization with moist and exuded material may be used.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And with this very same specialized tool, it is used only for bleeding caused by effusion of the humor (the fluid from within joints or other body parts).
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, administer the evacuation of maw fullness through inserted pills and appearance that are three lines apart according to its location; place chastity in any one line with cautery as per the tolerance of the patient'dicts for their malaute (indigestion) and vital force.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	This line translates into English as follows: And if it is a puncture wound that needs treatment with points, then do so using pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to proceed further in this manner, consider performing three or four cuts with pointed cautery using the following form. (Note that without additional context on "this form," a more precise translation isn't possible.) Here is an interpretation based solely on provided information: If one wishes to continue treatment by making several pun
Capitol .xliii.	If you wish to proceed with the instruction, here it would be in English as follows (
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	In regard to puncture wound treatment or incision closure within this context seems logical based on your reference "Capitol .xliii." This line can
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Wandering movements during this illness among children are recommended for them to lie on their backs, and it is through these motions that doctors should apply pressure over the child's body following elevation and motion as part of treatment (Note: This translation assumes a context where wanderings or gentle physical activity could be therapeutic. The specific medical practice would require clarification).
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	In the lower part of the back and between his legs, which is beginning to rise above the others vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you press and intend to prevent it from spreading, then apply that pointed instrument used for cautery in this circular manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	That applies the cautery over the entire vertebral joint of the spine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cauterization along the vertebral column with points of cautery on two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are their intended points.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	When taking care of the place where it has been healed with water that we have mentioned before.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May there be caution that a pointed cautery is not applied in humidity, but for muscle spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	From the context of your previous translations and considering that "cauterize" refers to using heat or some form of treatment (which could be interpreted as early forms of medical intervention),
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when this kind of pain occurs in the feet, it has become a common practice among doctors to refer to it as gout (podagra).
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And when gout pain due to cold humors is healed by the treatment of medicine and there are no more pains left untreated, then apply treatments with hot cupping instruments.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you are cauterizing that portion of elimination in the circulatory channel between the foot and the groin, with your own burners.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	That is the form of this tool: (The olive wood used for it)
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery for that purpose.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pains penetrate into the abdomen or other joints and their movements become restless, then treat that area with three to four of these same caustic applications from this cautery overall.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you have the necessary cautery tools here, then apply that one to where needed without pressing too hard with your hand at once; send only enough of what is already on the needle therein (to the lancet).
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain penetrates into the area between the thighs and knees, then apply the treatment that we have mentioned in this chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the feet and it's called sour excess (indicating a condition possibly related to acidity or imbalance of humors), then they will make an incision along the circuit of the bilious passages, making punctures in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there are residual pains in the head and on each bone of the mouth (which could imply issues with teeth or jaw), then make a puncture at the circumference around every tooth and under the tongue'zymes, where their blood flows.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If joint or muscle pain occurs during the days at the knees or shoulders, then they will perform cautery on all parts of their aids (assistants).
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if there is a blockage in the malady and good regimen along with intake of medicine allows for its removal through this cautery instrument, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise with influences of
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	From your fragment, "Capitol .xlv.," it's not possible for me to provide a direct
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	Translation: When the rupture occurs in the joints and when you apply bandages to the patient's ankle, bringing them close to their navel area (believed here as a reference point for treatment), doctors commence care by instructing how much force should be applied so that it does not exceed what is necessary due to causes lenient enough. This means using gentle pressure or other methods to ensure the wound inside will heal within its own time, avoiding aggressive interventions when they are unwarranted for proper recovery according to medieval medical reasoning presented in this treatise fragment.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	In this fragment: "E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos," the physician suggests following up with gentle treatment of the patient'dicts lower parts, specifically over their legs (which might be referred to as 'bodies'). The instruction is for someone else or an instrument ("lu") holding and controlling how much pressure ('their hands') should apply. If a hernia appears near these regions—where it may have pushed through the body wall into this area, known here simply
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	In this fragment: "E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh," the physician is directing to return what has come, which likely refers back to any material or substance that was used previously in an attempt (possibly cautery) on a specific part of the body with fingers. Here, "pentennial" can be interpreted as referring perhaps to 'fifteen years' old', though this is not common medical terminology and might simply represent confusion from translating archaic
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the heat of the cautery used for this purpose (the form/method):
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When it is time for prayer and putting on bands (or straps).
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity and place your hand over it to ensure that the intestine does not protrude further.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: You have already opened the space between the patient' extralimbs (malady), and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest; holding their hands tightly in place.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Return the cautery to that spot on your hand where you have placed it firmly, and wait for when those of the pentacle enter into their mouth at dawn; repeat this procedure if after the first attempt entry has not been achieved in the initial watch.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the condition of the intestine during your cautery procedure to ensure that it does not leak into the abdomen or cause another serious ailment.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you understand that when using a heating tool (cauterizer), you are not touching the patient's eyes, you do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it is necessary for children'thy instruments (cauterization) to be subtle according to their greatness and measure, so they should apply them gently.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the site of the cautery for three days within which the wound heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that healing will take place in those other ointments within which it is placed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joint is inflamed on its own for forty days until it's sealed and the patient recuperates, with:
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When the nourishment of him/her according to the length of time needed for his/her recovery is provided and that prevents the intestine from protruding out, it must be done immediately as part of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When after four days it is time to administer the ligature tightly, hold that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And when it is necessary that the initial wound be sealed with a trilateral cautery as per this manner, place it so gently to avoid provocation.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And there is a line that will come through the cut in the leg undernedicted by it and another down here; hold your mallet with one hand for the first lancet you have put in place, which could be better if inserted earlier.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (This line seems like it might be referencing
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Here comes a reference related to cauterization of the womb." This translation suggests that "ca
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in the limbs through lancination or percussion and does not alleviate despite medical care, it is customary for doctors to use a pointed tool for cauterization of points.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And apply the points on each member according to their size and growth, as well as the location of twisting and pain in them.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if it is healed by the first application of cautery, be; but if not, repeat over him those same applications of cautery until his malady (the swelling) has been reduced to a point where its movement ceases and enters into that womb from which they came. According to custom for these pains it is said that the points on each limb directed towards their origin in the uterus are punctured, so as to prevent further progression of those same cauteries within the malady until healing occurs.
Capitol .xlvii.	The provided text appears to describe medical practices related to joint pain (possibly gout)
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Certainly! Here's the line-by-line translation of your medieval treatise with added context and meaning
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Here are the translations:
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you intend to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is present and has been treated with the water we have discussed in this division, nor here or there does it remain, nor on the body of him/her altogether; for a lancet will be used at the top of the head where hair grows back, between two pubic mounds, behind both shoulders (servants), and over two calluses.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the next sentence to translate: And then apply a small extension into the bone until it enters the bone, causing the displaced scars to be moved away from there; and then cauterize on the lesion as requested.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and shows manifestations, then cover that area with these cauterums (burning tools), applying them to the extremity of the nose, as well as two on each mouth sore, two on each pair of spondylosis in the neck, two on both thoracic spindealions, one large over the vertebrae close to the coil, and one for the shoulder blade; apply two above the ankles, two around knees, two on each thumb/forefinger joint, two at every knuckle of these digits, two where fingers meet with palms (interphalangeal articulations), two in places corresponding to muscle tendons near your bones, and also apply them everywhere between the upper and lower parts of their limbs as well as on each heel.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Guard your nerves that do not burn upon the foot' extrinsic for they are less vulnerable there and must be preserved intactly from harm or injury, as per medieval medical understanding in this treatise:
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some treatments involve cautery on the bones of the pelvis and in another place upon the mouth of the stomach, and another treatment is applied to the womb (uterus).
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	When it is necessary for the cauteries (therapecoutry tools) to be large or small according to the parts and joints as previously dictated by the properties of these instruments,
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the pointed instruments made of iron dust and honey, as well as other treatments within which it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Based on your fragment, "Cauterizacio de stupor," it seems to refer to a
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or falls asleep and requires healing through medicine, physicians, apothecaries, and attendants—none of which can fully restore health on their own—then one should cauterize that affected limb according to the severity of its injury. (This translation assumes a medieval context where traditional remedies such as cautery were used for certain medical conditions.)
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let that pointed cautery enter into the hollow of the neck with a few.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is inside of it with care; for when it has been healed within its cavity by this means, then remove your cautery (the pointed instrument used
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	In some cases the patient may experience numbness in their arms and legs, as well as at the vertebrae of the spine where nerves pass through; these symptoms occur even before surgery for this condition (gout), which involves cauterization to treat areas like those mentioned. The 'stupor' or neurological numbness is induced intentionally using a heating tool, and then carefully removed once the necessary treatment has been applied within their body cavities.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not touch it anywhere but where one is wise in the anatomy of the body and knowledge of nerve exits throughout the entire corporeal movement.
Capitol .xlix.	In order to provide an accurate translation of this medieval medical text line by line into English while
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	For the treatment involving scalding (cauterization) for warts, which are growths on the skin caused by a virus called human papillomavirus
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are ancient and do not respond to the liniments (medicinal ointments) used by physicians, then cauterization should be applied over that which has been previously coated with a poultice before it is moistened again within bounds determined wherein both white exudate from beneath skin emerges indicating potential healing and color of the area changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .l.	Given that "Capitol" is likely an excerpt
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de cranc." translates to English as "of craniot
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When they consume and vomit that star upward, it is when the one who has been causticated with a circle in their digestive tract during indigestion comes about due to this motion.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	Here is the line by line translation of each sentence:
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	This is where you have placed a sharp instrument that has been burned in the body'dict form or as part of the loop (circuit), much like what we described earlier when using caustic tools at hand; this corresponds to placing and possibly burning with cauterizing instruments within specific areas, following our previously discussed method.
Capitol .li.	Capital (here): This phrase likely indicates that what follows is an
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	From "cauterize" and "afflicted": It appears to be instructing on the procedure for treating or burning
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any afflicted is delayed in ripening, and thus excess substance accumulately forms that condition either due to humoral imbalance or weakness of constitution, or because of age—then you must hasten the curing process; herein lies where small cautery points are placed within its circuit (likely referring to blood flow), which will satisfy it during maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the procedure of this (the poultice), then heat it and apply that very cautery for its form; allow it time there in the warm place where body humors are improved within so that the needle can enter into the vein smoothly.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If points are placed in that location where they were just put on with the lancet, take care to ensure that there is healing at that spot; and for the leg bracelet (brace) will be alleviated.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol .liii." (The original text seems incomplete here;
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	In this translation, "Capitol .liii." refers to a procedure or concept that is related directly to the
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 In this translation of "Capitol .liii.", I interpreted it as referring to the treatment or identification of movement corruption within the limb—comparable to how dry wood burns with fire, suggesting an organic decay process that can be seen in certain medical conditions. The sentence implies a need for intervention similar to cauterization used historically by
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Translated as: "Therefore if you observe the movement-corrupting area where was previously subjected to cautery using a small twig or bone splinter, then burn with fire large enough according to what is necessary at that location for which corruption occurs." Here, it seems like an instruction on how one might readdress areas affected by decay (referred metapsychologically as movement-corrupting) through the application of heat—implying a form of cauterization using fire. This aligns with ancient medical practices where burning was used for healing certain conditions,
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Translated as: "Therefore heat the area fully where you have managed to remove all decay and eliminate any cause of illness." This sentence instructs on a healing process, possibly following an operation or treatment aimed at completely clearing out disease (represented here by 'corrosion') from within someone's body using fire as a tool for c
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Translated as: "Heal that area for three days, and pause over the cauterized locations until all scars are completely healed out, and total decay is eliminated." This line of instruction suggests a post-treatment care regimen focusing on recovery time from both physical wounds (scarring) and internal corruption or disease. It indicates that complete recuperation involves patience during the cauterization period followed by thorough healing without residual damage, which would be essential knowledge for medical practitioners in a historical context where understanding of pathology was
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Return care for that which is in fleshly origin within them (the humors causing pain).
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If in three days the flesh that has just been born is clean and healthy as such, then no treatment (cauterization) is needed; otherwise, repeat the use of caustics on what has become spoiled in those places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosive substances are used in some acute medicine treatments; that is where they act as caustics.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	May occasionally applied focused heat from a poultice be beneficial for draining purulent (pus-filled) joints.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	When you have already applied medicine for acute conditions in this division and therefore take it when the patient exhibits signs of recovery.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol .liii.: This line does not appear coherent in
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	The given Latin-like text discusses medical procedures, specifically relating to the treatment of joints and possibly other body parts by means such as caustics or c
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The provided text appears to be a medieval medical treatise discussing the treatment of joints and possibly other body parts with some degree of discomfort or dysfunction described as being caused by what seems like an infiltration, likely referring to excess fluids (humors) affecting different areas. Here's a line-bydependent translation:
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the pointed cautery be focused on where pain is present as if it were fire, which tool consists of iron according to the quantity that contains the whole assembly'dictor (likely referring to all components of a surgical instrument), and also has delicate margins:
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Return the flame to that part of the key and return your hand along with the lancet inside the loop of the key until the lancing instrument reaches the depth of the keyhole.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leaves that enter for three days after beginning therapy with gout treatment are as follows:
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here the cauterizing agent is applied to that wounded part of salted hemp fibers and it should be spread over there for a moment until said wound disappears from their reasons/causes.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that location where flesh has been generated inside while it is being healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it is not converted (turned into water), and bleeding continues on the surface of the body, mostly in hands and feet, you must apply moisture with a cupped or iron cautery hand, holding these items: either an earthen jar containing water, barely filled; place your hand over this vessel. Turn it (the instrument) continuously until compressed completely by your hand; then secure the nozzle of the container into the keyhole already made in that part, and forcefully expel a stream through this hole down to where you inserted the needle previously—wait for only an hour after applying said moisture before rinsing it (the instrument) off. Afterward, if necessary keys are bent outwards as intended by their use:
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	When it is necessary that something be applied within them, place it on all the parts where they are located in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Return those pus that the reasons of the joints are eliminated by means of ointments applied to where the flesh is inflamed.
Capitol .liiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or words for
De cauterizacio de tremor.	From your provided text, it seems like you are asking me to translate a Latin-based medical phrase related to
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs in the nerves or due to fever as a result of inflammation, it is necessary that you perform four types of cauterizations: one over each vertebra from T1 to S2 (the cervical and thoracic spine), another on your hands; additionally, two more are required—one for the stomach area, and possibly an olive-like instrument is used.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the shaking of him ceases and hastens his recovery from illness,
Capitol .lv.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of Rom
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Translation for "Capitol .lv.": This line is not a coherent sentence and seems like it may contain typographical errors or
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	Translation of the provided text: When pus is expelled from a wound in the limb (foot), which consists of large corrupted materials, it must be applied with pomegranate bark as an external application to address these boils; or when they occur at the site where fine mistletoe has been used internally over time. Alternatively, apply crushed cactus leaves directly on the focus point while using a fistula for drainage (curetting). Or if located in long-standing ergotosis areas use gentle lancing to promote healing and remove these growths from deep within tissues or structures.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	May God that which is painful be relieved by surgical removal (flebectomy).
Capitol lvi.	Capitol LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of bleeding from a sanctioned injury by incision of scalpel.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops led by arterial flow that you must inflate or insert into the limb parts appear suddenly and it is difficult to restore them back again.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when you apply vinegar to your body, place the crotch on its own and rest it over there until such time that the fluids of the sanctified vessels are expelled without any coming out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Return pause in the focus with few and large lancets by number of needles, and blow over those inside that contain fire (flames).
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move and withdraw the cautery, then take another lashing with one of the prepared cauteries immediately; thus, do not cease to inflict more until the sanc's restriction has been achieved.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And when you ensure that there is not burnt nerve here and remove other evils from the abdomen or elsewhere,
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	When arterial flow is obstructed in these areas, it'thy not possible to restrict the vessels therein unless one of four methods are used: or with cautery where we have them inserted (instruments), when they should be extracted if extraction isn’t performed and upon removal their extremities will burn up and further constrict the vessel, or a pinch is applied using force for strong extension (or bone setting) of those limbs secured by mortise joints in sturdy splints.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer a proper measure of ligature and constriction on the patient' extrication due to burns or inflammations not ease but rather apply pressure firmly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen that when no doctor or medicine is present, work at the pace indicated above with those items currently in use from that vein'dictly where we have them, and understand the great constriction within which he stands isolated by the lower division of the body (probably referring to a hernia), as well as over the area mentioned not being further disturbed; also sprinkled upon this part with boiling water from that vein containing much phlegmatic exudation, causing him there to become congealed and swolloaded. May it then be necessary for cautery or medicine at all times where such is required.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Commences the second division/part (The term "segunda parte" can refer either to
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	From incision and piercing, through suction (aspiration) and cauterization, along with the operations of abscess drainage and fistulas treatment involving themselves and their counterparts/affiliates.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are terms from Alcuzzi.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Ja have we described in this first chapter all illnesses for which the focus of treatment and medical combustion are required, as well as their occasions and causes, along with necessary instruments used therein; here I order these chapters on the subjugation of headache within the body.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter for that purpose, so the desired thing is brought about as requested by you.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you enter here with urgency, son of a doctor who understands that in this place first for cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For the care that is necessary here, during this operation where movements are made cautiously as directed by these lines, you must ensure evacuation of what exists within it (presumably referring to blood or fluids), which forms life itself and resides in the vein or due to an incision on the abscess/emergence spot or pure extraction from maggot infestation or worm removal.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	From all of these things accompanies fear and trembling, in the abdomen of them (the patients).
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deveest vus manoier la maniere d'homes contra maladies.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Here come those who claim to cure the illness and deceive you into believing death is a relief from their suffering, driven by the potency of its humors as well as prolonged sickness which leads them to believe that this curing signifies escape from death itself.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	From those things gives him his health and tells us, that he hopes for this goodness, but the illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not consent to that which comes from the person you are observing; your caution must be greater than mere curiosities and lack of greed regarding any cause until certain scientific knowledge clarifies it for you, after which praiseworthy success will follow.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When healing your illnesses of prediction and indication, here in that you are being cured, it will assist you with acquiring fame and memory; a benefactor and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, God guide your understanding and not bend you in direction or protection, for it is within themselves where they find these things (protection/direction).
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And order this chapter distinctly by chapters as they follow in the book of cauterizations for head treatment within the feet so that you may attend to what is asked, from it and what you need.
Capitol primier.	Capital First. (This line appears to be an introductin
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	From the water contained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness moves slowly in children, and when the newborn first puts on his head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	When certain actions due to a hurtful cause have not been cleaned or addressed properly.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May you not see this illness in children but among all who have had their death caused by hernia (coitus), and for aid I present my work to these people here.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And you have seen that a child whose head was made of water could not stand on their own feet for long due to its great size and possibly increased moisture inside where breath is taken (emphasis placed here may vary based on interpretation).
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is added between the navel and the bone or is placed on top of the abdomen:
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case is where moisture (humidity) is between the chin and bone and the abscess is small, then you cut at the warm location of your head to create one fissure along the jawline, with this being the form of a spur:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture increases and ulceration becomes more severe according to this mannerism:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is in your throat, it means that you must open up and release all parts of division where water has been squeezed when preparing this mixture for consumption; there's nothing else to do at this time.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut into the spot of the head at three cracks according to this methodology:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And reduce the inflammation outside, and strengthen fissures in bedclothes and blankets; apply water and oil from morning till evening within it to prevent relapse of fluid (which indicates edema), fixing bandages around limbs with clean cloths or linens as needed. Strengthen the head for equal balance; feed dietary dry food until there is comfort and healing in the body part concerned.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes another operation method you should consider: the size of the ulcer and the collection of water around it may sometimes occur at the back of the skull, or in the area above, or on the right side, or on the left side; therefore pay attention to where the ulcer and fluid accumulation appear, so that when they do become visible, you can proceed with incision.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and blood vessels of sanctus and moratus for this flow of bile which is involved in the expulsion of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Capitol II.: (The Roman numeral "II" indicates
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the vessels through which blood is drawn to apply pressure with tweezers or forceps, they are called "hilsses." (This translation attempts to convey medieval medical terminology into modern English, though it's important to note that terms can have evolved meanings over time.) Here’
Capitol segon.	From the vessels through which blood is drawn for treatment purposes are
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When inflammation or swelling occurs within the hips or chest area and it's ancient practice not to apply this fluid directly for treatment purposes as a part of medical procedures, thus beginning curative action from these two vessels is necessary (Here we translate an instruction related to historical medicine practices into English). This translation attempts to capture medieval understanding regarding specific symptoms—swelling or inflammation in the hips and chest areas. Accordingly, they advocate for a treatment that starts directly at those locations via blood drawn from particular arteries instead of attempting direct application within these affected regions themselves as per their established medical practices.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you intend to insert those into the patient'dict groin, and rub it down with an ashen cloth for them to appear their arteries, and tighten its col of lint at the backcloth; take note of the veins on each location where they are applied, and such locations may be hidden in only learned men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the splint into the vein and divide it at the points below, in those parts opposite to where they are placed.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	When the length of the intestine is two fingers adjusted, when any vein within it exits with a pulsing sensation, which ascends frequently like a jump or surge.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow does not appear at the joints, then measure the size of three fingers from the auricle (earlobe), apply salt to attempt entry, and insert it into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the quantity of venom extracted from the snake is determined, and no more may be taken from it today or tomorrow, this amount corresponds to the volume that appears in the malady'dictorial state of its blood flow (artery) and repletion (filling).
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider the patient' extraneous matter (plagna), and thus if any remains on the bone for a cause of phlegmon (inflammation caused by infection or foreign material within tissues), separate it out so that no abscess formation occurs with caution.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return strength to the child with feathers and lambskin or linen wool within which it is dipped in grease for healing.
Capitol .iii.	Given that there is no text provided for translation beyond "Quan
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The phrase "Capitol" seems to be a title or heading, possibly referring to an entry in Roman history where the Capitoline Temple might have been mentioned. However, without additional context, providing
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	The sentence appears to be in a form of old medical Latin or medieval Spanish/Italian influenced by the language structure and lexical choices reminiscent of those periods. Here's an attempt at translation into modern English:
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The pain of the operation and extraction from which these humors arise in their places within the temple; understand that arteries are shown by your pulse there, but hidden behind few houses due to movement forcefully exerted upon them.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you are hidden, tighten the area of your thigh with some cloth; and apply heat or steam to that location until it becomes apparent that there is an abscess present.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take it (referred here as "the spatula"), this is its form/shape/appearance like so:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: And place your tongue in that which facilitating entry into the artery; and put on shoes or remove it from those parts of the body where you come after removing it from the neck and discovering these layers, throughout all portions.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May it be that if the artery is subtle, wrap around that part of the body'dict (possibly referring to an extremity), and inscribe therein according as much portion as by which their limbs are elongated and contracted so that no flow will occur unless these portions have been inscribed.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	When it is necessary to return the sanction of urine into three, do so by letting out (evacuating) its contents within these limits/parameters.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then you must place it in two spots on either side of double distance down to or near heart and cord blood lines, so as not to induce decay within the worms' concoction and its subsequent flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	When you apply pressure on the excess that lies between two ligaments, it may happen at this time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish to, apply the pointed cautery inside the mouth where it has been used for cutting (the tongue), and stay at that location of the surgeon'se work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Et il male ha febbre o è di scalda complesso; queste cauterie sono per quelle cause che aiutano le umidi termini finali, ed è quindi migliore in giovamento.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working you find that the flow of blood from the artery also comes out during labor, then at this time try to restrict that blood flow or use a cautery tool where it enters into your womb and tighten your belly so as not to allow the contraction.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If a cause of that is not present with you now, then rest your hand on the spot where his sanctum has cooled down and congealed, infuse this location thoroughly with strong heat until inflammation subsides, at which point tighten as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When you have pushed the leech out of its place for this cauterization that has two locations where attempts are made to insert them and rested thereafter until they enter the bone so that it is lengthened from these points, which are not consolidated by being here all day with this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the pointed cautery works:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the sharpness of both cloaks examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Even if the patient is in such discomfort that two pillows are better than none at all (or as good as any other cushion), do not cut into their flesh hastily for speed's sake.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickening in them and heat accumulants at those locations cause the flesh to detach loosely.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety because of this addition.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	When it is about the space between two sacks wherein lies the quantity of the said bulk,
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quart. (Assuming "Quart
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of sharp and acrid humors within joints through their limbs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors accumulate therein and do not cause any discomfort to that part of the chest over which those veins run (the area where breathing occurs), it happens as if their bodies resemble ant-like movements, walking on tiptoe like ants. The hands they hold tightly together; thus medical masters use this natural state for treatment in these operations, and therefore complete that cure with a passage.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	You command the humors in their head to move the hairs on their forehead and make three incision-like cuts at the mouth of the forehead, according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure is two fingers: one distance from the nostril to the bridge of the nose in the forehead location where tears are produced, and another correspondingly small as per movement of the eyes' parts that contain it, then so be it with this condition.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Guard your jaw where the lips meet twice and extend your tongue for the continuous motion of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If there is an excess of three days adjusted in any joint space,
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have an onion dressed in cloth or drying mats among the items, it is for scrapping out impurities from the sancus (which could refer to waste matter produced by the body' extraneous substances).
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Return the spleen between two acute limbs of it; this is its form.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that it is from the departure of the spirits into the second inspection.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Expose all of the spine where it is between two joints above which lies the disc upon which it rests and apply herein what issues from within this intervertebral space into the second joint below.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When that gout has touched the attached flesh of his ribs and bent the bone of his leg, push it in such a way that it reaches the migratory fissure, and cut off entirely all those vessels descending from the head hair.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May continued inflow of humidity from the cough and is placed into another crack within itself.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Put enough strength from your heart's quantity into expelling these blockages in the arteries of the sanctum with a contraction.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return pause in any crack of the joint' extrusion and place it over those grains within bone marrow therein, where blood flows at rest or during motion; proceed until healing sets in without developing an abscess (osteoarthritis).
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, apply great heat from water or oil treatment and take care that some of this moisture is inhaled into a bellows filled with rosemary and other herbs to cure the humors.
Capitol .v.	Capital I (since "I" is not present in any of
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	This sentence appears to be written in a mixture of Catalan and Latin, which could indicate an old or archaic text where elements from different languages are intertwined. It seems like the topic is related to healing images (possibly sacred icons used for curative purposes) and
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When one comes to catharsis and continues with it, sometimes the intestines of malaise (implying an imbalance or sickness) become tired, and their examination reveals ulcerated lips and fur from licking them excessively; inside the head there is a sharp, throbbing pain extending beyond conscious understanding—these are signs that these matters have not come directly but through veins of disintegrating parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And the best cure in these cases is that you command the malady (the disease or ailment) it raises its own forehead, and impose your finger on that very spot where there'dicts already be an opening at the front of the face; another fissure hereby enters into service within thy right temple tooth. Here is what each part translates as:
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all phlegm or dry flesh from between the patient'se lips where there is a crack in either the tongue or linen cloths, and fill that space with moisture again.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return it above in grains of barley and oil, so that it does not develop into an ulcerative sore.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the putrefaction has diminished and pus begins to enter into your bones through groaning flesh, take care that you remove with this regimented extract what causes it in its exit from the skin; as when taking two parts of flour made from wheat and four parts of beeswax, mix them together and apply or administer on these swellings using.
Capitol .vi.	In this translation process for an ancient medical text with elements of Latin,
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	When it comes to treating the fluid that has accumulated in the fingers (which is likely referring to edema or swelling caused by excess fluids). Here'
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	As for the cause of fluid accumulation in the fingers (which can be one of four species), it may or may not be mineral-related like iron and glass; if related to plants such as chickpeas or broad beans; caused by a fluid with similar properties, combined with water vapors and associated fumes from these materials—or possibly due to an animal. Here we have the source sentence broken down:
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when blood comes out of the ear or appears to seem like those causes which do not fit and pause the ear at sunlight, if you see blood coming from it, then administer its removal and make cauterization with fire according to condition; provide for their healing process after extraction.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply pressure in the circulation of the artery some rags or wool shawls, and extend the artery towards the parts above it; this movement is constantly sought for these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is not a cough present, then administer the removal of phlegm using the subtle instruments referred to hereby as its form.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If there is an obstruction (forebodings or blockages), it occurs so quickly that removal may happen in a moment' extrication with just two small touches of the hand.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	So if there is not an outlet, then make a silver tube and insert the extremity of the tube into the ulcer' extrinsic environment around it; seal with wax and oil-softened substance to ensure that only the tube protrudes.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	When applied outside of the belly in strong attachment with what we have counted on, too many troops are gathered.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If there is no foreskin in this condition, then take some alum or sharp instrument on which the fingers are pressed tightly to apply pressure at the end of the finger and cover that part carefully applied.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Return that into the hollow of the artery for ease, and remove the humidity from the artery itself.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if all the causes we have discussed do not suffice, then take action to apply caution or restrain spasm with such treatment as you find appropriate at that moment.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	E the manipulation of such is that you sanction the opening of the varicose vein in the spleen and extract it according to the direction of the patient' extrusion, and make this cut between your thighs into a parting of the auriga (an instrument used for surgical procedures), turning its point towards the parts above.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of pain in the wrist is grease that you believe and inflate it, then administer treatment and removal; however, if you do not obey your prescription, take a gentle sedative according to this method.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	e administers that which was extracted from him through his artery, where it entered in the veinlet of them.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Even when you think that it has become moistened by the steam of mercury and pauses there in drops, do not extract those limbs below (the joints or extremities), nor apply pressure with fingers or tools undernezymich influence; for they are already disturbed. Here refers to a situation where one might think that body humors have become excessively moistened by some substance like mercury vapor and thus causing inflammation, but it is cautioned not to attempt removal of those affected parts or apply pressure with instruments at this stage due to the disturbance.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May enter the water wherein the malady enters through the urethral cove for consumption, and fill up its urinary bladder to capacity; if diverted by fluid (presumably semen or other secretions), then it returns along that channel until fullness is reached. If not redirected, take stones of smooth granite/pebbles according to the length of this pathway, place them in one's focus wherein water enters and jump onto a stone thereof with your own foot; while doing so, strike another such stone upon it repeatedly as if engaging directly with the urinary opening.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that all water is drawn into the stone filter where it will be purified.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water flows into the orifice that you hold with paper or horn, place one end of it in the aureola and stretch out the other within where it can burn off the moisture of your body.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Even if more than enough water has flown in over time until all the water is drained from that catheter outside of the extraction hole, pull it out through its own tube as described by the stone door' extruder.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When a beast is dragged out of that hole, if it's small and appears weakened by the extraction effort (what we have discussed in terms of division), then administer its removal through force and cutting instruments; but if it's from a large one whose cause affects the head due to being drawn out, apply treatment with these same tools while removing it, addressing that specific problem above all others present within the hole.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	May happen during the removal of phlegm produced in the throat, when you treat that water which we have mentioned earlier as part of division and flow of distillation processes; provided your care does not interfere with watching out for the throat under the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So if there is any cause of worms here, extract them gently or immediately with small tools undernethyderhand; otherwise take a wide catheter inserted from below and this will be the form.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate part under the auricle according to the quantity that suffering can cause; apply pressure there with forceful suction and make periodic movements until all the worms are expelled from their holes (i.dict).
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	May you not observe me during my bathing with the cork tube inserted for treatment; administer these preparations which have already been evaporated in their healing process within the channel of distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is from your effusion, which you open for the application of these remedies in this instrument that has become its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E for that one made of silver or lead, struck immediately upon their underbelly, with a small implement and placed on the back.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Therefore it is necessary when they press in the continence of the catheter herein present.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the rod and wrap it gently around the patient's limb, place oil or some liquid from these medicines in the hollow of their chest cavity (which is in the neck), and insert the rod upward undernethy and express with your hand that quickly which will expel the medicine inside the chest cavity where the malady feels lubricated.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When humors have been collected in the auricle (ear), they are already cut small at the focus of one'dictone.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Guard your teeth that what you will extract in the arsorium is not too harsh, for those remedies of arsorium do not endure it.
Capitol .vii.	The given text seems like an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	In this line, it appears that there's some confusion in the mixing of Latin and potentially older or regional Italian terms related to medicine:
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Translation attempt:  
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	When you press on his forehead, which does not comprehend the covering, it is in major difficulties of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When it is time for that veil of the malady in which you have paused the appendix at the navel and look upon it there,
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Therefore if you see an external swelling present, grasp that subtle part from which this form originates.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If in the limb where it is small (referring to an injury or condition), one portion of which is acute and the other not, and its sinew consists of two bones that do not cause pain when touched by itself; then there should be no harm to the patient'thy wrist.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	So if the swelling is due to flesh born in the armpit or in the body of it, then cut that out gently and injure it violently until all the meat is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the swelling is in the area of the scrotum (pregon), then place under it a gentle breeze and heat that flame over there briefly; apply that to the affected skin on the testicle.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the artery is blocked by water that the humidity robs of life due to breathing difficulties, this blockage makes it easier for you (the doctor), so take care not to damage the nerves of the arm.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you suppress the flow of bile if it rises up and submerge sponge or cloth in water then pause over the forehead, using another remedy that restrains the flow of bile; this is referred to as treatment in the tractate of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The translation may be context-dependent as
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Regarding the care for which eye pain has occurred, or what is concerned with this condition affecting the eyelids:  
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When cold humor enters into the veins of the feet, sometimes there are drynesses as well.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So that you take hold of those parts where pain first occurs and separate them from the rest of their flesh, placing pause over the affected locations three times.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	May it be that if there is a flow of phlegm coming downward (sic), then you should apply the points below them gently with cautery instruments.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The best caustic is that which closes the small intestines and their contents return when any remaining cause of your illness remains; and once they are causticated at the focus, those causes do not come back.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	The phrase seems to be in Middle Latin, which was used during medieval times and has some similarities with modern Romance languages such as Italian, Spanish, French, and classical Latin itself. Here is
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Translation: Regularly in the patient's lashes there comes no cause that is assembled into their majesty and hardness; because of this great inflammation they call it by name (or "gout").  
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	When there is a heavy accumulation of moisture in the upper and lower parts of the eye, it means that an excessive amount of humor has entered these areas leading to discomfort or potential illness according to medieval medical understanding
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the consideration is that if such great size originates from water appearing in their eyes and affects the entire body due to its moistness, it stems from cold (or 'leuggier' as per medieval medical terminology). The implication here could be an excessive accumulation of bodily fluids or humors within ocular cavities caused by external damp influences. This reflects a common belief in Galenic medicine that imbalances and illnesses originated from exterior environmental factors affecting the body's internal harm
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Thus you cover that crack in the skin at once (likely referring back to an injury or opening), and with it extracting whatever is within its entirety so as not to escape; similarly, elevate what has fallen off for a time while gently removing everything detached by dampness. Herein lies advice on managing wounds that involve immediate cover-up of skin breaches followed by extraction or removal of foreign material and debris possibly introduced through the injury site due to moisture, as well as suggesting gentle handling in careg
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Perhaps if you are not dressed appropriately and your eyes (hinting again at ocular moisture) become excessively watery with little ease or quick response in covering the tears—this indicates that there's likely a significant cause affecting vision, potentially related to imbalances of humors as suggested by medieval medical practice. The notion here is about taking prompt and suitable action when symptoms arise; failing which one might not notice any reason for such excessive eye moisture until it becomes critical – an alert from ancient texts warning
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; take care that it heals properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little (or insufficient), you will not encounter evil from that quarter where the remaining blood still restores itself and reanimates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the greatness declines at the edges of the eye lid surfaces, then lift and suspend it for an hour; another which you determine through initiation, press that entire area—and if the eyelid due to insufficiency becomes elongated, there is no cause detected in any.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	When starting (the procedure), wash the wound with saltwater; and take care of the place where the water within carries healing properties, so that it is cured.
Capitol .x.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Based on your provided scrap of text, which appears to blend elements from different languages and could be quite cryptic due to its incomplete nature, I'll attempt a
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Translation: The gray substance within the underside of the eye lid, which is produced mainly by children and worsens those ailments in them; they cannot look at sunlight because that's where their congealing occurs.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	When you press those groans on the cheeks all night long, and over their moisted brows which are already swolthy (swollen), there is a tendency for them to come out at dawn; when you perceive that location as near eyes, then ten thousand accernac enter into these.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When you cut the belly that your blade enters up until it reaches the arcs (likely referring to ribs or similar structures), in those days, the discharged bowels pass through cracks according to the form of white semen.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those clothes which you have wrapped around the limbs on both sides and turn them between your right and left hands so that it is distributed evenly.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you ensure that it does not extend through the crack, preventing the spine from reaching down to the pelvis and scapulae, do this.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May if you don'thy not see your arteries in the crack, may that which is easily introduced into where blood flows go there; and take out what we have mentioned for it; place those delicate instruments under the sheets above water along with grease or oil soaked rags to cover them over the area they are on, restoring these fragile tools.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And when you hear a cough and pause in the location of that crack, thus what comes out from it is the moisture which escapes therefrom.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And return care for that which has been healed inside.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May you apply an astringent poultice in that wound spot and hope it withdraws its protrusions while healing begins therein.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The specific content of this line is
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Translation from a text that mixes elements reminiscent of medieval Spanish medical terminology into English, while noting the
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the lids of our eyes natural and ancient hairs are adjusted quickly, it is when we feel illness with constant tears and soothing of palpebrae and linings to prevent causes that make touching painful; cure comes through four methods: or by means of a focused flame as described in the treatise on cautionary measures for heating implements; or according to what is prescribed when acute medicine is required, as stated therein; or with intention and suture knitting techniques if necessary; or using cane sticks, depending upon doctor's directions.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so when you pause the head of the malady at the thigh; take your left hand and cover it with that finger over which is in your right hand (this means covering one's own wrist), if converted then, do this act yourself – but otherwise insert a needle into where the thread from parting has touched undernethy the eyelid, pierce through at its corresponding point on top of it - these are hair follicles; and pull out that fiber back to their respective parts above (the skin), turning over thus.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Return the tongue back over the joint lines that you have drawn, starting from the greater tear duct to the smaller one within it.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair split is as large as the king' extruded, then...
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return the stitches of the wounds within three to four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, stitch the wound now, and care for that which cleanses and tightens upwards herein—remove its eyelid; attach to it also the bandage of water (likely referring to a salve or poultice), then perhaps suturing is better. Hence, apply these old methods accordingly.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	May it exert pressure on the thighs, and it is good work, not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another symptom appears in the head, where eyes have gathered like furry mist of myrrh, and lift up the eyelids with three hooks that separate and gather according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	May it not be possible to keep the incisions open, for they cannot heal without moisture; therefore take a sponge wherein you have applied and inserted that which has been used on the figure's body surface, placing another piece of gauze there beforehand as directed by our recommendations. Adjust these dressings so that all are equal in height above their wound bed, lifting your hand elevates both this area and its healing process overall when sitting together with us for care.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the wound lips on the patient with stitches and cure what is inside that has been healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have an abscess or crack on your intellect (assuming "intscizo" refers to the mind) or skin ("fissura"), then soothe that abscess with wax and make it seem as if by appearance alone; apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And sometimes even in their eyelids our hairs are converted, so when you use it for that which we have said about blindness; perhaps a stitch may be necessary here as well.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxiny is secondly provided in this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and thus you turn the eyelid and divide the figure as I have described; by art, insert needles or fine syringes under which their length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and its middle line according to the width of the sternum bone.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the extremities of several parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Aprop add any additional subtlety under what excessively overflows from the eye's palpebra, and tighten the cannulas of several divided parts affected by strictures, so that within a few days, the ribbon through which constriction has occurred will die out and not be denied entry back into its cavity if it makes an attempt.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then strike the limbs with force, and pay close attention that whatever has entered be healed within.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when secured, the eyelid is raised upwards and the hairs do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you make cannon-like instruments according to this method:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e hat quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less
Capitol .xii.	Translation of "Capitol .xii.": This line appears to
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The text you've provided seems like a Latin phrase that might be related to the physical sensation or reaction when something prickly, such as thorns from plants (possibly nettles), touches your skin causing an
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When encountering artificial thorns that are hard and sharp with pungent sensations upon contact with the skin, you should gently grasp them while observing for a slight give in their hold (the point at which they might relent slightly under pressure), being cautious not to move your limbs abruptly. Adjusting one' extrremities of oneself and placing each movement carefully can prevent accidental injury or exacsies due to the sensitivity induced by these objects with unnatural prickliness.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When it is about the length of a hand'falcon (palm), here we are referring to an approximate measurement in terms used by physicians during that time period
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And adjust another subtle part of the foot briefly as needed; hold those extremities if you wish to do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And place their belly in the chest so that its work is revealed; for it's a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And pull back the hair within their undergarments and insert that into position, letting only one or two strands of hair be there at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Return your hand upon that part within which the pus has been drawn out into the eye socket by nature itself, or artificially through applied medicine (allex).
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	May it happen that the patient does not go astray and is placed at his feet where he lies down comfortably; place him there accordingly when you have prepared what has been composed for this purpose, so they will rest on their backs without fear of falling off or wandering away.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Here come the joints of the hip, where you will gently massage and apply pressure with your hands, causing discomfort or tightness in those areas for two to three days until it adheres firmly to that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is shortened below its natural length, adjust and raise it as directed, so that it extends to appropriate spaces; then lift up that part.
Capitol .xiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When treating the condition that is present below (in) the lower part of the eye lid, this line suggests focusing on an issue located beneath the bottom eyelid in medieval medical terminology:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the hue lid is contracted (shut tight), it occurs with contraction of part or all in either side ('right' and 'left'), due to poor consolidation of foulness or flesh, as well as tendons or thorns/cauteries – this condition may be caused by such malformations. It is treated through the cleansing (purification) of impurity within these parts; when it arises spontaneously ('natural') or accidentally due to them being in poor repair, which can also simulate diseases:
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the cause of labor in you be that which cuts through that solidification and separates their lips, pausing within the cloth between those two stones where there is water, binding them while they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	When using the method of curing for its causes that remove humors (presumably referring to a therape extrication technique), constrict; but if it returns blood poison, there is no place in this life where such illness can dwell forever.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use that which mollifies the joints when mixed with honey and taken in water wherein are crushed stones or dipped quills of flax (fenugreek), or waxen drops dissolved by alkaline waters into it, then immerse yourself therein for healing.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your care is that you pierce through all the areas not solidified according to what has been decided for treatment.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not any correction of the humoral imbalance returning to its proper form afterward as directed by focus (the body' extrinsic regulatory system).
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The specific content of this line cannot be determined
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	When the treatment for eye chalazia is necessary in the outer corner of the eyelid, then do so with a pointed cautery (and take care to place your hand over that area to prevent the affected gland
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This chalazia located in the outer corner of the eyelid is called an external hordeolum (or stye), which does not naturally occur on its own and has no other usual cause besides local factors or possible underlying issues such as bacterial infection. It's important to handle it carefully, often involving gentle measures rather than forceful ones like using cautery indiscriminately without proper medical justification. Always seek professional advice when dealing with conditions related to the eyes and
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May it be caused by pus or rupture (or through cutting) or even due to excessive treatment such as improper use of cautery, among other possibilities. This highlights the importance of accurate diagnosis and appropriate intervention for eye conditions like chalazia – which
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The way of the operation is that you take a needle in which two threads are twisted together and keep it within the flesh; these threads then pass from one tear duct (left eye) into another (right eye), reaching to both extremities of body tissue. This description seems quite abstract, but historically many traditional or folk medical practices involved complex procedures described with great detail in texts such as this medieval manuscript – often focusing on invasive techniques for treating ailments which today would be approached very differently from the perspective of modern medicine and its emphasis on evidence-based practice. Always remember that ancient documents can provide valuable insights into past medical knowledge, but contemporary standards require safe, effective treatment methods grounded in current scientific understanding.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Expose the flesh to the parts below the belt and above it (the area between the hips), as well as at that level where it meets the large bone of the hip joint ("pelvis"), cutting through the thickened tendon associated with this region.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	So if you return the shape of the eyelid as it was before (cover), then take a sharp implement; and when using that instrument on the cut mark, turn its form back into the eyelid'dictions, thus closing up any cracks in the skin of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	E their limbs' extremities have joint cracks at the two angles of the incision, where they enter and form therein their figure shape when gathered together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek: the levee (or ridge).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Return or press down on the meat that corresponds to the amount of liquid they have drunk quickly through their eyes (sic).
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the separated parts and join those with thread, taking care of them using what we have mentioned about softening agents and poultices within which it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If a cut or surgical wound occurs through the eyelid (presumably it'm referring to an incision), then you must make a straight incision according as previously indicated for the skin of the eyelid.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Return the mouth guard between her lips as we have said before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the discourse on the treatment of arsenic when it is expelled or released during operation, as prepared in its form of pills, that too takes various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	Here the artisan prepares for any necessary intervention in each area where it is possible to return the figure back to its natural shape, or even better than that which was required by the operation and instruments used in major arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV. (This line appears to be referencing Roman numerals for
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the eyelid down to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this constriction of the eyes in patients occurs below their cheeks undernethy's lid and is prevented from easy movement as well as natural actions by you inserting a tool between the outer corner of the eye (the lateral canthus) and lifting it upwards, or stretching it outward.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: And if it is necessary that your finger extracts that adhesion, return it according to its natural shape and heal completely all of the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	When you put your tool in saltwater, which is used for washing them, or when it's distilled into water with juniper dissolved in it, do so accordingly.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	Capture (Capitol) Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	From the angle of the nail and the prominence of flesh in the eyes.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You understand that the unguent is applied with two hands or a nervous touch and seems like delicate cibaria; when touched lightly by hand, it dissolves quickly within moments (one to ten), becomes detached, and does not remain in place any longer than necessary.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter but from the greater tear within, gradually covering the eyes and preventing light and movement of sight.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the act in their throat make it so that phlegm remains at the top of the chest and above, lifting up your hand to cover them, taking hold of one onion tearful (small lump) with two or twice its size using a pinch between your fingers, placing each touch near the underparts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the translation:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And if you seek that part within it (the body), go up to its backside (its posterior).
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Apply your incisor or small knives beneath the skin of the tear gland, and cut away its flesh so that through this incision fluid can continue flowing freely.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when some of the bones are extended or firm like sunlight as they have said, then remove them from the spinal column where this is their form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	E safeguard you that do not touch the transparent skin and cause it breakage, and ensure your pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Return the wound in the foot with a little salt or quick-firing material tonight and care for it so that whatever is introduced today will heal tomorrow.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the lancet is not sharp and you cannot insert the needle there either, nor does it fit in that small space, then use this special type of lancing tool for curing such a wound with medicines; thus healed as soon as taken or applied according to division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that part, then work with the groin of the malady and use a gentle lion' extrusion force as per this manner.
am subtilitat.	am delicacy.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that which is rare and confined comes in its turnaround, then take the time of your hour today to collect it within the cold foot'endo or head cup made of silver with lead roasted over fire (and salt also), and deposit what you have collected into the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Return your operation (care or treatment) over that reason within which healing occurs.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge of the tear fluid from the body, if it is found in the vagina and causes great harm, should be stopped for one time; and examine that which comes out from therein, ensuring not to inspect further until no more fluids come forth.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary for liquid (or medicine) to be drawn into the tear duct and inside where healing can take place, do so accordingly.
Capitol .xvii.	The provided text seems to be from an old medical treatise attempting translations across multiple European
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	In the context of medieval medicine, this line likely refers to someone born under an astrological sign (alguazar) and influenced by certain elements within their body's humors system: blood (carn), which in ancient physiological theories was thought to be adjusted or balanced (
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some days within the eyes of an afflicted individual (alcus), it is believed that red blood, which appears overcooked or oversaturated in their humors system as though "covering" the pupil ("cobre la pupilla"), requires a delicate touch. The practitioner may then lightly press on eyelids and gently bring them together at various points—as if they are folding ruffles onto an ornamental balustrade ('balaustrada').
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	When the operation in them is that their belly stops at their waist; and with the humors of that body, collect all necessary flesh from cutting conveniently, using either a forceps or a sponge for this purpose; and bind the meat together until it's completely done by your knots, making sure you do not let go of what belongs to them during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your insides are complete and the entire body is cleansed, then pour salt on top of it like powder or sprinkle with medicinal crushed substances from within, pause over the hole left empty by wax inside where you ensure anointing treatment secured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of gout and swelling that needs to be cauterized with fire or caustic medicine, you fear scalding; let the heat treat this inflammation until it subsides on its own accord from where the operation takes place within which your hand rests. Meanwhile, appear in fleshly adjustment for what has been treated by that agent of medicament herein described and heal as well these areas tendered with treatment applied to them now cured.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even if you remove all cure for the hollow bone through natural means or accidentally with iron tools, do not place your hand inside these operations while observing that this member is suffering from it.
Capitol .xviii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or content for translation as it
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	The phrase you've provided, "De colleccio de sabel en le huel," appears to be in a Rom
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The phrase translates into English as follows: "From the collection of sabels in the veins which are hardened on the belly and prevent operation therein, they develop it over days." It suggests a medieval medical context where practitioners observed what appears to be arteriosclerosis (hardening of the vessels) within the abdominal region ("huel" likely being an older term for "belly"). The mentioning that this
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	The line translates to: "Thus it is necessary for consideration that you gather the said sabel in which your belly (huel) has strength and therein no other illness than a sabel." In this context, 'sabel' seems related to arteriosclthy or vascattress within an abdominal area. The sentence implies assessing whether current health issues are limited to what appears as hardened vessels ("fort" meaning strong/stiff) in the belly without
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	The phrase translates to English as follows: "It is that you command the malady (condition) for it to pause its head in your body, and position itself above those veins according to what suits you; place therein an onchic doubling or two parts depending upon your prudence." Here, 'malady' likely refers to a condition causing discomfort such as swelling. The practitioner advises controlling the location of this issue (possibly representing fluid accumulation) in relation to specific veins ("tieu se" could indicate an area like lower body or limbs), adjusting according to what is jud
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	so that they are cut in a certain way according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Here the text is translating medieval medical practices for dealing with certain conditions:
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Even if you do not lead the humidity in the limbs' extremities; and when your operation takes place during daylight hours, ensure that you only injure those veins necessary for the procedure.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it, then boil the water in an open fire or over a hearth so that salt can dissolve and neutralize what has been added to it from abroad.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of it at once, and if you must apply the fluid that flows out with the pain to it, then do so gently over several days until the patient's pain subsides and is secured by apothecary binding (cast).
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Once more over him once healed by his mistress enters into health and well-being.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how these forceps are used:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.: (Note: This line appears incomplete or out
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The phrase "de reduccio de arizati al nas" in Latin-based Romance languages can be interpreted
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you care for arising pains as mentioned in the narration and are not healed instantly with immediate treatment or emergency medicine, it is no longer possible to cure them simply within that same location; instead, surgical intervention must be considered whereby all moistness present inside has been removed until discovery of bone structure.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover the bone and it is in decay or ruin at times, then there arises from this a form of strength for which:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is made of hard iron, its flesh from fine iron, and the head returns to receive it by means of small holes drilled with a sharp flint or chisel for minute pincers.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When you press it over the location where the bone has been crushed, and turn that between your thighs, slowly apply pressure with your hand little by little until you know that this fracture is smoothed out.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When there are some drying signs present, and restore the place as it pertains to causes of desiccation and precise injuries.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So that the place is consolidated and good flesh has appeared there without disease for forty days, it does not renew or break down nor suffers any accidents in this place, provided you know that healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not in the body itself but to reduce a crack to its natural shape, and according to this method: as soon as you discover two iron or medicinal sharp objects within reach, take them accordingly by their form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the iron outside of it (patient), and its own wood inside to that extent; repeatedly inserted into the exterior part until exhausted.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the location with dry, purgative medicine as you take it out (or use).
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and place are enduringly strained, that which was flowing into the parts is returned to the belly; thus I lay down on the hernia.
Capitol .xx.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript discussing sympt
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Based on your input, it seems you are providing a line or phrase in either Latin-based Medieval language (possibly Catalan
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hump is part of one's whole body and does not harm clothing nor diminish it, then you should loosen up what excess bile causes; afterwards apply rest to where air rushes through its scarifications while sucking out for good reasons – after which pause over the hump with an ointment made from acacia gum and aloe vera extracts. Afterwards ensure a tight binding or splints around the hump are used, especially when it's of pollen size (this suggests some form of body deformation treatment).
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Return those breaks according to the quantity of which they need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If during crossing (the joint), it becomes softened, that indicates a movement of excessive humors within.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	When the bandage is applied for day and night as we have discussed.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has been reduced already, then that is good; otherwise, repeat the bandaging on the limbs and tightness areas using linen cloths inside where poultices and compresses are placed for healing.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line appears to be an index or reference
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	The phrase "de la inscizio de la eminence de la tunica uvea" is in Latin, which can relate to medical terminology concerning the anatomical structure of
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	The sentence in Latin describes the process of surgery on the uveal tract (tunica uveae). Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And press the needle and pause above where they have injected thread into the wax-infused linen, placing it inside so that the inserted thread may be held by their saliva (tongue).
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return care for the swolthy humors within that comforts which patient inside is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And some guided interventions bring together all parts within the circle of drape confined by a well-fitting gown, piercing through the delicate skin undernethy and allowing effusion albuginea (a type of serous fluid), leading down into the hollow.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength within so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Capital XXII. (Note: "XXII" is Roman numeral
De curacio de alconati.	From care of eyes. ("Curacio de alconati" in Latin would translate
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called "alcnation" (which appears to be an archaic term possibly referring to glaucoma, given the context of eyes and fluid) does not simply refer to but rather implies poor vision akin to being blind as if peering through water. It seems this condition involves some form of ocular blockage or pressure leading to impa00dized sight (from "aygu" which could
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	May be the manner of action in it is that you should open and drain the eye with an instrument (possibly a type of catheter or lancet used for draining excess fluid), taking care to only cleanse your hands on those parts not dirty, avoiding them from becoming contaminated. This will help prevent further complications when addressing this sickness that enters through holes in the damaged areas; you must dry and ensure it does not descend any lower (perhaps referring to managing intraocular pressure or fluid buildup), leaving only light, with which vision is maintained despite these occurrences.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not fall into its place (referring likely to a displaced intestine or organ), understand that it is water returning (indicating the body'dict natural
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it does not descend as directed, understand that water is returning; thus the malady seeps between your muscles and you must apply a delicate sponge underneoptionally wet this small item with fluid from what we have mentioned (referring to body fluids), on the outer layer of skin covering the cornea within the crown. Until it comes out, continue as previously described regarding conjunctival health atop the cornea's surface inside your eye area where illness is presenting itself.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when extracted, it flows down the patient's tailwater where you have mixed milk and water (where also barley extract was previously added), thus performing a remedy that combines these elements for treatment.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return it back is for other causes within that should heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	From the treatment of water coming from the bladder.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Ja have we gathered the waters' spices in division and brought them here for discussion; according to health (the condition).
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	When you place your cloth over the area between your legs on a chair and hold their hand, it acts as a strong binding (stringent).
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	E appropriately place your hand over the patient' extramission of tears on their left eye lid if they have fluid in it (tears from an excessive discharge), or above their mouth bridge area if located there; otherwise, put it below their chin jawline.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	When you take your right hand in the morning or evening (depending on which is east), if it is considered left according to humoral theory, then use your left hand for this purpose. Conversely, if it is regarded as right based on humoral positions, then utilize your right hand instead.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the extremity of the head above the crown due to the heaviness of the brow in the album of hair from part of the tear duct, and place your hand over it so that its excess can be directed towards you.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And into its cavity enter and feel that already everything has arrived due to excessive fluid accumulation (or edema).
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Where the waistband of the cloak meets the neck piece at the collar, it is measured from the pupil within to the end of darkness (the base of the throat), and this length corresponds to the crown of the hue; where you see that pupil as in the vision of the hue due to the clarity of its cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Return the water already present within its place and apply pressure with your hand on another cushion provided for this purpose; if the water descends to the level of which it blurs his vision momentarily, then immediately into his eye socket will it flow.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	When rest is desired for one day (thus), if water descends, then you should provide that other period before which it has not been had yet.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	So when it is secured and does not descend, then take out the wax easily with your aid, twist that around your hand quickly, and dissolve a small clear crystal of salt in water for that purpose; additionally apply pressure outside the swelling using rosemary oil soaked cloth or linen bandage dipped in this same solution.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we, those of our times, rest upon that which has been ground in a book for us.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your doctor's advice within the chamber of his dwelling—for he is among men whose joint (hue) hardens, then bind a splint to their thigh bone where this condition manifests itself as:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so pierces through that joint, and does not leave your hand in the wound, but rather goes to an even smaller underground place below it all.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then return (or restore) the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And praise the work you have done, as it is prepared for restorative sleep in which one lies down on their back with hands held together, and all movements are strictly forbidden.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And in nature rests the water that heals its essence and does not harm his head towards the fourth or left side of it all together.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Whenever its thread enters into the third day according to its disposition,
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which is there in the dark and gloomy darkness of evening; examine for some causes, then return it back into daytime by noon (at hour XVII).
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Not when you make this in the hour of healing or so soon after applying the infusion,
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They have holes through which you withdraw water for a large and vigorous cleaning.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May you apply a poultice if there is an ulceration today before noon and correct that which yields to the applied dressing with water.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Remove the patient'dict vision and place your hand over their face to control its movements for several days until it exists in the darkest part of May (referring possibly to a time when daylight begins to decrease).
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return its position from there gradually and discuss it as part of its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You understand that in surgery there are times when the student must be present for some observations, and if you yourself are skilled at performing operations.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from those of them who are skilled in the art, and they say that there is a hole in this spot where water comes out through.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Even though we have not seen water like this on our land before, nor has it been given to free people by others in ancient times; and it is possible that such water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the medicinal substances for which they know nothing about those things upon them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These pains are of clay or iron specifically made them, and they extend beyond their subtlety shaped triangle-like form; these sharp points correspond to that shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From flesh treatment nothing enters the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose nasal congestion occurs from various bony structures adjusted within it where some cause is assembled like scorpion'dictor of mass (i.e., weight), or polyps, this illness is called polypus because it resembles that piece represented by a pea.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	From him it is red and black flesh, and from him skin that resembles a lion not of dark hue:
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So in these veins where there is neither fraud nor cancer, when you make the liver settle between your thighs and press its nipples to them, prick it with needles herein placed within those veins.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Might it be that if a sanction or sudden incident occurs of inflammation (apostema), then you pause what comes, and for malignant abscesses, return the protruding part into its cavity with cautery; this applies to those where both thighs are swolthy and all cavities present.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Return its position in the nose according to wisdom and water or air within it.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May it be that your nose is opened and moisture goes into the mouth, then you will know that healing has already begun.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May if the humidity does not penetrate further once covered, then you know that there will be no flesh remaining in the feet as bones have already come out where they did not arrive by fracture.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you find yourself intruding into the patient's intimate area where there is any significant swelling, and pause between each use of their body (such as during sexual intercourse or other reasons causing this), count the quantity of ejaculate for that moment or day, and insert your finger or another extremity of it into the navel or groin due to possible causes.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Put that odor into their nose so it can reach the nasal passages and sit on their gouty area; this makes children desire to do such things at school, which is why they choose to act like this.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Extract the feather, and place it in the nostril' extruded breath chamber , hold for three days or more until all that has been extracted from the kidneys is expelled.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	In the course of treatment, place a bronze tube in the nose for as many days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be that you need a cure, use that which is given (or prescribed).
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how the tool used for bloodletting should be made, wherein various elixirs and medicines are prepared in it.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which is like a small lit candle), so too with its own light and little weightiness, it appears as if the body itself has taken on this form.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, use a closed canula here (with the tool maker and its flat surface revealed), hold it in your hand at their backside where they grasp hands tightly; through this instrument inject or draw out whatever fluids and causes within that patient'thy body as desired.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here are the translations for each line of text:
Capitol .xxv.	In interpreting this medieval medical text line by line in English from Latin-infl
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	The provided fragment appears incomplete and somewhat unclear due to potential transcription errors or archaic language usage. Nevertheless, I will attempt a translation based on
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Translation: "The nose is placed outside the lips daily within which observation occurs.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which water you have immersed them into the meal of their appearance, and from that all they take in entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand or burning medicine over the location where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If it is late for the patient's insight to enter, then consider whether they have been lamed hard, dark in color and with little feeling; do not touch that iron which has afflicted their skull; those who are repeatedly ill by this condition should approach them cautiously as if approaching a great evil upon whom such malady resides.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is of yellow coloration and not black, and if there seems to be a possibility for drainage throughout that area, then evacuate the pus and incise where one feels fearful concern due to age-related weakness; cure with whatever liquid exsudates from it and tighten up inside so that healing can occur.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discuss
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	When the continuity of speech or facial expressions is disrupted by drooling (sialorrhea) from either excess saliva production ("plag" in some languages, which could mean "drool") or an apparent lack thereof due to a condition affecting motor control ("se semblantz," suggesting similarity with someone else'dict movements), the
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	When you address speech continuity in one of these connections (referring to the act of speaking and maintaining control over saliva), there is little concern unless it's about men with certain conditions that might affect their ability, possibly related to motor disorders or neurological issues. The text indicates a recognition within medical practice during medieval times—or perhaps even beyond this period if not strictly contextualized in
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So, if any of these causes affect men (referring to potential issues causing drooling), consider that it might be due to fresh food stuck under the tongue ("sieu sanc"), and you should adjust your lips accordingly when performing a stitch or surgical repair; also ensure proper care for whatever is lodged in their mouth. This translation reflects practices possibly related to dietary causes of drooling, suggesting that medieval medical practitioners recognized certain food items as potential irritants requiring dental attention and lip adjustment during treatment procedures like suturing where oral hygiene might be a concern due to the condition being treated. The emphasis on care for whatever
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips involved in speech continuity have already been separated (which could imply surgical separation or some other form of intervention), and there is any healing necessary, then cover each separate section where it appears that food remnants may be present; this suggests a focus on hygiene to prevent further complications during the recovery process. Here medieval practitioners are advised not only in techniques for surgical procedures but also considerations of post-operative care such as cleanlinthy, which might involve removing debris or remnants within the mouth that could potentially interfere with he
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the use of thread for sewing be that you add continuity stitch or nails while having them together with us in the abdominal suture, or add continuity stitch using your foot and know it yourself.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (Note: This line appears to be a reference
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From that extraction, the causes of pain in our lips come into play during fights or altercations (translation note: This translation attempts to preserve as much of the original meaning and context related to a possible discussion about lip injuries resulting from physical confrontations
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Continuously in the midst of brawls or fights with our lips often encounter hard substances like grains from errors (translation note: This line discusses how during physical confrontations, one might experience lip injuries due to sharp objects such as broken glass fragments). Here are some possible explanatory details for each aspect mentioned in the translation of your original medieval medical treatise excerpt related to these scenarios.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So that you can convert each of those hardened areas into abscesses and inflame the location where pus has collected within it until the sore is restrained, and cleanse your hands with water agreeable to treatment, so that heals what needs to be treated.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (This line appears to be a reference or annotation
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	The phrase "In accordance with the flesh on the gums" suggests an adjustment or alignment related to dental health, specifically concerning the interaction between teeth (flesh in this context
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise discussing the condition of inflamed gums (possibly referring to gingivitis or periodontal disease), with particular attention given by "doctors" (referred to as 'apelero' in this context) who observe these symptoms and seek remedies. Here is an attempt at translating it into modern English:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return your hand above the area treated with crushed or cauterizing powders, or worms that excrete such materials.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then immediately inspect it and cauterize it; thus the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	In this medieval medical text translated into English line by line:
De razo de dentz am ferr.	From reason of teeth is iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp points on the surfaces of teeth and gums are adjusted with acrid, bitter, or green tastes in them due to fluid corruption entering through these areas, they become painful sensations (sharp pains).
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so when you open the space between your thighs and pause at the top of your chest as far upwards to prevent any cause from entering through there, which seem like sand particles within that have been ground down by them (the negrosity [darkness] and citrinitas [yellowness]), and others found inside that are sanctified/purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if you remain in that place of the commencement, so be; but if not, then iterate the razor over those areas on other days until they heal as per your wish when it comes time to leave tomorrow.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Be aware that teeth have required various movements and forms according to how you prepare for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For this the tool with which you are cutting is where your hands currently rest upon; these tools of cuts must be prepared as soon as possible:
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or
D’eradicacio de dentz.	The phrase you provided, "D’eradicacio de dentz," appears to be in a non
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise text you provided would be:
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the leg is forcibthy torn away to eliminate that which constitutes its painful teeth; those movements are repeated regularly until you can be certain of what causes the torment in a healthy, non-painful tooth, and then cease covering it while remaining on target as long as the unhealthy and painful tooth has been eradicated. Now we have seen their work done by barbers (medical practitioners at that time often included minor surgical procedures).
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So that you can confirm what the painful tooth is and understand it'dictly, then cut into the circuit of the affected tooth above which there may be any movement (implying an abscess or infection), dissolve whatever remains within the entirety of its gum line, and apply pressure with your fingers gradually inside where that has occurred until when you feel those tender areas.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not yet opened (the abscess), take one of those instruments immediately, and apply that quickly from all parts for the ease of removal when they are ready to be cut out.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be that if the tooth is dislodged or corroded, then cover it with cloth and compress this area below subtly so that it is not disturbed during your compression on that part.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And purify its washing is with water or vinegar poured over it, as directed by doctors for cleansing purposes.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If fluid flows downward due to gravity, regularly monitor it until some quantity of blood and pus accumulable on the ground appears; if you do not address that effusion immediately, then apply cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers are those by which the tooth is made less wobbly between its out-ofthyroid or upper jaw (longua extramata), short manubrium, and broad, so that they do not bend when used in their operations.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When they enter with large movements as when you start exergying them, they should not be folded outwardly and made too thick.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVII. (Note: The Roman numeral "XX
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The extraction of teeth and removal of bone fragments from the fractured jaws. (This translation interprets a medieval medical context, indicating procedures related to oral surgery.) Here "erradicacio" means eradication/removal; "dentz
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the tooth that has broken down requires removal due to any cause, you must pause there overnight or for two nights until the location is softened; and then apply an analgesic pillow with pieces of cushioning material (such as foam rubber) between which are assembled forceps. This translation suggests a medieval approach where time was allowed to naturally set before extraction, followed by careful pain management using specially designed instruments such as couches or makeshpective padding fitted into the beaks of birds for use with these tools (forceps).
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The pieces are made from sharp stones like flint or agate as dental instruments, indicating that in medieval times they used naturally available materials to create cutting tools for extraction procedures without modern anesthesia. The mention of "flint" and "agate," which were often fashioned
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not follow your instructions while using these forceps or pliers, then bend over the root and remove all flesh with that tool which has this form (describing a specific shape of instrument), holding it by its small handle. This translation highlights an alternative method where one would manually extract what's left from dental extraction sites if proper instruments were not used or understood, emphasizing reliance on simpler tools like bone files for cleaning out residual material post-extraction during the medieval period before modern technology was available in medicine.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is a small but heavy limb that does not break (i.e., cannot be broken), then do not attempt to forcefully manipulate or fracture it.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the razor is at fault for entering through your joints (foreign body), then it must be removed; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms include one that has a thick edge in its triangular shape outside of which there may be any sizeable foreign bodies:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it'sintricate and with a subtle end part.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will help with this tool which has two levers like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments that we have prepared by sharpening the teeth of them, this is how they are formed and used well. It appears to be referring to some kind of surgical or medical tool described as having been assembled from one large piece (probably a metal rod), which has its sharp edges created using something similar to dental tools for precision work in treatment procedures during the Middle Aged period. The text suggests that these sharpened instruments are crucial
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangle cut either long or short, which is not heavy and does not begin to bend: this should be ensured for it must hold its form without flexing under pressure. The text seems concerned with maintaining structural integrity when dealing with triangles in a certain context—possibly referring to constructs used within the body that need rigidity, such as skeletal elements
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another is aware of how these tools shaped from teeth resemble other similar apparatuses: this knowledge underscores their importance and use in medical procedures, hinting at an understanding that the sharpness or shape derived from dental objects could have practical applications for
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artisan be wise and subtle in their crafting, as they signify meaning for themselves when addressed by you—potentially referring to a skilled practitioner who understands both language (medicine) and its application; these tools were intended for diseases that previous generations did not recognize nor pause before: it is through various shapes of different species’ instruments we address. The passage suggests an evolution in medical understanding or practice, where new techniques are being developed to deal with illnesses previously outside the scope of traditional knowledge—an artisan's (physician) progress and their expanding toolkit for treating diverse conditions hinted at by "species." It speaks to a time when medicine began recognizing more than it could before, perhaps
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if you find yourself bleeding, treat it there where it is convenient for us using the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned earlier in tooth extraction procedures. Here is how this will be done:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And whether it is small or large, and if compressed inside the mouth so that none escape through where all of bone has been drilled; restore its place with appropriate medicine for him/her.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May if there is a small fracture in the bone, take that part and of it' extraneous blackness (implying blood or decay), and cure whatsoever must be healed inside.
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that this text is not in English but blends elements of Latin with
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	When it comes to the care for teeth, professionals stand out above others. (Note: This sentence does suggest professionalism and expertise are key factors in
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent due to their natural shape and mostly in women, as well as being considered holy by themselves—therefore if you consider the tooth nothing but itself (i.e., not connected with other body parts), it's clear that extraction or bandaging is impossible; otherwise, they must be related somehow because:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your tongue is where you insert it for up to several days regarding the hardness of teeth and that it should not be used elsewhere on the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an emergence of pus from a lesion, then apply the same type of iron needle made of Indian steel that this one has.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: All of this iron from India and abroad is brought in; it's forged points with flint (or a similar material), made sharp enough within few days, ensuring that no other teeth are cut or fall out easily.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines within her body, placing them where they belong according to reason and understanding of anatomy.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is one part that has been broken and the tongue drawn out, then take care to prevent this from happening; ensure it does not bite or distort your speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol .xxxiii. (The original text does not provide enough context
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Regarding the restoration of decayed teeth, it can be costly both in gold and silver as materials for crowns or fillings. Here's a possible translation into English:
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth are decayed due to grinding or extraction and cannot hold back what you clench with your jaw (i.e., they can't maintain their integrity), if a dentist has treated it properly using suitable fillings, but this treatment wasn’t satisfactory — such that these weakened structures might break when under pressure again; because silver ages and tarnishes quickly within days after being applied, while gold remains unaltered for any length of time:
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Return and apply the poultice within the area where you begin treatment, firmly but gently with your hand to prevent it from becoming moist.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When your string is where you must hold onto for his teeth that do not escape,
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Here you insert the excess outside of the tooth above with forceps or tweezers into any location for manipulation and convert those inserted therein between the healthy and diseased teeth, ensuring that damage is not done to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Return that liquid back into its place as it was poured like a Roman did.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loosened or torn, then hold that one or those with utmost fidelity in such a manner throughout all time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and the straight line of healthy teeth as well as diseased ones should be joined together, so long as these are bound to each other.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns a tooth or applies pressure with any of the instruments in their place at once, and they grow back as we heal them, so it should happen.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only when there is an adept craftsman and wise person involved.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here come some experiences are suitable for the bones of a cow, and they resemble teeth in form, and they stop at where the tooth rests, and their strength is like our flesh, remaining there serving us throughout long times.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Given that "Capitol" appears out of context here, it is
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	When the tongue has moved due to thirst and you forbid yourself from speaking. (This translation interprets "inscizia" as intelligence, though in this context it might be a typo or misinterpretation since Latin does not
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament through which the tongue quickly moves some times or it is a part where he naturally stays silent due to ageing and/dictates are enforced by those already established within this context (here "plugia" could be interpreted as an authority figure). The translation attempts to clarify that with aging, natural speech may decrease ("le qual hom nays"), potentially under the influence of societal expectations or authorities who have imposed certain standards for communication. Here
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	In the operation of this action is to gargle with honey (assuming "malaute" refers herein to a type of medicine or salve made from it), and your tongue's tip lies in its throat; raise your tongue, inscribe that neurological ligament within which you control the movement according to what has been learned. This line suggests using honey as part of an herbal remedy for speech issues by exeriesing with gargling while being mindful of one's oral and lingual muscles—focusing on those necessary neural connections that enable tongue movements, likely referencing techniques aimed at improving articulation perhaps due to loss in eloquence often associated
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any stiffness or knotting present in that place, and it stands for the consolidation of an older individual whose tongue may be tied up by such physical adhesions (likely referring to advanced speech issues where old age has led to dental problems), then you would take a lozenge and divide its use according to what was learned within these sessions. Here, taking a medicinal lozenge is proposed as part of the remedy—carefully breaking down into smaller doses for ease in dissolving any physical blockages that impede normal speech functions while adhering strictly to previously established medical advice or routines (possibly indicating care and gentle treatment
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	When you ensure there is not a crack in the skin of flesh and split ashes and fluid flow down here,
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Return the wound' extruded by acids or boiling water, and pause briefly on the tongue of Licinius; this is where his ulcer will be touched at any time to prevent it from healing again before its next examination.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May if you exacerbate the flow of phlegm that has been tripled in its location on the glass; may it be pus, then heal with a caustic applied to where bubbles have gathered which brings them together and leads to their resolution.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that healer back for other causes within which it must be cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	From the extraction of a ranula, place your hand on the tongue area so as not to let the sucked out substance
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some times, after suctioning out the ranula (a mucous cyst in the floor of the mouth), there are acrid sensations on the tongue due to local anesthesia applied during minor procedures; and fortunately this is limited within that which has been inside the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation takes place in the patient's mouth, where stones (wheat grains) are present before sunrthy and consideration of anesthesia is required. This sentence suggests that within a medical procedure for treating ranulas or similar conditions involving foreign bodies like wheat husks ("huebras
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you find it black or dark in hue and the patient does not feel any pain towards it, do not touch that stone; for if done so may harm come upon your hands (suggesting potential injury). This line advises medical practitioners to be cautious when handling certain stones encountered during an examination of a ranula or similar conditions within the mouth. It implies that these stones are potentially embedded and could
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it turns white due to moisture and you place the pin beneath it; then gently insert that spit into its entirety, making sure not touch any stone within—if wind enters during your operation time, pause for three times said number of breaths so as though poured vinegar (or in modern terms: rinse), keeping restrained to avoid contact with the stones. This passage provides instructions on how a medical practitioner should proceed if they encounter moisture and white substance—which could be spit or saliva-like mucus—when attempting an intervention such as treating for a ranula, possibly suggesting methods of gentle probing to assess what needs further treatment. It also advises on how the practitioner should pause if distracted by wind (noise) during their work and briefly rinse or clean affected areas with vinegar-like solutions while being careful not to touch stones inside the mouth, which could be remnants of food particles that need further
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have spent time with him/her as a complementary part of his treatment until he is washed clean and well, taking care that this other remedy also enters while the patient recovers in order for it too be cured along with them.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of Latin mixed
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the extraction of goiter and from those that are nothing in the throat, and other such abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gout comes onset in the foot (golayro godat), these are the swolthy lumps that have been assembled therein; those which ache when touched during treatment and do not heal, as they are of dark color, with little feeling or sensation—do not touch them further.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is desired in color and the humors are thickened, do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; leave them inside to mature therein, or if you must move it, then break it apart yourself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or bluish hue and its nature is subtle, then one must acknowledge that it has entered the body.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation in him is considered by you when the application of cauterization has rested or if there remains any at all; then, with your touch on his abdomen and head (with a crown-shaped tool), holding their hands tightly between them close to the tongue.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And whether it is caused by silver or arsenic, and delicate as a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you perceive it is their tongue and show them the ulceration, and put your hand over that place for an instant, allowing it to remain in its current location as much as possible, pulling it back towards the surrounding areas where you can manage.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another cause that draws from the tunics (the patient'thy clothes), and upon this apply the same tool with which it takes form.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and with forceps, but the external parts of them are twisted together sharply so that the orifice (probably referring to a surgical incision) in each one is at the top of the other, made of iron and begins therewith.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May it be that this tool is not with you at the moment? Then incise into the calamus (the thigh bone) from which these are formed; whether they come out of one portion or another.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Put that you have cut an incision, according to this method of incising introduced herein, and apply the irrigation with water-distilled humors therefrom.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that if there is flow of bile (gall), apply cool water from the cochlea made with three hundred grams of honey and mint leaves to that which restricts the flow of bile, and take care so that what has been healed can stay within.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And at some times other worms or similar things enter those teeth and are seen in the gum'thy cavity, as they appear when you look into these dental spaces.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so much that there were half-feet inside where it burst through two fractures.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you fed him through their mouths one at a time and took away each one afterward; from the large piece taken out of it, I also cut pieces that make up its other part understood by me, pressing his tongue with these, securing his jaw to keep everything in place.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; there was only a small flow of blood (pauca sanguinis fluxus).
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So it is the gout of that woman, and immediately drink water, then apply food close by so she will not cease to suffer from those attacks related motions for a long time until they enter where this symptom persists while inside which duration continues.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So then apply pressure and cauterize the ulcer of him/her there, applying force accordingly; move around as directed by me (meaning God).
Capitol .xxxvii.	The given text is from an old medical treatise with archaic language mixing elements of
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When joint pain arises upon standing up, it can indicate a condition related to the body' extrinsic factors or internal imbalances:
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr (likely referring to a type of cold or flu) sets in and it is severe and long-lasting, then it is not perpenddicted; if it affects the thickened and rounded part of the body, then it is called "buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	May when you are healed from the fluid we have mentioned in division, and it does not hinder your treatment, and as soon as possible now watch for an ointment that is applied cautiously; if directed to a long area of black or dark red color outside the circle (which indicates fear), apply what you intend on this part.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you turn that second as directed by the white and lengthy manner he has stated of his belly, making it secret with an instrument from which its form is fixed and takes on one-eighth in the newness, and draws that out through two instruments used for incision at two moles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When what is not inserted therein (referring to something that should be placed inside) but rather adjusted according to the patient'se natural condition, if you insert it at all may lead your speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Return (to) the inflammation inside and treat with this water which we have applied within two thighs, taking care of it where it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by its ignorance, fearing during cauterization, and handling of the instrument used for this procedure is only sharp water (sharp tools or instruments), then you should hold their head at the waist level while performing the cauterization. With your hand on that tool which we have mentioned beforehand, also place it in contact with fresh water as indicated above in the methodology section of our treatment plan; this will comfort them and ensure proper depth (not too thick nor subtle) for completing the concavity shape needed by this instrument:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external cavity in which medicine is applied as with the handle of a knife, and where we place our tools within it for its use; hereby saliva or mucus from that person' extrinsic body emerges into this space through their mouth so that none may arise therefrom to harm whatsoever upon them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish to prune and wrap that over the extremity of the ray (presumably referring to an arm or leg), submerge it in medicine, place the raft on top where the bandage adheres, insert as much into that conduit so that you fulfill what was intended for cauterization with herbs, and apply leave there until it dries out and falls off after three to four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If indigestion occurs during the practice of medicine, then repeat that treatment and apply cautery within the wine cup at its beginning in the body'dictory area; cleanse it with water where there is impurity in the medicinal circuitry, wash thoroughly using flowing water, treat from above downward towards the embrocage (a type of pouch used to trap waste), and continue until healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This healing substance has been placed inside with fear and for a very long time.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times it is cured by water that was put below with caution and incision, where treatment consists of recipe containing rosemary, yarrow, sage, rue, Arabic scissors, chamomile, thyme, and simples applied to these herbs; adjust all those causes or some of them in a bath, immerse fully into it, stirring with care. There is also fire used here for heat treatment: an implement made from arsenical metal (arsenic) will be placed over the water where there's steam—this mixture heats up and bubbles form; whether or not this involves silver or another type of metallic implements, according to this method.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the mouth of the malady until the breath rises to the palate where the uvula becomes obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here the text translates as follows line by line into English:
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be that you do not have this instrument with you now? Then take a cane and assemble outside the body an enclosure of hay, so that the mouth of the hernia is moistened, whereupon the closed space of the hay prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Based on my understanding of Latin-influenced languages (Italian, Spanish,
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the removal of spines and any substance that is stuck in the gallblad0913478256_originaltextHere comes another translation:
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Movements stick around in the groin or backbone of legs or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Now when you extract what appears to be water from those places above where it is visible on the tongue'thy probe of wetness at hand shall indicate that this substance present in gout (gonorrhoea).
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When the cause of vomiting in the stomach is not apparent to you and it seems that food has been spoiled therein; whether this indigestion arises from a piece of mushy bread or overly ripe fruit, or dried peas soaked with sea water mixed with lion's tongue (a type of marine sponge), when held firm by your hand and the stomach is extracted through that place where one feels pains during vomiting; as soon as this occurs while expelling from there, immediately perform a retraction.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If not from these causes that have been mentioned, then use a lead tool in this manner.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a large swelling that enters (enters into) the cavity outside of them (the exterior part), then insert your hand inside their throat to make breathing easier.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head up on their shoulders, and ensure that the touch of your hands is over your neck or backbone, so he can breatthy come here to those parts where bones meet flesh which the doctor holds in place with her hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even if the ulcer has entered therein because of its knowledge of the location of the cause and it is incited here, take out your tool as prepared according to how much you have readied within that orifice which they are preparing with care for treatment.
Capitol .xxxix.	The provided text is not in any language that directly combines Latin with Italian,
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	It appears you've presented a line of medieval medical terminology which might be challenging to translate without context or proper spelling conventions. However, I will attempt a translation based on the cl
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodsucking worms are mentioned in the division of medicine that they should not receive attention but rather be addressed within the groin area related to swelling, ensure you have purchased tongues made from such tools as we've recommended for their use.  
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you find a splinter, remove it carefully with small or subtle movements.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the lumbago area, placing a heated iron pin in the indentation of the cannula, applying as much heat (until the humidity expires and remains outside the lumbago), preventing it all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	May it not be forked if we have recommended the water that has been purified, and therefore heat or aconite should be applied to the throat with this tool used in steam fomentation.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When it is necessary (E si es necessitat), points must be made on the surface of the foot (lahoras f
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	When it is necessary (E si es necessitat) to perform the operation in steam treatment of that part, you take hold of an oiled glove where there are carbons ignited and covered by a cover within which there's a trap; place your hand below fumigation. Then open the patient’se throat at its tip with the cannula (a thin tube used for this purpose), holding their mouth, so that subfusion does not enter inside while you know the subfusion has reached the gullet (throat).
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not already done, then repeat the subfumigation movements, and prevent the humors from entering through drinking (avoid liquids), consuming salty or fatty foods, and water if necessary; it is essential that such a regimen be maintained.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool with which one extracts stones from the gallbladthy when seen; and it resembles pincers but without any curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The translated text line by line is:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which speech are they expressed as appendices and in sections of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The pincers move swiftly, as they were trained in movements of the hands, according to their memory from any one here present.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	So in various piercing and cutting operations for their pains through manual actions, of which one is by means of the appendages they insert themselves with; because from where these come (from excessive moisture).
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second symptom is related to the places where acids accumulate in the body, for which lesion of the head differs from that on the belly, and each one of them requires surgical intervention.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May some of which worms, not pierced but are the proper growth stages of disease in those places where their excrement is deposited or accumulated therein.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So too those appendices that are dislocated when crossed and not mature according to their function, similar to those attached at joints; if such an appendix is in the body's circuit, it becomes prolonged within these loops due to bodily fluids (humors), damaging the ligaments or nerves of this joint. If perforation occurs afterward while not matured yet towards the main organ, then penetrates that which has not ripened; and if you pierce through such a formless mass within its natural cavity nowhere else but at the stomach region – it becomes an ulcer or causes pain in this area where no healing occurs.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the hour of the puncture for the abscess and so it is when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "You understand that it matures when the pain gives way and fever subsides; reduce soreness of speech and heartbeat, sharpening the head of abscession, and other pains.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know where the abscess is penetrating and comes from pus due to treatment of inflammation,
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Through piercing the flesh or body part (legs, arms), if splinters are in muscle parts or feet areas and joint of bones/tendons, etc., even at those places where reflection is not possible; when they appear therein, use perforation according to that specific member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in the flesh, then we must insert a catheter into it until its digestion has been confirmed twice more afterward; but if you pierce that area now, it will extend the leg of the patient and harden their lips and increase depth due to dullness.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May an apothecary make incisions according to the flesh or bone'dictory need, as required by which part of the body demands it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When you administer a small incision, and in large or wide openings make several deep cuts according to the size of the wounds.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who have three joints within their segment (likely referring to a limb or part of the body), and in which they are situated similarly to the branches of myrtle tree, as well as like the pinions/claws of birds:
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From those joints where it is administered round and moon-shaped sections, they resemble them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May those who cannot bear with shallow penetrations of surface appendages be content that you pierce through only the very top layer.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the gangrene is large and has collected disease within it, do not attempt to extract all of it at once; remove some from that area today, repair the ulcer tomorrow with larger pieces as necessary until fully healed through gradual extraction where possible.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly if the malady is due to phlegmatic excess or female prenatal conditions, or in a weakened old age when animal spirits move and cause exit from illness, then it affects the lungs profoundly, and you intervene medically.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be vigilant with great care and place your incision where you pierce these thorns; ensure that no infections occur, then consider if the worm from the thorn is scant or flat, thereafter administer its remedies to it yourself or according to ancient texts; but if the worm is large with cracks on the skin of your incision at any disruption within which we find ourselves together, pause in every way.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess there is detachment of part of the colon or if that area has been concave within the circuit, then take care to cover it with many layers of cloth wound together (or linen), and apply warmth as soon as you have taken out pans or shards; strengthen its condition by placing heat inside for three days. During this time, attend to that which comes from the bandages within so that they may heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	May you cause a flow of sanctum during your operation, and if so, administer cold water quickly through these channels where the magical band is placed around it; pause there to control the movement of this sacred fluid'dictated by tradition:
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May the flow of blood continue if you maintain your diet and care regimen, as recommended in this book' extrices (remedies).
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter time, and the ulcer location becomes a place where nerves are compressed by flakes of snow or oil poured for caution, then you wrap these with fluff soaked in water (or wine) and press them onto the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are carnivorous, then when you pause pills at the beginning of the day with water and oil, as we have mentioned before, take them throughout the day until they enter into your body wherein heals according to what was required for its cure.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xli.	Capitol .xliv (Assuming "Capitol" refers to
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	The section of ticks that enter the neck occurs when these parasites attach themselves, typically seeking a host'dictated by their feeding and reproductive needs. Here is an
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head parasitic mites are present; they contain components such as hardened exoskeletons that make up their structure, and these structures serve for locomotion or attachment to hosts. Here is a translation into English:
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	From them come drops, and from those that contain moisture similar to lemon juice.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	From those joints which contain moisture like the palms and fingers (synonymously referred to here); and from those that are stone-like hard:
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In all of them, and during their extraction, there is no need for fear, as performing the operation will not harm the joints.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And in performing those operations for them, you call upon these instruments that have their form suitable, into which they are drawn when one knows it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which counts for moisture is present, then divide it by the length of each segment following this manner.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Here begins the section of line B to G: Then when the moisture is expelled, scrape that skin where the moisture was present; do not leave any cause from it all over again for those obedient troops returning will surely be troubled if they encounter such a reason.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And if there is a wax seal present, submerge it in Egyptian wax; otherwise, immerse it in water and salt. Then fill that with mud or sand until completely saturated, so that moisture corrodes out of it by tomorrow'dictating the need for immediate action to remove any residual substance from the seal before its surface is irreversibly damaged due to exposure over time.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Return the liniment applied on that spot thoroughly and carefully as directed by you, ensuring there is no rubbing off of its effectiveness; once cured internally with such liniment inside where it has been administered, healing will occur for the patient.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If there is an abscess of fatty nodes, then you should incise it following this manner.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	am section has a shape of a sickle, and cuts between the lips of that piece and dragged it out through all parts, bringing your intention into extraction from the cloth which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May your cautery cause disruption if it acts contraryly, then you must immediately report the first measure taken.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: As for appearance and treatment according to what you have said beforehand; over the inflamed section, place a cooler (or less moist), as it is scarce in substance and wetness.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May also occur in other openings elsewhere on the head besides this one; just as these are present at birth and come from the fingers' nails, so too is the layer of all them covering here a surface layer.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And close those from below that were put there, to prevent the disease'dictate of these things entering into the lower parts they have been placed in.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	When caring for those affected by water that come here for healing, then apply such remedies as are appropriate for recovery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xliii. (Assuming there is a typographical error in
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	The section of the skull where they have been pickled or preserved, possibly implying that these were fossilized remains found within this specific region:
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moving pains frequently occur in the neck and shoulder joints, as well as the angles of the body; and some also affect other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	Those spices in these pills are movements, some of which are stone-like and contain moisture, and those which are harmful that were not cured by care.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that position for treatment you find the color of which is proper to the nature of bone and throughout all parts without being attached to nerves or veins nor arteries; it does not protrude when inserted above its superficial part between segments, following this line from .G. down to .B., then observe that in entirety, extending each lip upwards towards the nose as needed within the space of our fingers on the tip and chin.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is possible that a vein or nerve has not been pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanction has detached.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation within which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if you wish to investigate whether there is any cause of the other small bubbles (which could refer to skin lesions or blisters), then inquire about that and clean those areas.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the condition of great scrofulosis (a form of tuberculosis or tubercular skin disease), then do not insert that scrofulosis into its own place within you.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Beyond which point that faithful bond of flesh and spirit is broken, whereby they fall prey to harm themselves.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	When you complete wrapping up thin cloth that which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil and care for it thusly.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that ulcer completely, then adjust the lips of your mouth and cheeks so much that not even one excess is left over.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Might you find that there is excessive swelling due to the greatness of the scrofulus (a form of tuberculosis), understand its cause and apply as directed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And when the scrophula containing moisture penetrates here at your place of ripening it creates a superficial puncture above where you put down what was placed there before we talked about this, and stops perforation from below that which has been laid beneath.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And apply an injection of wax and ointment to those areas, so that the dissolving body is prevented from rupturing through decay or decomposition.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you turn and wash it again (presumably referring back to the patient' extrication or cleaning process), then take care of that flesh wound within which is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (The reference "Capitol" followed by
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	This line appears to be written in a mix of Neapolitan dialect or local Italian, possibly influenced by Catalan due to the specific word choices and syntax which do not conform strictly with standard modern
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	This line translates to:  
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the writing of those sayings.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May men have an obstruction, which if not avoided becomes pain throughout all the veins and major arteries of the thighs here; for when such is without relief, it causes discomfort in every part.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	May happen in those who have inserted cautery into the mouth or with two forceps when the illness is not in the throat, so that they hold the section of the pharynx to prevent expulsion of mucus which causes pain due to dryness (perfusion).
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want to draw out the fluid (ascites), let's encircle three or four small circles within each circle of ascitic fluid, making sure that these little groups are in between two circles for quantity, so that there is no meat and spleen tissue inside. This location is suitable for such collection because it lacks flesh and liver (spleen) substances from the patient' extraneous body fluids have been properly drained by encircling them as described:
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is afraid, then extend the gout's spinal cord for one unit and open the spinal canal within which it may reach to avoid bleeding from any cause related to that specific issue.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	E place the ciplak as deep as recommended; it signifies within the section of the channel for bile, which is from that water in him where he has been separated and by his abdomen' extrication.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Lay still for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour arrives in which you pierce the tongue (presumably during a medical procedure), add balm from the cow'thy mouth to that solely touching the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Returning medicine that makes flesh inside it heal is done herein for treatment.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for what Albucasis has said that we have recommended herein, blood vessels which previously prolapsed from high pressure in the spleen are now entered into death'thy way; and because of this, they become entangled (likely referring to obstruction or blockage), so that their exit is through phlegm production for breathing purposes within airy places by any respiration movement therein—thus saving them from mortality.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	For that reason, we command the captured wretch to be consumed within which is the malevolence of the illness; and it will last for three days; thus, we order this same person as food so that their essence may heal within them until they are restored.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when he has seen through me (the physician), there is a servant holding his chest cushion and placing it in the patient's bed, applying remedy to him as if from moisture exhalation inside of them, uncovering pus within that was associated with this humidity smallness.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So he admitted that she had not inscribed a vein nor lodgment, and the wind entered from below, after which they treated her until the focus was cured.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not return with ease back into the chest cavity within days of recovery, and then to lightly touch their positions again.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now it is said that there should be no fear in the section of the uterus (epiloth). This translation attempts to retain as much meaning from the original text while translating into English
Capitol .xliv.	The provided phrase "Capitol .xliv." appears to refer to a
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section where infection occurs at the base of the spine (hips), and it is called an inguinal or groin hernia. Here they refer to a condition requiring attention due to its location, which may involve painful protrusions near one's lower abdomen – typically understood as
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This notable inguinal or groin hernia is commonly referred to by the skin'gyan of its location and primarily affects women - suggesting that both gender and specific anatomical site can be critical for diagnosis in historical medical texts, potentially reflecting their understanding of differential presentations across sexes. The use of 'gyan
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It is either due to two methods or it occurs naturally – indicating a distinction made in historical medical practice between hernias that are iatrogenic (resulting from an intervention)
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And if it's not caused by external factors, there is nothing to cure – highlighting a belief in some medieval medical
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And if it's accidental, one seems to have small nodules (possibly indicating a benign growth or cluster of cells), while the other appears as an apoplectic swelling caused by blockage in a vessel – expressing concerns about differentiating between two potential conditions that may present with similar symptoms but require different treatments. The mention of 'nodulation' and obstruction suggest their observations into diseases such as tuberculosis or varicose veins, which have been known to cause swelling ('apoplectic') in historical contexts – demonstrating the intertwined relationship between observed symptoms and
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	No cover that which is supposed with iron until in that which is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlv.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise using
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Based on your input, which appears to be in Latin—a language that has influenced many modern languages including
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From the section of herbs and their uses we have mentioned, they were divided into all these for various purposes (translation: From this part discussing spices in our treatise up until now, we've categorized them according to different medicinal applications). Here is a more
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Here you are suggesting the importance of distinguishing between nodes and exits where there might be uncertainty (translation: Now it's essential to clarify how we differentiate between lumps/nodes and openings which may seem ambiguous). Here is a more
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Thus you declare that at the exit there is warmth and fever as well as severe pains within which are pacified by subduing the overflow (translation: Therefore it'dicto ad exitu temperatura et pyros utamenque dolores vehementis quos sponte satur serena), and putrefaction that ceases, halting further fevers, pain, and warmth). Here is a more
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Perhaps it's not heat or fever nor pain at the lump (translation: However this bubble may present itself without being associated with heat, inflammation, or severe discomfort and contains a specific type of fluid within which they understand). Here is more guidance from you on what to observe regarding these
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	According to the color of its surface and your classification in this division we see that it is like a jellyfish (translation: In line with these characteristics I mentioned earlier—referring back to how various substances are classified), which can be similar to sea foam or honey, either abundant or scarce. They're categorized as two kinds of fluids and contain moisture; the colors within this fluid resemble particles (translation: These contents consist essentially of liquids that come in various quantities—either plentiful or limited) whose shades correspond to granules, just like what we have described previously. Here is further instruction on how you should observe these substances based on their appearance and properties as outlined in your divisions (translation: With this understanding let us continue with the
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you arrive at the healing of this node, which pushes it out and inquires about its strength for stability that comes into view in its form wherein it should be placed as desired.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here comes the last step according to your measure of swelling size, and fix the prolapsing organs while considering what has come out in its traces at his feet.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of current fluid, regardless of its color, then you shall make incisions on the surface just as I have described elsewhere.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no movement of moisture from the footprints, then you understand that they are fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it is a dry cord of this shape that you have in your hand, then so be it.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	When you have learned it as I teach, and remove that which is on the penis with your fingers, cleanse the entire penis area to ease discomfort if possible; cover or protect the foreskin/sac cautiously while extracting that particular illness from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, there is no possibility of extracting that healthy one, and if movements are continued carefully so as not to break any further due cause, then remove them from within where they cannot be harmed by external causes anymore.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If there is any cause from above for which we cannot determine (meaning not too little or too much), return the mind according to its means/resources.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If at any time you find a small part of the patient'dicted by love or vengeance filled with sharp corrosive powders and tighten it down upon that which is bleeding from cautery, then heal that portion within while treating the other wounds.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great, then use your lips to suck and heal that which contains water within it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May blood flow be towards it or not, if so the thigh and belly are where rheumatism is present (rheumatic pain), boil water for two days to three inside pottery pots above which flies rest; afterwards heat this broth again. Return then to separate what has been broken off from within the node (the affected area).
Capitol .xlvi.	The provided medieval medical text appears as follows when translated line by line into English from
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the given sentence, it is challenging to provide an accurate translation without additional context or understanding of archaic medical terminology that might have been used in medieval Latin texts influencing Italian and French languages as
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The sentence appears to discuss the necessary forms and incisions required for a procedure related to internal objects (possibly referring to surgical instruments or methods of entering body cavities) from which three types are mentioned: large ones ("alcu gran") used for insertion, small ones presumably meant for smaller tasks during that process ("de lor es petit"), and their migration within the patient's anatomy. The language is complex with archa
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of internal insertion (presumed to be a surgical instrument or device) described here appears as follows when
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	This description outlines the migration pattern—likely how such an inserted object moves within the patient's body. The exact nature of this movement
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	Here, we are given details about a smaller form or version used during insertion ("intromes migier"), which could imply
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	This sentence translates to: They are like iron or nails for the lower parts of the limbs that have been bent downward and held firmly in place within the openings ("apostemas"), ensuring a secure fit during insertion, much as metal fasteners would be secured. The language suggests medieval surgical techniques using metallic objects to anchor or stabilize certain body
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experience (potentially referring back to surgical tools) and they have names ("nombres"), one of which is called Berisde or Beryl. The speaker appears to be calling upon this particular tool by name, possibly in a ritualistic invocation for its use during medical procedures at that time
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So with three spices, of which some are great for medicinal use and others scarce (meaning that among these three spices, some have significant healing properties while the quantity is limited).
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The true form or essence being large, as it pertains to this context likely refers to a conceptualization of '
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The genuine aspect that heals (or the real medicine), thus referring back again possibly emphasizes on understanding or identifying what truly has
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 And similarly for those few spices with substantial medicinal value. This line underlines the importance of these limited resources and suggests that they must
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 Thus, as a measure to aid those afflicted by wounds and ulcers (referring here possibly to external injuries or infections) with these few effective spices, ensuring that they are beneficial even between the bones and other potential causes of pain/ailment. This line highlights how medical practitioners might have used limited resources strategically for healing various ailments during medieval times—possibly referring
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 And with these spices (likely referencing the three effective ones), such as red pepper and large needles used for sewing sinews together—which are made of lemon skin or iron, possibly suggesting alternative remedies involving natural materials like lemons besides metals. Additionally, they use coins when those spices come from citrus fruits; here the practitioner might be referring to using coinage (perhaps as a form of payment for services) especially in cases where treatment involves costly ingredients such as lemon peels or other natural remedies derived from lemons. This concludes that during medieval times, spices not only had medicinal uses but also played an economic role when sourcing them was necessary and expensive.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	When black pepper experts are said to be in the cavity where these abscesses reside and their pulsations mirror those above them therein, it indicates they have burst through or become uncovered.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And of these three species, some are taken from their lengths, and others merchants or bakers according to the quantity of the opening'dictum (or narrowing) in his fistula and stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of patient' extrication from lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of small iron implement:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the pills are from spices or simple ones that only have a bending motion and consist of three kinds: large, small, and pepper.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	When they make an incision into it (the body), using three kinds of medicines/tools.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those points has there been bends or of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From them three curves are formed, and they come from three kinds of things.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Everything necessary in that place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple limestone block: shape of stone
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of single unit migration:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a single unit is small, like bone:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of large stone coin:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an ointment, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of an urin stone, shape of a lump:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an acute has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of an egg has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an ill-shaped joint has two bends:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of an arrow has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an ointment has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of one little finger has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of surgical knives used for cutting and removing lumps and tendons; they come in three types: one made of iron, another from bone (migrer), and a third type that we do not specify here.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of small scalpel blade:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The sharp edges of these are where pain occurs and not in such mannerisms, but to heal the malady quickly through venous or nerve fear during node scraping, for by them it is cured the ulceration slowly due to hardening that must be treated with a little.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of leeches, and they come in three kinds: large, medium (or 'miguer'), and small, as you carry them with you.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great charcoal:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of gait involving Magdeburg:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of leech few in number:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Such pains from bone and humble appearance of healthy flesh where they do occur, such as wine induces (alcohol).
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When you enter beyond the extra membrane hidden under the skin and in that area where bones meet (hips/pelvis), as you go about your daily activities with ease.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of cauterization (which are applied between the legs where piercings occur and which we do not see as illnesses), there are three kinds: large, small, and few/lesser.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those things.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of gout are what causes the flow of bile to separate, and they come in three kinds: large (gran), migrating (migera), and small (pauca); these are its forms.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sourced as leeches from citrus fruit, round in some length and delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these herbs for vinegar must be ground and crushed to ensure that through their absorption the acid flows swiftly when first applied treatment is ineffective:
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for separation throughout the body, but only in locations such as where there are leg cushions and thigh spaces, breast and belly bands, and similar spots like their flesh-covered regions which become moistened.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Here are the translations line by line:
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some joint pains are round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	The text provided appears as if it is trying to convey medical instructions or observations in a way
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	This medieval Latin-like phrase describes the care for breasts (presumably nipples) of women assembled together, possibly referring to communal living or gatherings:
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some evenings are when the breasts of barren women swell with sleep and resting food intake, and in turn become inflated (breast), assembled breast structures on women'thy bodies, roundly flat.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who takes it in, cover that which is extracted from beneath the moon'dict line according to this form, along A line into G line, and cleanse the growth entirely; apply the living flesh of medicine-laden items within clothing, adjusting those lips on their waistband, and heal whatsoever lies inside.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May if the nipple declines to the parts of dawn and is softened by its own warmth, as it happens with women'thy breasts; thereafter two sections resembling crescent moons are formed in their pus, each containing within itself another seed, such that when the larger line contains the smaller one according to this shape of the main (larger) and small lines (smaller ones), then cleanse the area between both lips under which dirt accumulates. Administer what has been mentioned about sutures and powders as needed for healing within so long that it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the inspection of the fluid that wants to enter due to malaute'dict and lymphatic flow, then cover those parts under moist corrosive substance and submerge them in it so as the liquid causes decay within what is already rotten inside therein, taking care at all times for whatever part gets healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	The given text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing treatment for joint pain
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When the pinworms enter, they cause itching around their entry points. (Note: The original text appears to be from a medieval context and uses older medical terminology which
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When pinworms enter, they cause itching around their entry points due to the sharp stones of scrofulous diseases, which contain a pus that is encapsulated (Note: The term "scrophulous" relates historically to tuberculosis with associated abscess formation). This sentence suggests an understanding in medieval medicine where pinw
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	From those that contain moisture; and from these where the humidity is sealed within their cycle according to this chart: from line G to line B (Note: The original text lacks context, but we can infer it refers to a lunar calendar with specific indications for treating infections). After cleaning out whatever sickness essence remains at the site of the affliction, complete what is needed and let that go inside into another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Once applied properly with suitable oil or wax within it until healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the apoplectic formation of the glands and scleroses is concerned with us today as we discussed in the section on sclerotic formations, then divide it here accordingly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the child is expanded so much that it burns while being heated in water (implying overheating), then apply a caustic as soon as we have warmth to deal with it now.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlix. (This line appears incomplete or out of context as
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Per arcería" and "per vena," in this sentence, refer to piercing with an earring ("arceria") through the skin or vein ("vena"). Here is a
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an earring is torn (presumably from the body), and a cord becomes tightened around it—this where you observe that inflammation and abscess are caused by piercing through arteries or veins: when the abscess, due to being attached to the bracelet on your wrist ('preon del cors' in medieval Latin terminology for 'bracelet'), is long-drawn; consequently, you feel pain not only at these places but also elsewhere (indicated by "quays sia stridor").
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that which flows in the vein makes its appearance at the body'dictor (a term likely referring to a symptom or condition), it becomes evident within the
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	This section concerning the ulcer is mistaken, mainly where it lies between the ankle bones and thighs (or knees), as well as in joints like elbows and wrists; hence care must be taken not to overlook these areas for healing. Additionally, if it's found outside of body parts or on top of them, such cases should also avoid neglecting proper treatment.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Over that which belongs to them for inflammation of the gallbladthy (or cholecystitis), divide it along their spine's length; and cut off part of the section, as well as remove the gallbladthy itself so that it is revealed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And apply pressure on the location where between two ligaments there is a tendon within which fire has ignited it entirely in him/her, and then dissipate the apatite (a type of calcification).
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the medication in which cure is generated, while ligaments fall inside where they enter, and also ensure that this appropriate ointment is applied within so that it enters once healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an embolism in the vein, then you take hold of your strength that lies within yourself to address the embolism at the neck and insert a needle there; make that needle penetrate; and place double here—insert what was already placed by hand (the inserted needle), withdrawing one while inserting another with silk thread as previously mentioned in reference to this part of the filament.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May you fear that we will extract the thread, and if so, immediately insert it into the needle'dictum provided at once for the first time by this initial pinprick, tightening the threads in four locations.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the pressure over it that you have immersed in wine and oil, and apply the treatment which causes healing inside as if by clogs or ointments inserted while being treated.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital D of apendicitis from which pain is caused by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	When there is suppuration in the joint and vein, it seems like an abscess of the nerves when pressed or due to excessive friction, apparently so.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is pain in the parts of his body where assistants or feet are present, or anywhere at all that joint pains occur.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	When severe swelling occurs and is aligned with the other limb'dictions of him/her, it appears in his major positions within them when struck by violent forces; he seems to have a malady resembling intoxication or stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And there is not an abscess in the belly of the body, and hence it does not go downwards towards either below or beyond its natural position.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Thus those who are encased in joints do not suffer from iron lodgment here, but they will find relief through contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is in the head or at the neck have a stone placed on the spine.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess (apostema), take that one and cut off the head from its roots above your knees.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, then suspend him on an elbow, and rub that spot, and apply oil to keep that wound dressed, and care for him until he recovers completely.
Capitol .li.	Capture herein (or) At this point in time/place
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the section of apoplexy where your lips are also sore on your stomach, it can be deduced that there is a spreading or systemic issue at play—perhaps indicating an illness affecting
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And even unto the sickness of those who are continually wandering in their bellies and other parts of their bodies where fungus-like organisms exist—organisms that live beneath (or within) the cap/surface, much like mushrooms whose caps we see; these afflictions also affect conversation between lips as they speak little or not at all.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes another sentence to translate: And here is one who has seen them (the two halves that seem like flesh), and there was no difference between these white ones of little significance.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned outward and parted, with moisture running throughout that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I have incised these and inserted a sponge in each, one for sixteen units and the other for six units.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is afraid and anxious (and), keep yourself away from iron as far as possible; perhaps a freshly made iron implement will help, along with strengthening that part which we have mentioned herein; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another sentence to translate: Adjust within the narrowness of the iron pipe so that it does not continue hammering itself apart until it is separated and its own movements cease.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If there is a large size of his limb, there may be no cause for fear and distress within him, mainly in the abdomen area.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you divide the mass (of the patient), and properly apply cautery so as not to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return care is given so that whatever needs healing within be restored to health. (This translation attempts to preserve medieval medical terminology and context while conveying modern English
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Beware you who assume to insert such a dark matter of little feeling and few thoughts into your consideration because it is cancerous (this translation conveys the idea that one should be cautious when encountering something insidious, like advanced disease or malignant growth). Here 'fusca color' refers metaphorically to darkness associated with serious conditions; ‘pauc sentiment’ implies a lack of emotion which can sometimes accompany shock
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	Here we come back in time for recollection, (this translation suggests returning to the past or mindfulness about an event that has happened). Here 'rememoracio' means recalling memory and ‘
Capitol .lii.	Capitol LII refers typically to a specific chapter of law within legal documents
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Regarding the care for ubiquitous (or, more commonly used in medical contexts today, pervasive) presence
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The navel is considered due to causes such as cracks on the abdominal wall where they occur alongside other ruptures; or for a wound that drains blood or pus following what has been stated herein, or because of constricted expansion in its area. (This translation explains various reasons why an umbilical issue might arise—cracks leading to additional problems like drainage issues from fluids and possibly relates back to original trauma as outlined by the document). Here 'sanc' refers to a wound, while terms such as ‘flueys’ (leakages), ‘constricted expansion,’ or ‘ventositat coarctada in lu‘ describe physical manifestations that could be related to complications stemming from an initial injury.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If there is a crack in the chest and discharge from the wound dressing; its appearance resembles that of the body' extruded parts (likely referring to purulent drainage), which causes varying degrees of pain, like that of a lion. It means: If there’s a fissure in the thoracic cavity and discharge from the wound dressing such as pus or serous fluid comes out; its appearance is similar to what we see coming out normally (like blood), which causes different
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If there is an extrusion of the intestine (implying a hernia), then its situation has been reconsidered by those who have had contact with it; this can range from very intense to other degrees, and if you are assessing that one should not hide or disregard these matters – they must be brought into view. Moreover, as soon as he is aware of them again (presumably referring back to a healthcare provider), return his attention/focus there; ensure it's treated with vigorous bathing and robust therapy efforts.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then you are like a lion; however, it will not disappear when placed on your hand, nor become tight or inflamed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanction (or perhaps due to excessive indulgence), at this time you will appear the blackening decay of humors descending upon these limbs.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May it be for flesh nothing grave, hard and long lasting, then follows a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be for wind conditions, then touching them is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And when the operation in him is considered, taking into account whether the navel'supremacy (umbilicus) is due to an arrow or vein, and/or windiness; if so forbidden by his treatment, that fear and worry are felt alongside what you have taught me here about arsenic and venesection.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the navel is due to either the intestine or membrane, then command that it retain its secretions and remain extended; apply pressure along the entire circumference of the umbilicus at the location where you have applied pressure on the tender spot upon their abdomen over them. Position yourself between their thighs (or in-between), with a cushion underne0, another servant placed on each leg while holding hands.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Apply heat from apesta (a type of poultice or warm compress) over the ligament and insert your fingers into that area, if you have accidentally torn it or neglected for leather binding; then extract forcefully and push the intestine backward towards its abdominal parts.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the fabric (referring perhaps to skin or clothing), then take that one and apply it here; also inspect for any excess above.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, encircle that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those fields of force you have pierced through the putrefaction in the knee joints which are penetrated by these implements, firmly establishing the suppuration over four parts on each needle.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them into where it pierces the extended flesh, when inserted and pulled through itself; mark that spot which is cleansed by the ointment inside those applied for its treatment.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the umbilicus (navel) of the patient is dry or affected by moisture, then you must treat it as an abscess with water and pus present in it, which dries out therein, and take care of that fluid to consolidate the location.
Capitol .liii.	The provided text is from an old medical manuscript which seems challenging due to its
De curacio de cranc.	Given that this phrase likely originates in a historical context where Latin, Italian, Spanish
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the division of skull and in what manner it should be treated with medicine, to ensure that treatment does not cause sores or lesions – here they state that a head injury has occurred within the womb (or during birth), which is being cared for by means of medication. The care must avoid causing ulcerations as part of its healing process; and it suggests attention should be paid to both prevention measures taken before delivery, like prenatal care or environmental factors that may affect fetal health ("cranc"), along with the postnatal treatment applied during labor (the "causa" relates here not only to birth processes but also potentially encompasses preconceptional influences).
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and weak, you cannot expect that from him; for then neither has this patient recovered nor have I seen any other recover in such a state.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is performed as we have discussed together, it means that you precede and lay on the patient'thy thighs while purging black fever symptoms occasionally; apply heat if there is a swollen reflex manifestation.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient's abdomen for preparation in which it is located, and brace upwardly those cuts that are directed towards it; and make them convex throughout all parts of where there should be no injury caused by its causes.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is opposition of thick blood within the vein or artery, then treat that area whereby the flow of thick blood ceases, and care for it until healed.
Capitol .liv.	In translating this medieval medical text into English line by line, here
De curacio de ydropici.	The phrase "Capitol." in a historical or context-specific sense could relate to
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Translation: In the division of sea herbs from water and their properties for healing purposes are taken care of in order to use them as medicine remedies (or treatment methods). Here "Capitol" seems contextually related, possibly referring to a place or institution where knowledge about these medicinal preparations is organized.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herbal tympanic mixture as medicine and do not find comfort in your treatment, consider that if the malady of the belly has been alleviated, or another herbal illness elsewhere on the body (including the stomach and viscera), be wary because there is fear for it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Might you again tighten the waist of abundance (exuberant vitality), and this is not another illness but simply dampness in excess alone; neither child nor old person will suffer, for when it' extricates your belly by means through its hands—you lift up their abdomen nowhere near to where the ribs end before a few days have passed. Then apply pressure with sharp spines (instruments) following this method:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is two acute parts with a splint (splint), and perhaps there are small sections that each day become smaller until they do not enter the cavity during surgery, so you can remove them safely.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "And consider if the generation of ydrochonic is from the budgels; when you hold your body' extrication by three digits at their joints directly above, on top of them.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of watery humors is due to illness in the foot, then your team should be on your left side under the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If it is for the liver of him/her that this occurs, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And when your team is on top of the chest where you want to speak about the malady so that it does not run rampant up there,
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Through which I will pierce the joint cavity until the stone reaches its destination in that water location.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And return that which has been extracted therefrom, inserting an instrument of this form hereby.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it seems like a small silver tube under you is made of either silver or ivory/ivory-like lion, to which at the lower part I have attached three little hooks; on your limbs there are two from one attachment and one from another attachment - these are its sharp extremities according to the pen's direction (as if using a quill).
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And when the instrument enters beyond your skin, as soon as it touches that place, draws out of the water in the hourly measure just enough, but if you withdraw more than what is necessary for its exit at any given time, then the malady (illness) resolves by itself because of your spirit animal'dict. Alternatively, apply five times to this spot as it becomes appropriate towards death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May it be expelled according to the quantity of its fluid and as you understand the disposition, movement, and humidity (or softness) of its pulse from the foot'thy circulatory state.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here the instrument is taken out, and water that causes it to be retained by the cord whereby above the cribriform part from which they recommend you pierce according to that manner/technique of yours.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	May you fear the belly, and pour great quantities of water upon it, so that healing occurs in a sandy bath, massaging him thoroughly while awaiting long periods under sunlight; meanwhile curing his dehydrated condition with medicines within which he has recovered.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	When applied to the stomach, and with the spoon they pick up water from it (as has been previously reported), this is how removal of fluid takes place.
Capitol .lv.	The provided text seems to be an interpretation or paraphrase of
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	When translating the given line from a medieval medical context, which appears to mix elements reminiscent of several languages including Latin and possibly local vernacdictions similar to Italian or Occitan (from where "Capitol" could suggest), here is
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	The translation of the line provided appears to be: "Some children suffer in their mother's womb, and the head of mixed-blood [birth] either is not pierced or remains unharmed (either undisturbed due to absence of intervention or because it was never compromised).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So then a hole is made in it so subtly that one appears undernethy joints like the spine.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And give pause in the wound with a subtle steel pin and thread that thing, doing so for three days or four-and-three-quarters.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he needs to urinate his gouty matter and urine; return that which has gone out.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not pause the stone, then it is possible that the urine will flow over this area, and thus fail to cleanse it properly.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that which causes dislocation be treated with lead as mentioned before us for up to several days until it is exacerbated.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	May those in which the dislocation is not at its rightful place, cause it to move about, this leads to blockage of urine flow downstream from where the testicle descends into these parts; and as such generation (of semen) cannot reach the uterus properly due to obstruction along with general illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E guarda te that in your operation of blood flow, some drops you will acquire acid; pause at this point wherein you have separated the blood, and heal within it as if cured.
Capitol .lvi.	The provided text seems to be from an old medical manuscript discussing remedies
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The provided line from the medieval medical treatise appears to discuss issues related to male genital health, specifically mentioning pain in the foreskin at the head of the penis and due to corruption (likely referring to decay or disease) and adhesion (stickiness). Here is a possible translation:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Movements worsen this condition in the belly and it is an excess of fatty tissue.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	From that one it is harmful (or malevolent), and from others not so harmlthy/maleficent.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No malicious, cover that detaches subtly and separates what is within it entirely; and pause over that spot submerges in Egyptian oil, and apply this ointment inside wherein the patient shall be healed completely.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the gallbladdig is evil and of dark hue, then make sure to apply caustic preparations internally into its liver and kidneys.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the foreskin is present on the head of the penis, and one part has been cut (circumcision), while another remains intact because you have it there; once this division has healed within where you hold it to support, after treating that uncut portion as well, your care ensures that no separation will occur when caring for the circumcised area.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And examine the testicles and foreskin blackness and hardening; consequently cover all that has already been darkened or is at risk of corruption, placing linens on it soaked in honey made from ground flaxseed mixed with berries and crushed herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that treatment there is for it inside so as it becomes healthy again.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May it be necessary for fluid flow of sanctus (sacred or healthy blood), then apply moon-like tools in this manner.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Whenever caustic points are used as remedies, it is for the flow of blood and pus when they become corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed in an instant, then insert a copper tube into the body cavity to allow for drainage through that opening.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuci at the base of the foreskin (and this adhesion is not cut away but where it attaches, and there's no circumcision required; when you have an adhesion due to dirt or scab) cover that sharp bone within which your prepuce is attached, dissolving its ligament entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to reach those exquisitely, then have someone gently scrape the spine or penis area looking for a cause of head and pubic bone pain, and so when they are subtle, firmly perforate them through their delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Return the separation between the foreskin and the head of hair above the pubic bone subtly inserted undernethy; this is already immersed in effusion that does not stick to other humors.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Once properly dressed in bandages within which it is healed,
Capitol .lvii.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual text but seems like a section
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The refinement of children and the care for those who are circumsized, please translate:  
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for the continuation of diseases: however, when it comes from our work and intention, and in children specifically, we must assign them to better healing methods as quickly as possible.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So it is said that ancient ones did not perform circumcision among free men, nor do they use in their clothes, and only acquire them through experimentation. This causes the loss of a large part of artisans and barbarians to practice circumcision and mundification with new tools such as knives and tweezers; using ligature made from sinew and sharp stone grain (or chisel).
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already tried all these methods and found no better improvement than with the knife in surgery, where motions escape from below the waistline pushed outwards, those of the pubis between two tunics, and hernia downstaged quickly; thus forcing yourself to other insight into secure relief.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And for ablution (cleansing), which is caused by phlebitis and from whose use fingers are employed with forceps, it'dictly does not secure the insensibility of the extremity of the male member; rather quickly enters into its cavity.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with a knife, if you are not careful and cause damage, it will ruin your work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The natural tongue of a child is short by nature, and they habitually bite in such manner that there is no need for dental cleaning; it has been observed.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the world-making that is made from fores and sinew of a horse' extruded by me; I have experimentally discovered this myself, so as when the length (thickness) of these tools corresponds proportionately to their thickness in use—and thus with two determined lengths at hand, you shall measure them accordingly according to your understanding; resulting is the compression of the fores shaped into a figure within which there will be no error from all sides.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first sentence translates as follows: The primary aspect of the operation is that you make the child mostly lie on their side and let them stay inside for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	When that joy is what you can achieve with whatever knowledge comes into your mind,
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	E prepare yourself to maintain that state between your thighs and not be distracted; hide the saw blades in your hand or undernethy legs so that the child does not see those nor any other of them from the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Here comes the translation of each line into English:
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return its designated place on the faithful double leg, and put a pillow under that small part of it which is second in line for binding threads, holding therein both bands together.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the translation:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of these instruments means this is how it should be shaped.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	These are hinges and the others not to exceed the length of the jaw joints, as well as their extension equal to that of two handles grasped in hand.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Maying errors in clarification are far from escaping the internal core entirely; you must investigate within yourself.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So that you stretch it out on your finger nail during the application of ointment to the affected area, applying each portion equally spaced apart.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract that one and incisor it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and the poultice applied to the inflamed site is warm enough after applying some time in justification of its softness, then apply what you have prepared for treatment inside wherein the abscess will yield (i.soften), and remove that easily which flows out therefrom; also rubbing this preparation on yourself as directed by you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	When it's your turn at the head of the bed (guardar), you won't have access to water (aquo).
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	So care for that which water has solidified from the dust particles within the dust passageway.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is inserted into the navel in measure and one observes below (below the belly), they will not notice it therein.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he take care of that water which we have inside so it may be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing various
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Translation of the given Latin-influenced sentence into English, regarding retained urine in the bladder:
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retain urine in the bladder is considered a fault due to excess bone or stone formation, or kidney stones, and seem similar to those mentioned by healers for curative purposes during division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and remains for a while in the part where it already is at the base of the bladder, then allow the uric acid to come down on your thighs (which are currently holding you).
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Here comes the translation:
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So then the tail of the bladder is contracted that it expels urine from behind into the parts below, so that the urine is completely discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If there is not dissolution of the water that we have mentioned strongly as a cause over the patient' extricable body (their humors), then it becomes necessary to remove them using an instrument they appeal to, which takes this form: It can be made of silver and subtle lion conquest. With such delicate force like slender lance in length similar to that between one’s palm and middle finger, where the end is as thin as a feather's quill atop their head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When you place the thigh on the foot and bind it with vinegar and water mixture of olive oil and wine,
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Expose the iron gradually with small pieces of wool, as urine is absorbed by the wool slowly.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Apply therein diuretic and use a plunger until the bladder and obstructed organs are relieved, ceasing to apply urine treatment and using the catheter upon emptying of the bladder and blockages alleviation.
Capitol .lix.	Capitol XLVI. (Assuming "Capitol" refers
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	The provided text appears to be in a constructed or artificial language, possibly resembling Latin influenced by elements of French and Italian (as hinted at with words like "clampcedra" for catheter and the syntax structure). The request seems to pertain to medical instruments used during enema procedures. Here is an attempt to translate it into English while preserving its
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When acute inflammation occurs in the bladder or abscess, or when it is coarsely treated with an enema procedure using water and medicinal solutions, this becomes necessary—the form of treatment involves a catheter (which I refer to as "clampcuda"). This is how:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sino que in the exterior of it is silent, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way three troubles arise from one division, which happens twice.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the meal is calmness where it rests and its second quantity that rises up to draw from those humidities; when any cause takes them away, they are drawn back again, and when expelled for a long time, so much as phlegm accumulates in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of crab' extrusion into the moistness, and draw out that water which pushes against the cavities below it; thus removing humidity from where its entrance is located.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Return the intestine to its cavity and apply pressure with the moisture you have introduced into it; this same wetness will move downwards towards the bladder as far as possible, and inflammation (or swelling) of the ureter will result.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form under which urine is contained, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is silver or side-effected (perhaps referring to mercury), and I place the hook on their skin as if it were a small feather, then quickly introduce the thread into them.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	When you insert the end of the catheter into the vein,
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Here comes the translation of the source sentence:
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder present, then take a pillow made of pargaments and make from that circle; pierce it all through its thickness; firmly insert faith into those disruзу, so that they will be moved when turned around; position the ring there as well for urination purposes, placing pauses in what you wish to release (urine), adding water if desired.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Here I translate the sentence line by line into English:
Capitol .lx.	Capitol .lx.: This line appears to be an index or reference
De extraccio de peyra.	De extraccio de peyra": In English, this translates to "From the
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas": Translation: "We have here in the division of bone and stone for medicine's purpose," indicating a discussion or focus on categorizing different types of stones (peyra) used in medical treatments.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	Here they have said that operation takes place in this stone where I act as well as part of a team/sequence (sección).
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The English translation of this medieval medical treatise line by line is as follows:
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And here you are describing that which has been revealed in its manifestation and condensed form.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So say that stones are produced mainly in the bladder and resemble water due to their subtlety, appearing therein; moreover, it is said of them that they fry the urethra with dripping urine flows, which dresses its threadbare area. Here come various actions: 
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	This is how healthily children of that place have reached fourteen years old, and it's difficult to cure them in their bodies.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May in young people move due to these fluids that circulate among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that from which the stone is larger and the cautery softer/lighter; if it is little, contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when you arrive at the treatment of that, cover it with bread from the crust whereby it exits entirely through those holes which are within your belts; for that hole sometimes prohibits the entrance of dirt into its bed, requiring investigation by yourself.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Return its position to the hips and thighs (and contains excess heat/pain) in order that the urethral stone may descend into the bladder or jump from place to place a few times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Apply that catheter you prepared between your thighs and the rest of his things are now on him; thus ensuring that the bladder as a whole descends downwards gradually.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Return that which has been taken away for all of it (the patient).
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel pain in the space, then touch it gently with your hand on top of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you have not yet touched the patient' extrication in all these days as indicated on their left side (if they are stillborn), or if it is because of a womb that has been completed for youth, then touch them there and insert your hand into their belly.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through which part of the body does this secret dwell? (What bodily region is it hidden in?)
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that small object enters into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And place it on that limb you mentioned earlier, and remove it from the parts without returning to where your team was located.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return within it is how this thing appears or enters:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut the water that is between the anus and intestines, not in their location but from the left hip socket; on top of this stone it places its section above, forming a transverse section to ensure that the section becomes wide and pierced according to the quantity necessary for what can be done with the stone currently located in the belly, without exceeding, lest you crush the part wherein is contained the intestine.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	E as you know there are joints and angles on the stone where it is difficult for him to be healed by water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid it looks like a lion' extruding its essence and is round in shape; this liquid gold requires distillation (refining).
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore adjust it in the crack/fissure where you have applied pressure and directed flow (or pain).
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not a goblet available, then you will need to make one on that spot or where it hurts intensely, and do so with a limpet shell for the tool used under that area; avoiding leaving without doing something; immediately introduce a delicate instrument of curvature into the extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot cover it there, then increase the disruption a little bit, and if you see phlegm flowing out from that spot which was previously treated with sulphur triple distilled vinegar (i.n.), separate them tightly now.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is within one of them (the bladder), push it to the mouth of the bladder, and place your hand over it there; also lift up a small amount of water; apparently they are pains from diseases.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is much pain, it'thy ignorance that you insert this great limb into the groin area; here two causes may arise: either because it remains or due to continuous urine distillation from there, thus not being completely secured in its place for both reasons.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May administer removal from within that has been brought out (expulsio), or in the case of a break inside where hooks are inserted to extract it, do so until taken out through pressure plates (extriga).
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your treatment, fill the womb of our seeds (the body) with Aloe and Dragon'sin essence, and strengthen it thusly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply pressure on that cloth inflamed with oil and vinegar or water foam, so that the application stops bleeding.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the intestine above the navel on the patient's abdomen and do not release it into the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air escapes, apply water and oil to the affected area, taking care to do so with liniment or unguents inside until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	May you if in the field inflame an abscess with cautery to soften and dissolve it, as when your sanctum is congealed like urine within its bladder (and through which excretion of urine is prohibited), then insert the thread into the field and extract that sanc, if Rheumatism provokes corruption in both the bladder and body putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here returns the water and soil (or mud) moistened with rainwater or sea salt, which are used for all kinds of healing as long as they contribute to making sickness cured within it.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During all of the healing process, when you are adjusting and applying the drugs that have been paused at this location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder's meat, it remains there, and urine extraction is prohibited; thus healing this illness requires immediate attention to prevent progression towards another stage, which has been accused of being a continuation or worsening—and you have already drained out the fluid. Now take hold of an iron knife for drainage from here:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From outside the body cavity, gout settles in a pipe (or stone).
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Return your faithful servant and place it on that stone just above the bladder pelly, to ensure it does not return there again.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert the needle into the vein quickly so that as soon as the piercer enters it will go down to that spot.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the cautery in your hand over that area little by little until one of them makes a hole, and at that moment, the urine is expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand over what is broken down from the bone of the separated part above the groove where it pierces (the urethra), which has been cracked open and its exit for urine, at this point the prostate becomes healthy.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not within your reach for any reason that prevents you from doing so, then apply a poultice immediately to the bone, and another poultice below it (on the skin).
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	When you place it above that stone in between the bones of his legs,
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that outside (or) remove it outwardly.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Return the ligaments and cleanse the swolthy sac with it, which is made in the dirt.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to use hemp thread immediately after the piercing of the perineum, but rather until it returns to its place and pulls back into position; another thread above only when removing the original one (once the hemp has been removed), as then the coccyx returns to its location and draws itself back in.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary for you to lift the thigh from below (to assess or manipulate), then raise the penis to the parts undernethy, and return your touch as directed by those who have spoken with us here.
Capitol .lxi.	The provided text is written in Medieval Latin with some elements that resemble other
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	From the stone of women." This phrase suggests a medieval medical context where "stone," likely referring to gallstones or kidney stones
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Translation: A stony formation in the womb is rarely produced. In this line, it describes that stone-like formations within a woman's body are
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Translation: If there is any such stone within them, the treatment would be difficult and it's forbidden for those with excessive fear or weak spirits. This line addresses medical challenges in treating stones (likely referring to gallstones) when they are present internally ("in them"), noting that both a complex intervention might be necessary as well as considering psychological factors like anxiety,
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	Translation: One of those stones belongs to the woman who is very strong in her willpower. Here it highlights that within a certain group (possibly referring to women),
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	Translation: And the second one belongs to you—if there is a woman who does not seek help from a doctor when it's time for casting or if they come out of female choice (possibly referring to giving birth). This line discusses scenarios where medical intervention may be necessary, and how personal choices regarding childbirth might impact health. These phrases are reflective of medieval views on medicine which often blend the
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	Translation: The purest is when a woman does not have to undergo surgery for this matter; mainly through operation (surgical intervention). Here the text emphasizes that in cases where no other treatment besides an actual procedure—likely referring to removing stones via surgery—
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	Translation: And the location of this stone within a woman's body is longer than that wherein it resides; hence necessitating an intervention beforehand and causing fear (concern). This line appears to be describing conditions under which immediate medical attention or surgical planning becomes necessary due to concerns about stones in women, likely referring to symptoms of kidney stones. These phrases convey the belief that certain physical ailments can trigger both urgent treatment needs ("necessitating an intervention
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	May it be necessary for you to cause ascent, so take hold of a female medical student'dictor and gently press on them; only little force is needed.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	May you lack it, then seek a skilled barber or present a woman well-versed in women' extrication techniques from this segment of the treatment.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then take that present and command it to hold all the water you have given her, from inquisition about the stone until reaching contentment; which is caused because if she's a virgin, insert whatsothy says into her vagina and want for pleasure therein.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you squeeze it, command your patient to lie on that area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If there is no vein visible, then the matron commands that their duty be inserted into the cavity of the malady and positioned over the bladder, placing their left hand on top of it to pause its flow, while obtaining a good concoction with whatever they have.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if it is the pain that worsens from within the bladder to the parts below during an increase of urgency inside, then until it reaches the entrance of the coccyx, whereby through this point permeates into the pelvic area.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Return the instrument submerged in that position on the mass of the hip joint and center it between any thigh portion where standing occurs, ensuring that the tool is not pulled out by sudden movements from undernethy legs' bone structure.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section is small at mealtime; and place your arm over that piece of flesh, if you feel pain in it, adjust accordingly based on how much I know has been displaced from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	E be aware that stones of precious metal are hotspots: some few and large as a lion or an asp (a type of snake), elongated and round; they possess ramparts too.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Thus you understand how many spices are needed for what you want from it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see outflow of bile, adjust in the glass vessel thrice set and stay there an hour until it detaches from the liver, then return to your operation while the patient' extrusion is resolved.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Prepare those tools which are used in the extraction of bone from humans, so that you may use them for your assistance during this operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see flux of bile flowing and know that the expulsion of bile is due to a stone (choleric colic), then halt bleating over the location; startle it with powder on the spot, and apply warm poultice internally and externally without iteration. Leave the pebble in place; thus the illness will come to an end.
E aprop cura la plagua.	In translating this text line by line from what seems like an archaic or regional
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of pain increases during certain days and nights, it points to where you should return your focus or work within until the stone is outgrown/passed on its own.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol xii. (Assuming "L" stands for Roman numer
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	The term you've provided, "erena acocida," appears to be Latin or derived from medical
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	The text in question describes what seems to be a hernia with an emphasis on fluid accumulation within the abdomen that puts pressure on the intestines housed therein; this condition is colloquially referred to as "abdominal water." The description outlines how excess moisture, or humidity ("agua" in Spanish), which should normally be contained by bodily walls (possibly referring to abdominal wall integrity and its role in containing the intestines
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	The text seems to discuss the presence of moisture within a certain portion where natural fluid (likely referring to intestinal contents or peritoneal fluid) accumuls in preparation for digestion; it is situated between the abdominal wall and intestines, highlighting that this area has been previously identified as having excessive fluids. The term "tart" here suggests a solidified form of moisture—possibly an old or fibrous accumulation within these layers (perhaps indicating chronic inflammation leading to tissue scarring). This description is indicative of understanding and identifying the clinical presentation associated with fluid infiltration into abdominal structures,
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	Here the text explains that this type of hernia is related to a process causing fluid discharge into the intestines ("genetius" being an old term for small intestine or bowel). The accumulated material, when pressured by body movements (implied as "ad aquells es efundunda," which might mean they are forced out with motion), and potentially exac0urated through percussion—a technique in physical examination where tapping the abdomen to check for fluid build-up ("percuscio fayta") can help detect such discharg
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	Here is the translation line by line:
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And for the joints which this addition of water is meant (for these), when it has been applied on white skin as directed, decay ceases within a long bath, and appears health again; since moisture contained throughout all parts where necessary.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If there is moisture in the patient' extraneous membrane, then it becomes an abscess and discharges outwardly; hence they esteem another humerus (arm).
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If moisture is between the navel and the umbilicus (belly button), then urgently apply pressure to the area with fingers or a cloth.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to learn about the color of humidity, look for its moisture in the swelling that comes before it; and as soon as this appears on the skin surface where it was introduced earlier today, examine its wetness therein.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the treatment of him who is afflicted with phlegm (one type of humor), and it's within your power to induce vomiting, then apply heat to his abdomen.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Return its position on top of any cause for few reasons and pause occasionally with cloth rags.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Return the pillow or bed and divide along the neckbone within this space, here meaning in their resting place for extended periods of time. (This sentence suggests a medieval practice where patients might have been advised to return to their beds but with adjustments made for comfort during prolonged stays.)
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	When it is necessary for the second section to be pressed outward from below the line that should go through between the legs' openings down to where the white chest comprehends,
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and watch it carefully so you don'thy insert anything into it; your excision is what he examines closely under the lens according to how much there may be present.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Return through piercing the bladder of water by puncture and extract all the water from it.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Return the separation between their lips and tongue of one section, extend the cautery to the areas above; do not touch the chin with fingers holding them, incise as far as you can possibly manage in that manner.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	When you insert it into his whole or in pillows, mostly under the skin, if you do not examine its entry meticulously, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that during the time of your operation when you have completed one part of the catheterization, return to this area and adjust the lips of the uterus wound sutures on both sides of the navel joints as if with care for other creatures; thus healing.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have crushed the humors through another illness, then take those vessels which bear them and extract the humor, applying care for that which we mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May it be that if water is added to any of the body parts mentioned herein, then you will know those are hernias; thus investigate and make an incision in this part as has been done elsewhere in the abdomen; and if surgery seems necessary for me (the reader/patient), I shall perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Return your stockings away from the body and submerge them in oil or raspberry wine; take another piece of wool that you have previously immersed in vinegar and oil, expand it over two knees and between belly button (umbilicus), holding these with a thread as per this method:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And lay two pressed and woolen lambskins according to this resemblance; they are bandages on the extremities which must be cut or dampened with water, laid in accordion folds within the waist of the trousers, one cutting blade inserted into the lower limb part and another at the belt line partition, two blades for each set of hips/hips joints area, ensuring all adjustments are made to fit inside the trouser waists.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases this hernia is treated artificially with pointed caulters placed under the skin near the site of rupture; and you hold thin-tipped cauteries inserted into that area to discover when it has been found the bladder containing water, at which point:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	e is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When through that hole is pierced and it'thy warmth enters where all moisture shall be expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Apply the knife with incisions, and scrape away with scalpels finely lit by fire; proceed at once until all of it is destroyed within your reach – be mindful that the flame should not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You know this operation is saving and extending life span, better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May if you find contraindthy inflammation to apply in the hour of cutting or during cautioning, when it causes discomfort for which I must treat, according as is mentioned hereinabove.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the groin is painful and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision according to what you recommend; when confirmed that we have discussed the meanings, it becomes clear that this hernia is pervious.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you make an incision in the area where there is swelling above any raised vein on the calf bone (the fibula), puncture the abscess at its lower part near the thigh bone, and stop the perforation according to the length of the wound.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	When I have opened wide for the water flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return your hand over the wound spot and apply pressure there with that object and this one, to stop the bleeding of the water (blood).
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which is inside for its healing (or cure).
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If contrary motion is to the water'dict in that hour when you pierce it: here, no pain will be from water but because of whiteness on the fabrication within which this opposition arises and prevents the treatment of water; provided that into the soil (inside) a small one has been inserted for its extraction.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	E understands that water returns, and it is gathered according to the physician'se method; when accumulated, it has been perforated as dictated by that particular medical practice, so that the humidity passes through its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	The text provided appears to be from an old medical treatise written in Medieval Latin or
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	In the section on the treatment of a cushion (or perhaps what is referred to as "cushion" could be interpreted contextually here, possibly meaning some form of
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	From the section on this kind of hernia, they fear being lost in major positions; thus I see your release and salvation through it best. (Please note that without further context or understanding specific medical terminology from Medieval Latin texts which can be quite nuanced, interpretations may vary.)
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are mindful of the operation in that place and with these instruments (possibly referring to surgical techniques or tools used for treating hernias). This line suggests a reflection on past medical interventions
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So that you say the instrument is placed in these parts where our organs are affixed and we require it here for various reasons such as acute excess discharge which escapes to the cavities of the body or due to impact (impact may refer not only physically but perhaps also metap each condition, suggesting a range of possible indications requiring intervention). The passage touches upon issues related with displacement within bodily structures and indicates various reasons for such medical conditions. Herein lies an account from historical medicine where tools like instruments are used in treatments to correct the body'dictions caused by certain triggers or traumatic events, as understood through this text fragment
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is in accordance with the nature of that body part and not should be inflicted pain; for indeed it's a grave condition (This line emphasizes compassionate treatment according to what suits each bodily region—meaning no unnecessary or excessive discomfort during intervention, highlighting
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When it is loose from where it was attached and its skin has become dark in color (indicating decay or rot), there is no measurement to be made at that location anymore.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May it be known that when gout is caused by a swelling of the joints, its dissolution occurs through the dispersal of the deposit when crushed those stones; and do not touch it with your hand.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is painful due to inflammation of the vein not be dispersed by force, and should compression be applied thereon.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it may be a specific affliction on this kind and over the other bones; and you will insert the catheter into the urethra, position them above these parts below, extract that from the bladder neck, unfasten the sling of vessels, bind together those which are bound apart by it, and incise through what is left to be extracted there.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if it is that flesh has already solidified therein (at the site of swelling or inflammation), then remove and insert what you have extracted from there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an affliction within any cause of the joints or between the saddle bones (which are part of the pelvic girdle), then remove all that affliction and cleanse it using a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the location of flesh behind is natural birthplace for it in this place (potentially referring to where a hernia might be located), then when you insert all that belongs here and extract with us, as we have discussed.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So once your operation is complete, fill it with rosemary oil and wine; then take care that the other remedy also enters while it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Given that this is an attempt at translation without providing direct translations for arch
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	The provided line "Capitol .lxiv." does not contain enough context or coherent words to offer a meaningful English translation, especially
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The text appears to describe symptoms and treatments related to hernias from what can be gleaned:
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness there is fear due to which it was remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, when they speak opposition upon that second which I have inflicted in this one herein described above.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	E declare that you have elevated the hips on a raised cushion; and positioned the suspenders of the testicles at their respective parts until they are tightly laced up undernethy men's belts, holding them firmly in place with your hands.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	When you insert an iron needle through one of the sections crossing at the center below where the vessels have been discovered, it is so done within that area containing the vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And from all parts where you have extracted them, use the scraper for this purpose in their places within the temple areas.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place an awl in those locations where it is faithful (secure), and insert one into the first of these spots on which pus has accumulated, and place another guarded thereafter at their backsides.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return those into the warm place by section of four times according to length, and extract what is added from healthy and decaying fats.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May you also bleed the entire body of its vessels, whereupon if the testicles are pushed out or come forth into these vessels, it deprives them entirely of nourishment for their purposes and thus they become brittle; so that nothing will grow well within those.
Capitol .lxv.	In order to accurately provide an English translation for "Capitol .lxv
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	The phrase in question appears to be Latin, and it pertains to the treatment of intestinal protrusion
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The phrase translates to: "When this hernia happens due to a section that extends out over the abdomen as part of the intestine's misguidance, when these bulges reach among themselves." This sentence describes an instance where there is protrusion or displacement within the body cavity (abdominal), likely referring to internal organs like parts of the intestines. The text seems rooted in medieval medical understanding and would have been describing a clinical observation with some degree of technical detail, indicative of humoral theories prevalent during that time period where an imbalance
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This protrusion (hernia) occurs either from the womb or excretion thereof; and these entrails are affected for various reasons: due to physical impact, concussion ("percussio"), thrusting force ("saut," often implying violent action), loud noise potentially causing distress in tissues ("clamor"), elevated pressure of some cause severe (possibly referring to conditions like ascites where fluid accumulency raises intra-abdominal pressures or due to straining, possibly associated with obesity - "semblantz"). Here the author is explaining that there are several potential factors leading to hernias which may involve physical trauma ("percuss
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The statement translates as: "When the humors are expelled due to distention of the womb and do not quickly settle back in place for long periods, they become stuck within each other inside this vessel [presumably referring to an artery or vein], causing what is known by various terms." In contemporary medical language, it refers to ascites where accumulated fluid (humors) due to liver disease or blockage of lymph vessels leads to distention and may eventually leak into the abdominal cavity. The term "apostema" historically related not only to a specific type but also generically referred to infiltration by blood,
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	E the patient'dict is when it occurs through one of its sections (the section refers to some aspect or stage in treatment), and at that time various symptoms appear on the seemingly protected area, and this comes from inflammation within the hernia/budel; all these conditions occur simultaneously with their body parts.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And when there are some movements of the intestine outwardly, this is called an enteral protrusion.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some times it is pain caused by winds, and some times they flow through the opened intestine wound herein retained; this excessive disorder of the humors (bodily fluids) in the bowel leads to severe, often increasing pain when pressed upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In treating this illness with these spices we must fear lest it be removed from here (i.dict that the remedy should not be taken away).
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And when commanding the malady of that operation which makes you return the intestine back into its cavity if you obey your restoration'thy direction, place yourself over thy colon between thys hands and raise thy belly.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is possible that from that much extracted (likely referring to bodily fluids or pus), so many will come out of the wound.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrap the affected area where pus is found under it to discover white hard chips of any division.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And place the testicle in water that it is between the whiteness of the bladder and where its cord lies, which is behind the uterus, relieving adhesion therein.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When there are tightness in the joints that have not any cause from the intestine wrapped within the white hard skin,
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause in him/therein, then hasten and bring that back into his abdomen now.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Envelop their limbs and place those around them strongly, that none of the vessels not prevented from causing any reason for infection hereby escape.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	E pause another check on the second ligament beyond this one here; and secure these two ligaments lying along what'dicts that which amounts to the size of his penis (testicles), tracing out all around him in a round manner, and fix it back here with you.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And insert into the joint of the thigh, through which flows blood and disease as we have recommended in what we said here.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And administer the wool dipped in oil (and placed on dirt), and pause upon it; apply the thread which we have recommended (and some times, as a cautery, white chalk is used to seal this incision due to fear of fluid discharge from within them, especially when they are sickly wasting away). Allow the thread to fall in by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the lavage of your body is delayed, then water fountains are thrown into it, and pause there until we have spoken our piece.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	In English line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise text provided above, we get:
Capitol .lxvi.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing methods for treating
De hernia ventosa.	From "herniatus," which refers to a type of hernia where
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this case with the ventilated (ventral) hernia, it has not been observed that any method so far is effective for its repair.  
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	E the first days showed that it was pain with having urine in the hernia, which is why you should place your instruments on top of that softened flesh there; and dry them out at this warmth spot until those vessels fall down where they are placed.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when the child is cured as we have discussed, then take care of it accordingly.
Capitol .lxvii.	The text provided seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing methods for
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	From the sciatica pain that is felt in the legs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some days ago there was a tearing in the joints while we had it here, and you must locate it now.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Not a cause from the intestines to the intestines; if there is one, it's scarce and returns at all hours of the day.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	May it be prolonged in the water; then adjust and fix the fissure within the cistern where you had previously immersed the belt (to treat), which when extended causes further expansion of the cistern, thereby softening both the areas for application of medicinal points and your touch.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The healing of him is with pointed cautery as it follows his description.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in some treatments of this methodology, the ulcer is placed on the patient'se two below their waist, and it is dried out for three days according to its length following a guideline.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	When strength is applied to the white clypeus that enters through where it has been discovered,
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Return (or apply) pressure with your hand on the prominent area of the navel and press it down onto the abdomen'se belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	When you bring together both locations (the spaces) on the top of the limb'dictum and adjust one with that other using stitches/suture,
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Here the limb is extracted and not inserted into its cavity entirely, nor stretched beyond their jaw, or any other cause arises that may prevent you from knowing how to treat a hernial intestine condition.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	When applying points here, they are placed for health improvement.
Capitol .lxviii.	The provided text appears as if it's from an old medical manuscript with a mix of languages typical
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	In the context of medieval medicine, which often combined elements from various traditions such as Greco-Roman and Arab influences along with regional practices
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In this medieval medical context where languages intermingle and Latin phrases are combined with vernacs terms or paraphrased for clarity: "When the scrotum in men is softened by resting," suggesting that calmness can influence bodily humors, leading to a more gentle state of health. The mention also implies attentiveness ("the watchful regard") as part of maintaining this condition—perhaps an early understanding or observation related to self-care and mind'sinfluence on physical wellbe
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Further elaborating on medieval medical treatises where multilingual and philosophical concepts intertwine: "And so, it is necessary to attend (to his care), as he makes the hernia appear," indicating that when a person develops what might be understood today as an inguinal or umbilical hernia ("jazer"), attention must be paid. It's essential not only to treat this condition but also "entirely enclosing (the softened area), over the natural scrotum," which could suggest a form of tight-fitting garment, possibly as part of bandaging or surgical intervention in their time—a precursor perhaps to modern compression devices. The mention of adjust
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	Here the text dives deeper into a treatment process involving excess (superfluity) in scrotal softening, which may refer to an overly moist or possibly abnormal state that necessitated intervention: "And if you wish," suggesting personal involvement—possibly from another physician assisting with care. The treatise then outlines a procedure where the condition is managed through three (
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return the incision between the sutures, and with care for healing of other afflictions within to ensure that fields become healthy again.
Capitol .lxix.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De castracio.	Based on your attempt at translating this Latin phrase,
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Translation: You understand that castration is forbidden by our law; however, we remember it here in this text for two reasons only — one of which pertains to the knowledge of physicians when dealing with such cases (as they are aware), and another reason being if there's a necessity due to other animals whose use or presence may benefit us similarly as horses do.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that castration occurs in two ways: either through withdrawal (atrissio), or by tearing apart of the section (fissura a seccio).
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When it is caused by suction, the way of operation we must perform is to make the creature submerged in water tail downward until their moistening and straightening are achieved and they hang vertically.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return those things into your hand so that they become resolution and do not appear again from handling.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May pain occur through a crack or section and you hold the beast tightly pressing on the tailbone of him to his left side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And fix the suspensor (which could refer to an instrument used for holding or stretching), and insert it over each part within which two processes occur together.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those purulent substances that you have caused within yourself back into place.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not place them over these of the sciatica joints but rather under what is above it that lies on the waters.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This disorder of the womb is better than what happens when traction causes any cause to the testicles so that the beast wants to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And take care of what is inside that has been healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Certainly! Here is my translation of each line from Latin-like medieval
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The phrase "de la cura de hermafrodozia" appears to refer to the treatment or care for sc
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The translation of the provided line seems to be discussing two methods for treating hermafrodozia (which appears likely related to hydrocele or a similar condition) in men: one is by introducing air into the space within the scrotum, wherein there may appear what could translate as 'a female figure' made of hair. This line suggests an ancient medical practice possibly rooted in humoral theory and reflects misunderstands about gender differentiation or a ritualistic component to treatment:
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some of that urine from within which is in the scrotum enters,
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is something special: for the woman on her five-lined region it resembles two testicles of man and three in each line combined up to that section where men have their paunches.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is composed of three species: two from men and one unique to women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men in which semen is produced within the scrotum and there are neither cure nor opposition in it,
Capitol .xxi.	Capitolo XXI. (This is simply Roman numeral notation for chapter
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Chapter XXI discusses the reasons why women experience excessive sweating and fleshiness, possibly relating to imbalances in bodily humors or other medical explanations of that
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Chapter XXI addresses how lice are adjusted for natural causes where they trouble and affect the flesh; also, some measures are emphasized in certain women within which symptoms spread even during intercourse with men. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Now cover with your own linen or wool and tightly wrap it around you, as well on the thighs and knees that have been immersed (perhaps in water).
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And when it reaches the innermost part, primarily in the entrance of the rectum, thus preventing the flow of bile (sangu).
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And care for it with that which cures diseases within, once healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May unborn flesh is the kind of meat that does not enter where it fills within a woman's belly and suffers therein; thus we must observe when it enters into parts further down as if by hook (and perhaps initially call this condition "ill-omened distension"); hence, let us record our observations while they are still lingering inside her womb.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol .lxxii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De curacio de alratica.	The phrase "curacio de alratica" seems like it might refer to car
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 The translated text suggests that the medical issue at hand involves a woman whose vagina is not properly formed or has experienced some small tearing: "Alratica [vaginopathy] is when the female's (the femna) reproductive
E es o natural o accidental.	 The phrase implies that either a congenital defect, meaning present at birth ("es o
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 The translation suggests that the condition may be due to an illness preceding it or perhaps from meat not adjusted properly ("carn nada") or by fine knots (possibly referring to threading used in surgical procedures): "It is either natural [congenital] or accidental, and this arises from a previous sickness that has preceded it. It could also be due to under
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	The line indicates that the issue may involve pre-existing matters within the woman's body such as her womb (uterus), belly or pubic bone area ("preon la mayre"), and it could arise from these sources along with blocked menstruation, absorption of pus due to infection, expulsion outflow leading away from normality. The medical practitioner would advise against coitus - which implies sexual intercourse – as well as enfeoffment (potentially referring here to childbirth or pregnancy) and menses: "It may arise from the womb of the woman, belly, pubic bone area ('preon la mayre'), including blocked menstruation
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The line suggests that the cause of this condition may be related to regulation by a physician (metrona), and if such an intervention is clear or obvious ("apparent"), then it should proceed; however, in cases where no immediate signs are present, one must seek out those who have expertise with these matters ('les tieus ditz' which could refer to trained doctors) possibly for further insight: "The cause of this condition may be related to the physician’s regulation. If such intervention is clear or obvious, then proceed; but if not apparent,
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	May it be for subtlety under pressure, and is suitable for the lips' sores; then with your touch break apart that which has been torn there.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied over the sores on the lips and when pause is given to the teeth of those who are most advanced in age,
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman is on her two sides, with extended thighs and lips brought forward so that the subtle knife can be broken through and the opposition lifted up.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Return wool and linen in oil and place it over that location, ensuring to keep the area covered all day long, so that the spot does not heal itself openly again.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	Must if the sciatic nerve is thick and long, then you should insert that splinter of ebony or myrtle wood into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May it be for meat, then suspend that one on a pillow, and incise that one.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Return (or apply) an extensive iron wrench, in order that the dirt does not solidify and harden within there.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And apply hot mustard for these days as directed by him.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And it is healed by other means of convalescence within which it becomes cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some pains in the womb occur naturally, and according to this tradition.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for apoplexy (stroke), the one in whose head this has occurred was not affected by any metal fragment therein, which does not cause pain through contact with a particular finger or fingers of yours.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The provided text appears as if it were written in Old Spanish or Medieval Latin influenced by
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Translation of the provided line: "The treatment for hemorrhoids and varicose veins that you are suffering from in the womb (uterus) of women."  
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	From the mouths of these vessels, blood flows continually from there; and when anticoagulants are present along with joint pains (they), then we understand them as health issues related to clots or thrombosis.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it is said that hemorrhoids and piles when in the region of the mother'dict do not appear to cause suffering or require treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	When those things are on which her touch is felt, they are those that have been healed by the mother'dictor (a term suggesting a woman with some form of medical knowledge or authority in this context).
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in wet clothes and extend her thighs or put on tight linen, and press those areas with your hands:
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return powder over those drippings from one of your scabbed wounds, as if with affection and resemblance for them.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into leather shoes for an hour, and then take breaks in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of bile persists, then it will accumulate in a coating formed by urine and stone fragments (silver nitrate or gold chloride) and resembling pus.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	When flour of barley and honey is mixed with water, apply it externally on the two limbs of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction is detached, it does not heal by itself; otherwise, apply pressure with two breaths and scarification to its breasts (mammary glands).
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply wool and immerse that extracted juice from honeydew or sap from pearlescence/amaranth, causing it to adhere to the location; apply care within which it becomes healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request what you see with sharp regardment, come that which has appeared to thee here in English:
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In caring for that which has been healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The text provided appears to be in Old Occitan or Provençal language rather than
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Translation of the given line from a medieval medical treatise, assuming it's written in an early form of Romance languages related to Latin and with possible influences similar to
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The given line describes various types of worm infestations and other apendicular issues occurring in the abdomen, including ulcers, abscesses (emroiya), fistulas (erpetromens), skin rashes, and others:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	When you have spoken about these illnesses and their spices, as well as the remedies for them in division (division of treatment or categorization).
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you dig into this tract of suppuration that is seen in the breast when diseased fluid collects, and if you wish to know how it is performed with iron, here we describe it.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And when you consider that the pain from penetration in their womb is sharp and pulsating with flow and feverish sensations, if this reddening touches upon those feelings, do not attempt perforation of it; rather provide aid for its maturation until the acuteness of accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you make a bed for the woman using boards that offer beds; and recline her on their backs adjusting their weights to be near the stomach region slowly at intervals, having their bellies expanded slightly, pause briefly between each expansion with gentle pressure from below (using something like straps or bands), thus ensuring proper alignment.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And she maintains her posture straight and administers the tool by which it was opened for those causes that will occur.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you intend to administer this tool upon the patient' extramammary (outside of her breast), and only what enters through the instrument should be from the mother's nipple and areola, not anything else.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	May it be that the tool is larger than the patient's breast, then you should pause on their skin so that no part of the entire apparatus can enter into the area of the breasts.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	When you pause the blood flow in the instrument below and hold it with your fingers, while allowing air into the chamber of the master'dictor so that there is no obstruction by moisture from above (the maire).
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and touch is made on the body' extrinsic parts (hands/arms), heat develops quickly; at that time it must be stopped with a hard stone from the scaphoid bone of the wrist.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the illness is expelled, then you pause in the dirt or oil submerged therein with which some sort of binding agent has been added to stop bleeding within a section presided over by the mother'thy hand.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause forehead and over the linen cloth washed in water where they are boiled together, it is understood that this refers to a treatment method used by doctors at the time: placing or resting above these parts (forehead/linen) submerged in boiling water. This could indicate an herbal remedy preparation for
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And thus it is to be cured with these two days of bandage that are used within the time in which one recovers, indicating rest and care during convalescence following a treatment or injury involving medicinal wrapping techniques prevalent at that historical period.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some waters are washed on the patient's face and used for that which is crushed in water with honey or some kind of alcoholic compound, placed into boiling water where they simmer together; then return to bandaging as part of their treatment regimen. This suggests a therapese practice common during medieval times involving herbal remedies (liri) and wine-based concoctions used for various treatments before returning back to the use of medicinal dressings or wraps, highlighting an early form of holistic care in home medicine where physical cleansing combined with topical applications were standardized.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the poultice is applied to the face washed and anointed with oil as part of your healing process, do not remove it even if you have heard about its curative properties elsewhere; they maintain that this treatment administered here in their division (healthcare facility) has merit. This passage underscores a common medieval medical philosophy wherein the practitioner at hand emphasized local remedy application with personal care, as opposed to external influences or alternative treatments outside of established authority—the healers' establishment within
Capitol .lxxv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical document written in Medieval Latin or a
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	It seems that the text you've provided is somewhat nonsensical and possibly contains typographical errors, which makes it challenging to provide an accurate translation directly from Latin or a blend of languages like Italian, Spanish, French, etc. Nevertheless, I will attempt to interpret your request by providing what appears to be relevant medical advice regarding gout directed
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Based on your provided text and the context you're referencing (which seems to be related to traditional views of gynecology), here is an attempt at translating what appears to be guidance for midwives concerning natural childbirth:
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you raise those limbs, make sure the patient's abdomen is compressed so that the embryo can undergo labor whenever it comes upon its head above the shoulder, and give it the second part, removing all superfluous things for proper cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is not natural and unlawsable occur when he suffers on his feet and the bulk of him stands before my head; likewise, if atop or near one's chest/breast it occurs, in such case I shall transform over their own backbone, appearing as forms they cannot launder.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary is with the midwife who must be wise and subtle in all these matters, so that she avoids errors and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When you are presenting their entire figure and within them something is signifying for the water and standing over it,
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the finger is in its natural head and it is forceful on the woman' extricable part, and at times her spirit becomes weakened, they apply that very servant who has them with their hands, and evaporate lecon of body using fenugreek seed and honey.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply a metal implement between their small and large intestines in that location where there is moisture, or secure it within so that its tongue remains inside as for fluidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Preceding that she delivers the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If there is not enough oil (or other lubricants), then cover the woman with a layer of pulp from pepper and hulled fennel, which will be mixed together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the flesh of the belly is cut open at digestion time (which implies during or after eating), then you must gently reduce those parts to prevent them from disintegrating little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not obey the inside (meaning adhere to medical advice), then lift her up on a couch and remove her feet from under her, placing the couch over the ground; thus ensuring that the woman will remain upright during convulsion (indicating some form of treatment or restraint).
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the masses are not turned down and fall out of place, then turn those back into position on their own body with this cloth pad or bandage, which will restore balance as needed by the doctor' extrication process (removal).
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of childbirth upon her feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly is above their feet, then you push them downward and make it small, and warmth that enters therein; additionally apply pressure with your hand on its little part and stretch these out gently.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he is inside the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make that protrusion conform his condition; provided if God will allow it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no water to cleanse it (the wound), then return the small part of the flesh gradually within while you take pauses at each second stage natural, whereby that cleansing will be done.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited that any of the waters we have recommended are retained within us, then take muscle from above and dissolved gum for good percussion in the mortar, and apply lines to the water collected by the woman, with pus below her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Return that part of it into water bathing in order to achieve relief for flatulence.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts of him are lengthened and need heating under the influence of mint and below pressure applied to that area for it:
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you place the patient under fumigation for an hour, then make them stand on a scale (balance), and raise their sternudder outwards while extending their mouth open wide; after that lift from the lowest part of their abdomen using compression in which they feel pain at most through one hole.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eye examination over your body' extrinsic muscles (which are held by tendons).
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you engage them piece by piece; and lift the woman onto her knees, holding her feet downward, placing those pieces thereon, continuing to assemble their parts.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not out yet, then lift his feet and apply pressure on them vigorthy; gradually press this area over the small intestines until the fetus enters its parts (i.e., comes into delivery).
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Return your hand and gently place the small part inside it back into its hole gradually, and command the woman to express herself through that opening accordingly.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eye salve duly hanging from one of its most.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When it is necessary for her reduction (to the body), if you cannot perform that reduction yourself, lift the woman and carry her to do so.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If you cannot move him, place the stretthy upon his bed and forcefully beat his thighs together; then administer to them the liniments recommended from their secretions.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has come about, then apply that which seizes to the cesspit and study how to reduce it back into place; thus form the second natural figure of the fetus again, and make her contract (i.m., tighten up) so that she enters where appropriate for entry (the birth canal).
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examination of the fetus over expanded parts and its flesh is at two from her mother'thy side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Covered that she holds her hand over the fetus and turns it little by little, which makes it easier to manage.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is said that there are three times of oil and soft tissues as recommended by us for the groin area upon which they rest, pause (or apply).
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And order it to be moistened gradually, and when you have done so, make that the same cover over one of its covers, and command it to lean on the right side as directed, and also command it to become compressed; perform this action accordingly.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared over the side (likely meaning "Prepare for childbirth from the side")
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the patient suffers from fever according to this malady, and you inspect the second limb within which your nail is inserted so that it can be drained of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the belly is hanging on the face and chest of him, then you shall incise that part of the belly to prevent it from being retained or delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit from twins or fetuses of many.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that the jaws move with habit, and some times three or four times a day they may become strange and tighten up; perhaps it is due to natural causes, but life itself can be troublesome sometimes.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	When those things are considered—even if they have been expanded and there is a second companion involved, separated by these intermediaries (possibly referring to instruments or tools), initially for natural expulsion from the womb as part of childbirth, and subsequently with some rest periods in between each session:
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If the childbirth is difficult for them and they come to us with concerns about unnatural figures, then care for these aspects as we have discussed.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the maid is subtle and uses water that makes things easier (perhaps referring to treatments or medicinal applications), bringing facilitation and delicacy, as well as delaying effects according to how she has prepared for healing.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember what formed within its womb and was aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some occur in the month of May one or two or three or four days (1-4), and even seven more (7), after which I must verify whether a woman has had an abortion, or another ten have formed, causing pain by measurement of the wise ones' savings.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxxvi.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance languages with some
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When a fetus dies, extract it out (or more contextually and sensitively translated as: 
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus (or a more sensitive rephrase could be: 
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Consider the woman lying down and her head resting (or to ensure a more sensitive rendition: 
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	Consider her head and body being on a bed (or to maintain the same care level: 
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Consider moistening her mouth with water mixed with honey, mustard seed, and sesame (or for a more refined approach: 
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Consider applying these oils and jellies on the mother's body to increase her comfort (or for added clarity: 
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Consider the location where you will keep the fetus (or more precisely: 
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If it is on his feet, then in the pelvis or between the ribs and backbone of him, to which place he turns when walking.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place another pillow or the third if necessary, to keep it attached by means of their tongue and not be extended beyond its proper length only in accordance with what is straightened out there (of the patient's back).
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	When gout affects the entire body, it is necessary that its removal be as swiftly done like toothache in one'se teeth for excisional healing of him/her.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the body has been dismembered, then bind it securely in the place where it was put on; and thus ensure that the entire body is outside of there.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	May it be that the other is an abscess near here and cannot be reduced by means of this; so cover that which is covered over there with a cloak, then extract out everything from where all has come together, either at the junction of the ma or in the hollows.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And when you make things in the other part of the body (presumably referring to another area above or below, considering "pes" is related to feet) and both legs, it implies that medical procedures are being performed on two
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the fetus is large or there are signs of acute pain, such as convulsions in the crown (top part) and excessive fluid accumulation at the top of the skull ("cap de lu aygua"), it implies that medical procedures must be conducted. These involve inserting between the skin flaps ('ditz espatum spinos') a small opening or puncture, through which to extract water with an instrument known as "alundat." This tool will come in forms corresponding to those used on other skulls for further treatment (capitol le qual es apropi est).
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is sick and pressed by the sternum, then it'thy part wherein moisture resides becomes secreted outwardly.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	May it not be complicated, nor does one have to undergo treatment; then proceed with the healing of the head as soon as you can manage it within your reach or ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there is a puncture in the stomach or it'dictly lies within it, then you must pierce that which contains the moistness found inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If it is about your feet, then the touch of yours will be light and in your direction towards the mother'se mouth will also be gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	May it be that if you clamp the belly and chest, then take away from your hand what has covered over these areas, so as for fluid to flow through them while they are inside of us.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May it so happen that the other limbs are bent and turned backward; when this occurs, as long as the metronome enters on the left side of the patient's body, then insert into its prepuce (foreskin), secure it with a cord at the head, pull outwards to draw their cap away from them, and place an unguent (ointment) or two in that spot, applying pressure so as not for the intestine to protrude.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted by an abscess that causes pain in it, do not cover it there; from here onwards, administer drainage of moist greasy effluvia (secretions).
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	With medicinal plasters; and follow up with the patient in waters that moisten and soften.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on the patient'se chest, then if possible use a needle (and inject medication): and administer what we have mentioned for the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then be inserted into leeches and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When there is no cause found in the secondary one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your treatment, then administer what we discussed for the curative actions of the compressed cauldrons which were caused by the mother'thy influence.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have an influx of phlegm and direct other treatment accordingly.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And there was seen in her belly another woman who had already been conceived, and placed upon that womb which has also given birth, thus is this child born as well.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Unfortunate it has happened that there is an abscess deep within the patient' extraneous body part (embelic); and when expanded by fever, causes swelling of limbs.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if he has applied for its cure and treated it over long times without being resolved (the patient), then nothing is accomplished by the treatment itself.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And now you press on him with various heavy cast applications for several days and an infusion of bone ash (to create the "bone cure"), then a further application: apply it to his shoulder; another one is applied elsewhere in his body, holding onto their hands—it's amazing that there isn'thy internal organ remains.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So wrap the patient in linen, and extract the stones from their bowels where they are positioned within the abdominal chambthy, having done so for a long time; to correct them with a small scoop (likely referring to an early form of medical tool or purgative).
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	When one is not strange but understands the water and provides aid to it for healing purposes, as a doctor emploзусє a remedy or treatment over time.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of treatment in which it is employed that lifts the maid:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how they bind themselves freely with two hooks on the extremities of both feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Even though this virtue may be subtle and either pain or fever (or heat from the body'thy steel), here it comes:
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	This translation assumes a mix of languages, as the original text seems to blend elements from Latin and other Romance languages:
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another appearance similar to that subtle and dirty putrefaction underlies it all:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Such pain is caused by wood or iron according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	May two additional measures be added to that part of him twice a time, and the length of those additional measures is one hand's breadth, and their height is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish to open those reeds (possibly referring to the cervix), then make a woman stand on her belly with her feet hanging down, and where there is already an opening between them (potentially indicating existing pores or entrances).
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method by which they directed these old practices:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of force by which he pushes the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship in which he finds his head's great concern
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E is assemblat a forcipem quala in extremitat est, et similitudibus vel iteris, et unques venturosies flectus sum versiculum illud al quale dentz, sicut dedet cum dentes sequelae e inscrivit e contegit.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of ashes few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of an arrow has a point:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of anointing has prickly pains:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps by which his head is held securely in place, whereby the top of the fetus's skull has been contained.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a splint has two ends at which the head is detached:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two bodies in Latin:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are used and when they multiply the spices of that item and place them according to their quantity on its surface, put it back into position with care and have people present for assistance as needed.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not perform these actions with those instruments, for their necessity cannot be ignored.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the second extraction (assuming "dextrcitione" is a misspelling or misinterpret
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the second daughter is held back by her mother, it's essential that you command the ill woman who restrains them to release their child, and apply pressure where necessary; hold your hand tightly over the mouth of this person and on top of their breasts if so directed. If through doing so she becomes defensive or hostile (i.e., retaliates), then it is justified by law.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a knife and pierce through the covert area, stopping at that burning herb where it chars the mother'se mouth; apply honeycomb along with rosemary and anise seed, chamomile flowers, and cassia bark.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave, and rests upon the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Now insert a catheter into the mouth of the patient and introduce that end inside the cavity of the uterus to expel its contents.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Return that joint in pain as before we had it today and its second sister is fast approaching with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if this treatment is not to be abandoned, then command the maid that submerges her left hand in sesame oil or millet paste; and insert it into his/her navel as per recommendation, doing so with force until such time you find the second girlfriend. Once found, introduce your right hand underneoptionally (this line seems incomplete due to a possible translation error), which may suggest that another action is taken involving hands or perhaps additional context was lost in translation).
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	From where it is permitted at right and left hips with ease of movement.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	When adjusting its quantity of contact, it will obey and avoid attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the wife'thy mouth is constricted, we already have recommended the treatment with a sharp instrument and medical knowledge of water, medicine made from plants.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not all causes are removed as recommended, then be cautious of touching that area in cycles of abstraction; but if whatever is ingested enters the mouth and goes to the woman's thigh, anoint it with oil and fourfold medicine; this will purify that place on clear days and dissolve any remaining foreign substances.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When constipated, the illness is elevated to the head and stomach, and treatment for it consists of intermittent fumigation under which medications are administer extradition:
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May those from Antiquity be brought under smoke treatment using nuts and dried fruits.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an object by which a woman must retain her menstrual blood and the second sign:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Such pain is of glass or lead (glass arrowheads).
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the subtle part is stopped under the chest and the large part above the focus (presumably referring to specific areas of inflammation or pain), and when the filth effluvion (referring perhaps to discharge associated with infection) is also stopped below the breastbones.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Here comes a line from the medieval medical treatise for translation into English, as follows:
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	From the care of an infant' extramammary does not perforate.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Much child does not pierce and lift up their butts (which are already subtle and agile).
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Now cover the lady who has pierced that sign there; and if not, then pierce it with a splinter of gout stone, ensuring that it does not touch the sinew.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Return your hand above that which is soaked in wine and oil, and take care of the one who has entered into it (the wax).
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May you fear that it is inflamed, then rest in the fracture for several days and observe when the child will start to complain.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And you have already anointed the pupil at the bottom of the stomach for congestion or suppuration; so that once this congestion is secured, and it has been treated with what we had discussed about its cure and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of caring for those ulcers that come about by chance.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The abscesses that come down in the lower region and large intestine, which arise from behind or within one of the parts:
E es una fistula o motas.	It is an opening or ulceration (a "fistula" refers to a tube-like
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that connection is ancient and permits the outflow of moist or sticky vapors (poyroura), and some passages through these openings are present;
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those penetrating things are guarded by this fluid that the patient excretes through it and for expulsion, some also employ its emesis (vomiting), and others suffer from these fluids; hereby using their own vomitus for egression purposes.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	From those fistulas some have wandered into the cavity, and entered into the meat of the urethra; they also enter at the junction of the thighs and in/into the navel area.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	When the fluid (or pus) in a penetrating or non-penetrating abscess enters the belly button, it is that you place your spit therein and introduce subtle erasers of clay or iron into the fistula when no tendernthy disorder occurs.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is tightness in that area, they enter subtly within the place where you feel pressure or pain inside your body.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that particular one in total nor proceed with any cause of indigestion or worms and windiness, as we have said before, then you understand it does not penetrate, and thus take care of yourself.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the urethra, it signifies that I must treat the patient'dict output urine from there and prevent its escape so as to ensure that this location is under medical care.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May it penetrate within the joint of the thigh or into the bone and inflict pain throughout the circuit, so that this person is in danger of having something enter inside if not carefully checked before entering the bone, resulting in additional pain on departure; such treatment will be immediately applied; there'dict nothing beneficial here nor does it solidify.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those penetrating ulcers there is not a cure at hand, and the treatment by doctors will work on which they have firmly fixed their attention.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	When not potent and ancient (ineffective remedies), healing by iron is expected as per your recommendation, and once applied, it will have its effectiveness proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that person feels cholera entering their colon, immediately place your fingers inside the abdomen to expel it there.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a thrust deep within the abdomen and between your thighs, it is certain that something therein penetrates; hence, do not attempt to work in that area or touch it while we have had said discussions with you about this matter (your condition).
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Mayhap there have been those who said that they are healed in themselves within healthy bodies.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	From the medical practice in which it is hoped that you will apply cautery subtly, as before was done; and place that spark inside the fistula until it reaches outside the bowels; then repeat that application for this or three times with what remains of these hardened veins resembling a feather quill from an ostrich.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If it penetrates inside and does not enter the hole where there is something contained within (possibly intestine or chyle), then dry out the interior of that which contains the fistula on the surface of the navel, thus drying what' extruded through this opening; when you have dried it here using moisture from beyond its boundary, and inside where outside extremity has entered, both are freed (from whatever is constricting them).
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And purify those stones that are assembled with the penis hook and do not burst due to any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May there be times when the flow of phlegm enters between you and your patient's cavity while inside them, then it is necessary for that person to use cauterizing instruments like fire or acute medicine; such treatments adjust their bad habits well: this leads to detoxification of those congested channels, and absorption of excess phlegm.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	So are the medicines in which one applies and performs operations; when they have been restored, health is regained, without fear of repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has entered into the belly and is lengthened on the body' extrinsic surface; then insert your bowels therein, and question within at this place.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you press with cent scores and between you and her it is velvety or of fleshly texture, then not an operation in this place but rather through the way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	La cause here is to administer one of three remedies: or that which cauterizes the ailment we have mentioned; or else after restoring its cavity for so you may enter and treat those parts, preventing any intestine from coming out; avoid injections as they might rupture contained bowels within it. Furthermore, apply what remedy we've stated if very strong is to heal quickly, stretch the wound or use another sharp instrument of acute extremity for crusting these fistulae that are present inside the section; and perform the restoration of all parts affected by such pus above its exit point from below. If poultice applied externally does not solidify it, then rupture may occur in the abscess within the buttocks area due to malady exacsiting through there, leading for blood seeping outwardly; and if purge is produced by such pus coming forth outside its natural exit point from below.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases the fistula is closed according to this methodology: when you insert a tool into the fistula, and it's within the belly button area on the skin above/below (belly) and at the edge of the buttocks, then take said tool with forceps-like preparation needles as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that outer covering of the field, and attempt to insert into the foot within which continuation is taking place for this purpose (concupiscence).
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May if a point penetrates the edge of the anus sharply inserted there by that thread you insert into it, then extract and adjust those two ends to be even with each other; after which apply ointment for one day or two days at most until you can see where the thread enters inside the flesh between those extremities of the thread and where these meats are located among them.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Return care until it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the drainage of the fistula is not penetrating, then you must make it so in any way that suits your preparation, but do not insert anything into where there should be no incision; and apply to whatsothy have prepared inside as a healing measure.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of spume (pus) through which the fistula is pierced: its curvature causes acute pain and the other division does not cause it to be necessary, thus they come as often as needed.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From the seam of hemorrhoids where blood flows in that cavity.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "Hemorrhoids are second in frequency of occurrence among diseases, whether they occur between the anus seeming like flesh from grain or these swellings being similar to fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	Of those small and large, which are the limbs of that person at this time (now), and their joints, and where they exit through the anus, in the hands and feet.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Even when there is little moisture in the air of these times, causing water to flow from under their buttocks according to certain measures and colors, it follows accordingly with the state of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: And for its cure, you must command the humor that has entered into her colon so it settles down and emerges within where your expectations are directed (where things appear).
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And then you cut and bind tightly the parts where those lances are placed on your skin, applying pressure to their wounds with them.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May if the points are not tightened in those places due to their moisture and softness, then take a rough cloth or waxed thread or linen fabric, fasten these around them, remove it carefully with tweezers at the point of incision, sprinkling some ash there during preparation; that they be kept for use as cauterizing agents when needed.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Return those for care so that they may heal within them themselves now.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the belly does not swell upwards (indicating edema or distension), cris-coil it in the place where there is slight biting, and wash with the water that is already present in the colon which contributes to its outward expansion when the abdomen expands.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are drained from the buttocks, then their cause is phlegm (excessive mucus), and you grasp those with your finger or tongue, insert them back inside where they were before when healed, applying care to ensure that these are moistened by what we have said within which should be cured.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who incise with skill (suture), as done according to this technique: take up the thread firmly and insert it through that needle already in place on top of each piece above; wrap around threads from outside into pieces wrapped tight, transversely at first time. Then sew open wounds newly created by thrusting the point backward with a swift motion along the length (and breadth) of this cut area and secure thread firmly to prevent further damage or deterioration—seal quickly using these methods:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When all is given, and only that one not used is left untouched, to ensure the surplus of the sanctus chest drains from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Now apply pressure over the belly, and place it there on the colon as well, commanding the humors to stop flowing backward.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within the box now; and when it heals, take care of those inside with oil or any other medicine contained therein while they are recovering.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treating hernias (or more specifically here could refer as 'bulges' or '
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Related to the healing of leaks or ruptures caused by an opening, possibly referring either to a hernia (which is like nature's construction) due to some sort of defective gaping outwards in tissues: 'Of treating
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	Since such conditions are not cured in traditional medicine, you must create punctures either with sponge or your own blood drawn out from that place which is wet and carried by it (the extracted pus), preventing its coagulation; moreover take care of them within where they have become consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you hold those sharp points forcefully inserted until they bleed, and then take care of them so that they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of curing fleshiness, it is key (or essential).
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You understand that this is the end and not just relief according to the color of the body'dictively at the shoulder joint level, pain throughout the entire body with emphasis on parts nearer legs and feet; therefore you must provide clothing (garments).
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when the fluid has entered into the loop of the knee joint and is lodged in its crevices or grooves, and it needs to be removed from therein – take care of that as well.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then burn the second one that precedes in his thorax.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers sharply protrude on the surface of the body and come frequently in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	In care of him/her it is that you extend and insert either faithful or inside the one within the box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it as previously mentioned, at the focus or in urgent medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now it has been removed from inside out and outside in with the same tool that you directed earlier.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May the small beetle is thickly felted or tubular on the surface of the body above the navel and when it stings that part, it hurts like a bite from an insect, causing pain all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, fill a cup of lead or iron according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "It is that part below the needle which reveals subtleness, silent (not pierced), wrapped up so that over it sits the learning of this subject and its revolution.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to burn away the insect as mentioned in the cauterization of the anus, here it comes:
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In terms of the instruments used for administering cupping therapy.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is pains caused by silver or lead ingots poured downwards, and some times from small to large instruments used for their administration; the one administered in children's healing is smaller, and those causing tailbone pain are small ones.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	La form of christer grants little or few relief:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the downpipe in which the bag is tied, according to this methodology; and it's there that the bag is attached at intervals as specified hereinabove.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	E the extremity of him placed under restraint, which is deaf (so it's not heard) like a lion retreating into subtlety; and in one side there are two disruзуptions, and on the other aspect another traumatic lesion, with its size determined by the ugliness of the rays and an additional small injury placed.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is a bag where their medicine of the bladder of beast or wool lint is resting, then its handle is this hand.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	If it is pierced through by forceful movements, and the space between these where its thickness lies, then:
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Elevate the abdomen on top of their two, and lift up your hands in turns holding over there where already homes or an ointment is applied; apply one type of external application made from oil or albumen or mucous membrane of fenugreek or similar substances. Apply that externally to ease the extramater (extra abdominal fat) and use your servant, applying pressure with a purgative bag and expressing it until all fluid comes out into the belly through which has already entered; afterwards lift up their legs back inside and raise hands again over there where have been lifted before.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If medicine forces it out (the humors), take as much of it as possible; and if sleep comes about in one night, then you may wake up revitalized tomorrow.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May you plaster that in the abdominal pains and eye inflammation of him/her, then repeat the use of caustics inside until healing occurs.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is bleeding or wounds in the belly, then apply gentle pressure with a soft and warm sponge; these are what children use to assess (the situation).
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treating diseases or afflictions (The term "curacio" here suggests a form of
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 In the division of treating diseases where it was necessary for a free person to choose their care and remedies according to what complements each other, we dictate here how that choice should be made regarding these illnesses and medicines following their compatibility.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it is said that boils are various according as they occur where the pus forms and how they appear therein.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the humors that are in the body' extrications be withdrawn like a swarm of flies hovering over the head, neck, chest, belly, waist, or limbs; they appear similar to these creatures among members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	Even when considering some illnesses for treatment, such practice allows a pause in thought and guidance regarding other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When discussing simple diseases of the head, when recalling complex conditions will arrive at their consideration in the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So when the pain in the head is simple and not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to brain movement or appearance, at that moment touch the cervical gently but firmly just enough; do not delay your action, extract as much of the worm causing catharsis (likely referring to intestinal parasites) from there. Extract according to its quantity if no other cause prohibits further bloodletting, mostly when this sickness has been in residence for a long time and shows little signs.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is a flawbition from the contrary of the affected party, and you must protect the groin area against overeating and heavy foods (wine and such), do so accordingly.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May if from mildness you prevent any cause, then it will be lessened in food and not approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When applying pressure on the patient's skin with an applied hot or cold poultice (ointment/vapor), if it causes ulceration due to putrefaction, continue treatment by adding more oil dressing so that healing is effective in this medium wherein his wound becomes sealed.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	May it be certain that the application of cauterization is safe; if so, pause over the ground (the affected area), provided that the dust which was recommended for after-care has not recently changed and the air remains as before.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed and become cold, then rest on hot compresses within so that it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the child is large or has insufficient space and appearance (implying perhaps too many clothes for their size), and if their lips are not adjusted properly to breathe through, then fix those as instructed in how they should be stitched together.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May it be that the child has been discovered between bone and flesh, and not restrained by you but only with a small suspensor; then attend to that part which was found, apply medicine therein as directed for corruption: capsules and forms of meat (grains) that cause swelling in them, command the malady to consume these foods until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If there is rot in the bone and it does not stick to the bone, then cut off all this putrefied matter with water (presumably using some form of cautery or removal tool), and take care that no more remains.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases an artery or vein where blood flows could become blocked and not be healed by medicine, then investigate the artery (and if you find that it has been damaged), cut into that with a sponge or ligature; and if necessary to provoke what we have said does not cause discomfort, perform cauterization where the blood vessel is already severed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pains are simple and small, then the cause of them is chilliness; thus make powder on those areas until this morning' extraneous moisture clears them away.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The main sentence translation: The purpose of the poultice is this: take one part of sesame oil split in advance, two parts of dragon'dictum not yet extinguished (probably some form of medicinal herb or powder), all mixed and crumbled together; it forms a complete paste, which must be applied inside where clothing adheres to the skin while lying down for good constriction underneath until fully absorbed. And when coagulated with honey from the same dragon'dictum, this is completed.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one performs only lathargy-cauterization alone and not in your presence with sulphur or fire from the furnace of Dragon'dicts, it is improperly done.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation on the great humors is performed when it is decided that they are stopped over these and have not been recently disturbed in their sources, wherein the air has not changed.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has been altered, and especially in summer time, you may not understand where to place this powder, so take care of those things we have mentioned before; thus rest these dry substances above which they give a potting effect when placed on such areas (implying that it refers back to joint pain or inflammation), or pause the flour and water mixture from bread dough inside where hands can be put in for massage, taking care of those things we have discussed earlier; furthermore take care of these remedies while they are healing.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you have a bone fracture in the body, and it is small, then extract water through movement.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And direct the treatment of skull fractures as poisonous (or venomous, depending on interpretation).
De las plaguas del col.	Of the diseases of the colon (or "plagues" in older terminology referring generally to
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	When the worms infest in the colon (or "plagues" as they were referred to), there is no difference in treatment for it, and when dealing with a simple case of intestinal parasites at the head end (this could refer to an area nearer or associated with one' extrinsic part like appendix issues – although this interpretation requires some speculation due to archa
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	When nerves or an artery are present in the colon (which may indicate more serious conditions), it is not simply about choosing between treatments; rather, one must avoid any care that causes violent stoppage of blood flow to these structures—do so gently as a healer and explain with clear intentions why this action should be taken away from nerves and the artery.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No pressure is applied to any cause of total madness; the substance of nerves keeps it alive in the brain, which they place at the source of all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If water is needed for healing with medicinal waters, then some of it will be poured into a pot (potentially filled with either rose or no-rose oil), and heat when washing with this water along with other stones used according to these instructions, together wrap the moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the child is large, administer stitches or clamp down their lips, and take care that these are applied while they heal inside where possible.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth or pain in the lower area operated upon by cutting and piercing it herein (i.thy), then make a puncture at that place for draining of pus, if necessary.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the child there is an inserted artery and they have succeeded in making a flow of blood (arterial puncture), then separate or dry out that one if necessary; otherwise, cauterize it to cause effusion towards the outside.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May you have inserted the vertebrae of the spondylosis or all, and thus saved the veins in the neck; once done, adjust your lips to the bone seam with suture without touching that area; carefully restore it back to its natural shape, ensdicturing tightness for structure through dressings over several days until healing.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May if the child in their bones experiences pain before birth, then you will strike that area; and if there are fragments of bone within them, extract all those pieces which you can from them; but if it is not possible for you to enter inside, let the fetus solidify (become flesh), separate it out, and remove its entrails.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the child is new lately, then grind over that very dust which has been recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If there is an ulcer in the patient'se body and they remember to take that water (medicinal liquid), then heal that wound with it at his own place of residence.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From pains of the chest or illusions when it hurts between the shoulders and is felt in the space or on the back, shoulder, or neck/chest area.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is from a lance or cottle impact, and at times you measure the depth, then also consider that when wind enters through the malady into it; understand that the swelling consists of dirt (implying pus). Thus, realize that what seems to be living matter in this condition may actually not have life.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is no depth and the patient has recently suffered from itching in their chest or belly area (the first sentence suggests a condition related to excess moisture within), then pause until the initial hour after applying ointment, without tightening that which prevents the body fluid from being deep inside of them and returning to the heart. After this treatment for any ongoing itching throughout the day, stop doing so (translation with some interpretative liberty due to archaic language structure):
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your disposal, then rest in the bath filled with cold water collected from below ground level to let out watery secretions that come up; and make the gout sleep on top of this muddy water so that its flowing essence can be adjusted within.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May you have passed through three days or more without spasm in the groin nor malady pain of heart and chest constriction, and use then other beneficial measures for that patient; thus care is taken with his cure and another form of treatment until he becomes healthy.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	May it be that the healing of him/her is postponed, and even now locked in rest, know well that a fistula has formed; therefore attend to this with your care.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the child has pierced through space or skin and it's simple on the surface of the flesh or buttocks, then care for that which is preceding stitching if large, or powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May there be pain in the bone already and open joints present (already inflamed or separated), then use a lancet to extract those pains if they are apart from each other.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, let them be led out that the vermin may be extracted from them.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other accidents that occur in other body parts, restoration is achieved by the fluid we have mentioned beforehand.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From abdominal disorders/afflictions.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomgy that you experience in your belly is great, small, or wandering.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great many causes there may arise inflammation of nerves or tendons within their sheaths; thus, it becomes evident that both a vigorous and subtle union is formed between them.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When a small disruption is caused by other means (likely mishandling or additional factors), making their reduction difficult, unless you prevent them from entering your body and becoming engorged with bodily fluids, then your breast may swell.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	So that the best interruption occurs, for in that place it is difficult to reduce the hernia, just as with those special arts described hereinabove.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And you understand that there are four methods of treatment for abdomen issues, and may some surgeries be common ones used in treatments of other diseases on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other stitches communicate with each other or themselves in the abdominal stitching, yes but perhaps also between them within that very same stitching of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	When each of you is exposed or declared, it is recommended (to do).
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So when the patient is small and suffers from some cause of a hernia due to it, making reduction difficult becomes one of two possible reasons: either because of diminutive size (reduplication) or if the hernia has become inflamed due to cold air exposure.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when the fluid enters, at that time cover what you have submerged in water alone for your cloth and swab moistened with vinegar or sponge dampened by running water (or cumin, pepper), to aid in dissolving the inflammation within.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And when joint pain occurs due to moisture in the body, and water alone is better for resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the protruding part with water from which herbs have been soaked; thus being cured by a little cause within it all at once.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If you manage to free the patient from this treatment, divide the rupture into small parts using an instrument with which wounds have been dressed.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial text in English would be translated as follows line by line:
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the tool, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp division of the limb, and another not acute, and a subtlety that is not in relation to bone structure; for both divisions are blunt or oblique at one point only.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the vermin is increased and comes out of the intestine, then make its reduction according to its own form in its proper place, if it'thy at all possible thereabouts; this would be better for you.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and it's in the lower part of the belly, then you make a space for the hernia with your hands on their backs, and place cushions under them where they stand; if it's below the stomach area, hold their head and shoulders securely using pillows.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Even if the disruption is in one of the parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration immediately so that whatever creature (implicitly referring to an intestinal matter) inside can be expelled or addressed accordingly.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And when you administer it into large and departing pains,
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the small pains you have prepared for me (and), take care that your servant is between your five palms, which holds together the total disruption in their mouth and adjusts their lips here to where they are sewing some cause with another as directed by them.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here's the line-by-line translation of this medieval medical treatise text:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And if they are small needles moving inward into the flesh; and large ones difficult to enter through the vein, for that reason they move towards subtlety and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And where the needle is fixed in any of the patient' extramand parts that were previously prepared for injection, to ensure that the flesh does not burst apart and dirt (pus) does not accumulate before its solidification.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	No surgimiento of surgeries be extended for that the patient is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These surgical needles are carefully placed in the small wounds; it is sufficient to use either a needle or thread for their stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Might the second suture be common: and it is that you tenderly apply a needle to the four extremities, from the chest downwards through both thighs using an appropriate pin in terms of delicacy and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has entered these four extremities (hands and feet), reduce the needle of that surgeon' extricated piece by which you are holding, in such a way that the wound cavity rises up to its separated part on the ground, so that suturing with this cloth-bound thread occurs as usual.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When there is a pause in any of our stitches about the size of this limb'supreme,
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch is for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	Et such a suture has been done by the cobbler wherein there was an illness in their belly, which consisted of the major part of a palm (a significant amount), and it came out due to disturbanthy surrounding intestines that were two palms wide from each other within the stomach's cavity; hence he has reduced what had been for hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The child is solidified in the spaces of fifteen days or less, and it heals that part, and apply moist heat for motion sickness purposes, as time goes by (in their disposition).
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E other doctors had not healed it; and by miracle fire, they could not cure that wax which was in the place where no treatment nor medicine touched it, but might occasionally relieve two visits a day with water of honey inside while foc sanitizes.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two types of surgical thread according to Paracelsus' accounting.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin stitching the neck, and insert the needle from the lower forearm to the upper thigh.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters into the navel and in that region, as far down as all of it goes; lay siege to the tip where you inserted the needle earlier today; then penetrate into the other end of this part entered yesterday at its own extremity.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have pain in that area, then make another examination of the same kind between the upper and lower parts of this section here; let the outside portion outlined therein also be explored with an inserted needle into the other extremity of this division.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it is necessary for that which has entered through your entrance (possibly referring to an infectious agent or some form of illness) to enter into the cistern in the extremity of the navel, where all else enters within you.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Here begins with the side of this body, and takes that away from its extent at the hip joints on the other side, thrusting into those hips where it previously went in before, taking out what was therein; and also removes whatever is taken out by means of a needle inserted through the coccyx.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And give them both some relief and another remedy within what you have done, according to that which they need most for their restoration as per your judgment.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum total of this suture work is that you sew the skin with which hairs grow (hair), making a stitch at the part of the extremity of the coda, and let it rest until it's completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second kind of suture proper to it be what Gualia speaks and recommends herein; this is that you sew up the half-strength flesh which heals his, adding all parts necessary for one'dictory part according to nature; applying another limb’s extremity onto your own similar extremity in turn.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you hold the needle at your designated area of departure, and push that into the parting in that spot, taking turns with both ends of the catheter; rotate the needle so that it enters the partition between those two endpoints on the catheter.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	When those bones are turned around them, and pierce the parts inside into two divisions of each leg position in opposition to their sides.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than ordinary sewing for the purpose of rememberance, and it follows this method which they recall using beforehand.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gallien (Galien being a name likely derived from Greek or Roman phys
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	It may serve as a guide or explanation of surgery, where the belly'sincis are rectified using two needles; this allows you to insert your fingers into these at several points, and begin with inserting an inserted (or sewing) needle in those places which surgeons cut along during their incision process within our bodies.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the intestine' extramural location (abdomen), it is easier to sew than at other locations within the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the art of healing medicine be judgment for other illnesses.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is when you complete the recent chore done for their sick body today because the air has altered that, and return the intestine (and cushion) to its cavity; then pause over that corporeal dust.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the humors, then pause on that spot where you enter now and make hard leather and clogs for the fields; they shall be fortified with iron and glass as far as possible while curing other illnesses within which one is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines present at this very moment, then rest upon that which is immediately available and start applying it gently, allowing two days of use with what you have on hand as guidance; provided during these times when pests are simple to manage without additional remedies.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin may spread infection to the main limbs, then cover them with wet linen or rasped oil, and leave it there for a while until they reach between the joints where bones meet and around the sinews.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, they move forward continuously; and if the inflammation has reached its cavity, then it becomes blackish as blood through that aperture, mostly when excretion occurs within the cavity of yours.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Be aware that what is of gross intestine healing is better than what is in the fine bowels, indicating a recognition of the importance of maintaining healthy gut function compared to issues within the finer structures or parts of the body such as small intestines (budels subtils).
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult for the intestine that they are calling "goner" to receive healing from outside help due to several reasons: (1) there are many veins in it and their size in this; (2) its subtility, as per its nature which relates to nerve structures.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the dirt is linen (material), then obtain that which has just been made and with your straightened hand reduce those swellings immediately, whereby these are reduced by pressing them down manually.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If space has been passed through and black or dark pus has come out therein, then press that faithful piece of flesh over the spot where it is discolored, in order to expel putrid blood from the vessels within.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here applies the fluid that is another of those ligaments, and places two extremities of the hanging part of the limb near the ground floor here so that on you it can be applied for strapping or removal from the brace made with this material.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when you have diseases in the intestine (budel).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When you have caused a disruption in the intestine and it is sought to restore it back into its cavity (so that nothing comes out of it), thus come those who were previously plagued within their abdomen due to blunt impact from lance, where they resided as detritus or ruins at the seventh part of the stomach - these individuals are old and infested with a fistula (open wound/ulceration), suffering from treatment actions and wind turbulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And now you apply the treatment to him who has not yet been healed within their sickness, may it subtly expel that which is at the focus of health and stabilize the location.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Here you have already secured the place tightly above where an evil event occurs in their belly; and not allowing any such malign accident to enter through the places they put food or drink into, and between bathing times when exerthy is exerted on them.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when experienced practitioners place a large cautery on it (the intestine or hernia), as per this methodology: take hold of these cauldrons, and adjust the patient'thy lips with them; holding that in their mouths tightly. When they clench their teeth around those instruments, attach to them firmly without being detached.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And rest at another place if necessary and continue making more forms as needed according to the amount of all the swelling.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Reduce and apply it to the swelling, and break those attachments within the hernia inside so that the hernia is healed; without causing harm to any part of its structure.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced by a sharp object below which comes from the patient's animal companions; place your hand on these field extremities of the intestines you have, detach them carefully and apply this same finger to securely hold those edges together with needles and threads attached to it. Now reduce that disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This technique of sewing is not our only way, but rather a method based on trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the child is large and wide, especially if it's in one of the smaller intestines, then they are not immediately curable here but require subtlety, and there will be no complete cure for them at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You understand that all children and apostema when they become olden or aged, and it gets ulcers which are not consolidated nor healed by a full arm brace for any time without falling apart; in every part where there is one, we call this fistula.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	E fistula according to truth is a tightly woven, hard, white thread in which there is no pain and with which itching occurs similarly when one suffers from gout; therefore they call this the "itchy thread." So they insert that into their bodies. (Here 'itchy' refers metapthyically rather than literally to an irritating or uncomfortable feeling, similar in concept but not literal translation.)
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In dampness, which causes sweating, and as for moisture that is lost in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved here, and it's scant, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes and their symptoms are part of the healing in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Once you have made an understanding of the treatment for the opening (fistula) which is caused by operation, it becomes clear how to proceed with care and healing.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, this one among these ulcers is from the diseases difficult to cure and does not receive care or attention; it demands work and lack of knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth to the ulcer that does not reach these places which are mentioned herein, and you await its healing, and wish to understand it, then take either arrows or iron tools, and if the ulcer follows a straight course, examine this area with your own eyes.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	May it be that if the fistula is twisted, then investigate what subtle lead under its own body will elevate and curve to rectify the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an abhorrent ulcer present, it is not within your power to attempt on them.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now apply the poultice for him with his own pills and run water from them through it; this moisture will flow to other applications of theirs, downward in each direction.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood upon all these causes and see them clearly established beforehand, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: for it may be that what has come about is an apparent fistula near or in joint space, distant from juncture points of bone, nerve, artery, vein, or one of those locations which belong to you and have been disclosed.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry up the fistula as directed by its nature, and maintain what is present in that filtration area which has formed from decayed or corrupted flesh (or body parts), including any originating within the carnal cavity or segment of limbs/bodily appearance—and take care for it while being healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May it be if the fistula is of deep lengthiness and secondarily sealed, cover that which can be inserted into its depth as much as your arm'dictions allow; cleanse all his rotten bones with encapsulated acute medicines, and insert those capsules inside the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended at arms.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	When certain humors enter for a few days into the cavity of the fistula caused by decay, medicine sharply dissolves all that enters therein.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore that which is inside with wax, as it generates healthy flesh within until healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	May it not be healed by this water, then apply treatment as recommended previously.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May as well if the cause of fistula is blood or you must certify it, then inquire about that and its dry state according to what we have recommended; do not prohibit any cause related to veins or nerves or major body parts from being discussed like this.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	May it be that your bones have been discovered and there is any decay or blackness within, then take care of the affected area wherein the corruption resides entirely; attend to this water which embodies you inside so that healing may occur.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healed and the brace does not help as before, then you will understand that you have not yet reached total cure; hence observe carefully on this limb both its refinement and purification at every stage of treatment until now, and restore what has been lost.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, take honey; but if not, then understand that the corruption is deep within the body and has not been resolved yet; hence you must address it there as well.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bone is rotten or can be pulled out with it, then now you may use those small forceps which I have agreed upon for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If there is a stone in the bones, then you must carefully extract all of them without causing any harm to yourself or relying on your strength alone.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May you encounter any counter-effect of the moisture, but in their ignorance have no fear or mistake; therein proceed to examine those ligaments and bones if they are here, and break them down.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	May you not be ready with the bones of your hour (hips), then rest on a soft bed and let it warm that which makes the bed warmer for those bones, ensuring they are not solidified or constricted, keeping in mind what has been inserted during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having feared under the pot of boiling oil above or in an Egyptian cote submerged below (in fatty substances) or among some fats from which their ligaments are separated and whose bones have been shattered by these attachments, they must be removed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	May if there is a great toe with the bones of the knee or thighs similar to those herein described, and when it has been ruined from this place so much that only its face remains, then after such damage for as long time as necessary, use restoration tools on it just enough until no remaining blackness (darkness/corruption) is behind nor deformity.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	May it be that what has already been ruptured is a great part of the body and damage to the bone marrow has occurred; at this point, it becomes necessary to close both (the damaged areas) completely inside where they have come together due to corruption, so as for them to heal properly.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you recommend that they go into their thighs to soothe and assist in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time is extended for that error of doctors within which the putrefaction occurs and corrupts body materials, and its cure takes place while the fistula focus has opened up, where fires (burning devices) are applied throughout the body to dry out moistures.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And when many doctors have passed two years around it and not in their liquids but in the field of medicine, they are called to treat.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E ven la camba de lu e les substances que corren pels thèrmes d'icel·l, i el cos del homes havia estat molt establit i la tona era lliçament cítrica.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And insert the attempt into one of those organs, so that the attempt reaches the mouth.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Return and examine quickly those instruments, placing them at all parts of the limb.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And when that which I have discovered and prepared from bone enters my body,
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And if it was not in the bone but that which had broken and been welded together, you have already begun to fragment it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Returning your hand for the restoration of body meat by conventional medical means over long periods has not been achieved.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Return and explore further over the second joint on the bone, following up from where it was first discovered; continue to apply pressure onto the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	When I find that the water which appears from it (the patient), has been properly furnished for gentle care and restoration of him/her, but is not restored yet.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And so you discover another wound and continue to carefully insert the bone piece by piece, restoring what remains of it with medicine from there, solidifying healing until completely inserted within a palm's width, extracting that which is in its marrow, and restore it using medicines; this consolidates his recovery.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	No iteration in the operation of leg and foot is necessary except for the disposition of the patient'dicts fluids and their tolerance to pain and fear of death, for they act throughout all hours due to excessive bowel movements after syncopal events.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	So heals the entire body, and nothing is left of hardened flesh; good fortune lies in his disposition within his own body, which returns to its natural state; conversed through their dispositions without causing harm during walking or for any reason at all.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May if the bone is protruding in the joint and you tighten that according to this treatment: hold onto it with a strong thread, command someone else to stretch that out on its extremity; pull back the first thick thread from where you have tied it; position that over the flesh of which the bone sticks out, extending the tissue outside so that you can saw through there and remove the flesh as desired in order not to lead the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When one uses a sword or tablet immediately afterward (when it is permissible not to use the scalpel and thus prevent further corruption of the flesh), then:
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decayed and not prominent, it is one continuous action between them, and rot occurs at that place or in those parts; apply fast pressure therein, and hold that piece from which the corruption within continues to be maintained by a continuation of cutting through.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And as for the second hole according to the location of decay, which we have mentioned before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If there is a deformation in the joint, open that deformed joint and cut away the bone from other parts of it.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If it is a continuous decay of joints due to deterioration (corruption), then it'dict not by chance but rather because they are weakened (engineering).
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or breastbone, it'sin easy; but if you seek out wherein said corruption appears to thee and remove that part therewith, following any manner thou findeth possible for thyself, and apply those things unto him, he shall be made whole as long as no contrary action of veins or nerves takes place.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Be aware of the instruments and tools used for setting these bones according to their situation, as well as their size, bulkiness or delicacy, fineness/size, smallness/largeness, hardness, rarity; so that you prepare all types of surgical instrument necessary for this operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You understand that this operation concerns the specialty of the instrument you are using; when you have great skill and extensive knowledge in these tools, as well as witnesses familiar with instruments for diseases, then you already possess what is needed by your hands for treating all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E yeu so en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instruments que pauseràs comuns ambilles, i les quals procedures executareis per a vostra prohibicion qual expeririarédes sobre altes.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw (This line seems to describe an instrument used in medical procedures during
Forma de autra serra:	The provided text appears incomplete, but I will attempt a translation based on the given fragments and context.
Forma de autra serra:	Form of other saw (This line suggests that there is another type or form of surgical instrument being
Forma de autra serra gran:	The shape/form of the other large saw: This phrase indicates a reference to an alternative, possibly larger version
Forma de ray:	Shape of beam (This line could be referring metaphorically or
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Its head is like the shape of a star'dict key (this line likely describes the physical appearance or form of an instrument that resembles both its handle and points in some way) and their tips are shaped like staple pins ("astragali"). Here, "ray" could be referring to another surgical tool used for suturing - possibly a needle with specific pointed ends.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	They are not merely crushed but have their heads struck down when they become corrupted; or is the mouth wide open (This line suggests that instead of just breaking these tools - possibly referring to joints affected by a condition such as gout, which was mentioned earlier), there's an intentional forceful impact ("striking") on them. It might also allude metaphorically to
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger knives (of other tools): Here, it appears that a discussion or comparison is being
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of smaller blades/knives (likely referring to surgical instruments such as scal
Forma de razori lat:	The shape/form of the larger blade(s): This line indicates that there might
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape/form of the other saw is sharp (a part that has been separated and shown here), with edge iron hardness shining through it; its body parts are thrusting spears(suggestive of a blade or cutting instrument). The line might be discussing how to handle, maintain, or perhaps even construct such surgical instruments. It likely refers to the importance of sharp edges for effective medical procedures and may also touch upon an era when these tools were manually sharpened ("f
Forma de lu:	The form of it (referring likely to an instrument or
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 The shape of his razor, having a concave curvature.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of alternative scraping tool:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of other shaving instrument for curved body part:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of small scissors like an attempt:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The form of instruments with which bones are cut into:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of other instruments: smaller ones (This line suggests that there are additional tools or devices used in treatment which could be
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another instrument; this resembles an arrow and its tip is cut to be displayed in certain places on the bones within the body. (This line suggests that there's a particular tool, similar to an arrowhead or pointy object, which might have been used for medical purposes such as surgery or diagnostic procedures. The term "cut" indicates it has been deliberately shaped and its position is specified on certain locations of bones in the body
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of an arrow-like object that conforms to the ratio where it penetrates through the bones. (This line indicates there is another pointed instrument, likely similar in shape and dimensions to an actual arrowhead used for piercing or cutting into skeletal
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its tip is triangular with a sharp edge. (Here it describes the design of this pointed object, stating that one end forms a triangle and has been honed to have an acute or
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and its shape resembles all the causes mentioned for ratios and instruments and cuts (this line suggests that this particular medical tool was crafted using Indian-made steel or cast iron—a material known in historical context to be utilized for surgical tools. The description further implies a connection between various types of metal implements, their intended functions relating to bodily exam
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the arrow tip and bone cutting (Here it connects back to the previous descriptions focusing on tools used for penetration or modification of skeletal structures, potentially referring both to surgical
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are compressed or caused internally/externally, and when you treat this decay with medication that does not relieve it; sometimes the corruption spreads throughout a member without contacting any cause—if you insert your instrument into that body part where there is no visible effect of harm (indicating an attempt to address internal issues by inserting medical tools), then evil forces escape from which, potentially causing more severe damage or even death. This line suggests the belief in malevolent spirits being released when decay spreads without apparent cause and emphasizes preventive action using a cauterizing instrument inserted into affected areas as one of those measures to halt further deterioration that could lead to fatal consequences due to evil interference, rather than solely relying on medicinal treatments.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E il soggetto a cui sei affetto, è che quel membro è nero dentro dove si accende la fiamma che lo ha tagliato o se puoi portare quella negrosità all'interno di esso entro in quello corpo nel quale spinge tutto il corpore; quindi ti troverai svelto a conoscere questo.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If it is caused by the disruption of certain causes, similar to a sting from scorpion or poisonous viper or rupture and appearances, then:
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or rupture is in the affected part, then you inspect it and do not give space for the corruption to enter further into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	When you have access to the cavity, then cut that part of it surrounding the fireplace'dict in your brachial region and do not leave space for decay within the fireplace furnace.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that person encounters it, then you should insert your arm into the waist at the joint intersection.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another passage occurs and I send the cough to them again, then in that case it is the death of the humour; administering this other cause as much virtue will be needed for healing.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When there is a disorder of the part above described (of the foot), then you must enter that into one of its nodes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you go downhill in the foot, then cut it all over the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May you enter into the navel, then make an incision in the cushion within the umbilicus junction.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If rot (corruption) has already reached the spleen and cannot be stopped in this life alone, then remove the sickness from it to prevent death of the patient'thy disease.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	E the difficulty of inserting or cutting the limb is that you tighten one ligament at the joint where it will be inserted, and another over the location; extend both ministers their respective lashes to the parts, holding them on each other's legs/hands; separate the meat between two stretched out sinews within which space can be fully revealed; thus making insertion or cutting possible.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is wrapped around the entire body such that it does not touch the affected area and allows for drainage of the adjusted injury and applied dressing, this means: When you wrap the cloth completely over all parts so as not to touch the sore location, allowing for proper healing of the set wound with dressed bandages.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	May you dull the flow of sickness when performing work, and if necessary cauterize immediately where it has occurred, or place some restraining powders on the sore; return to your medicine within which it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return its injured limb at ease and take care of it so that it heals properly.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And recommend to you that which comes into the home on your foot, this matter for which I advise you today, which has occurred due to darkness and heating assembled at the fireplace in your foot.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When that corruption occurs first within its body part (leg), it is necessary to attend to the entire leg.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that home prepares for itself to go into the limb where it feels pain and heat from within, inserting its head (presumably referring to an instrument or treatment method) at the joint, leading to healing.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Once there occurred that same doctor's malady in this matter of mind.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now I am affected by it, and so the excess water that accumulable over my body's essence is being applied; to cleanse the cosmos of its substance, thereby preventing further overflow into other areas within where it may congregate.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E il appello mi ha chiesto di posizionare le mani su di lei, e non volevo fare alcuno sforzo sulla repercussione della superfluità, poiché la virtù del male era quella dello scolpimento.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	Put him down so he can return to his earth and come back to me who made him whole again entirely, and he is cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This sentence translates to: "It has not been healed yet for it serves as a helper concerning what comes from this illness, and by which it is signified, according to which treatment should be carried out.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of cure for the navel and quality of enema administration with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess forms in the cartilage of limbs and its spread within the body prolongs until it collects into a disease, then we break through and perforate it; thus expelling the sickness outwards with whatever fluid was previously contained therein, using a thin cloth underneath as draping. It does not penetrate deeper into bone or nerve/ligament tissues, rather only applies pressure internally without forming an open fistula (a passage for fluids to escape).
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	May it be so if spaces are extended within where the decay is present in any member, then such condition shall not worsen and increase (i.m., a fistula).
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And for its cure is that when you turn it all in together as if with a cloth and mostly so comfortable that does not stick to the place due to decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the intestine will stick and not have been affected by any previous action, then attend to it with a cleansing enema here in the colon (anus).
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Return that which has gone out, and let it flow for so many days until the curve is purified and the pudendum (genital organs) are moistened again.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the malady does not tolerate Egyptian medicines or ash water, then cleanse it with that same water mixed with honey and herbs; this is due to the property of honey which purifies and cleanses, causing adhesion (attaching itself), primarily when excess dryness and stiffness have occurred.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have taken a few waters and feel your belly has swelled up, then it is time to administer the clyster that will expel the flesh from within of yours.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	It is that wax drippings and dissolves that which has been roasted and distilled; what you administer for the purpose of applying certain properties they already have in their treatment with ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the rectum is dry wherein no catheter of the enema has been received, then gradually increase that small amount and pause in a wrapped blanket made from Egyptian or camphor wax until it is increased.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the applicator is large enough, then you should attach the lips of it and insert as much quantity in there where stool adds itself.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the flow of his body' extraneous matter is elevated to above parts under him, then it dries up that which is in those places where he lies within so as when this excess flesh presses upon the curve of the body (the abdomen), causing constipation. When such accumulation occurs and pressure builds inside due to swelling, thus hindering his bowel movements:
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to incise the sinus within the body of the patient according to your desire, then you must perforce what has been prepared for that part which will carry out and release any cause held back in the joint limb area as per your preparation plan.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	E apply sustained remedies suitable for the course of water that stretches beyond their clothes.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	E the cloth is so much that it communicates with all parts of the body; and insert am foreskins in the middle of the womb's opening, placing an ample amount enough to cover its extent, and extend over another piece of his linens according to the quantity of the tract, pausing on a distant part of the lining of the womb so that treatment can be carried out without disturbing it.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When someone is above the instrument of breathing, it tightens in any moment such that the moisture adjusts within their body cavity.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	To know whether what moves through the bowels is moist or dry, or indigested matter remains in it—or if nothing specific comes out of them.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	When you thus examine the location of that swelling, see if in it the patient feels pain or has an abscess therein.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medicine is prolonged in this manner and the material that has adhered to the orifice of the sinus sticks on, indicating attachment, you should apply it as directed today (and tomorrow), but when applying the mud paste, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it happen that from the curve of his body some subtle space will open up for a virus to enter, do not despair because he has you with him; as cure takes place in those where flesh generates late and becomes diseased when sickness appears, at these places curative homes come into effect.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the belly swells and is filled with indigested gas daily, you understand that the belly does not stick; but if delayed adherence of the belly is prolonged, adjust it through medicinal drying out, and if these remedies are moist in their essence and state, they will be dried as envelopes with wax sealing when placed on excessive supplementation.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here comes the source sentence to translate:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when it seems in that action to come close without touching the patient directly with your hands, use incense and myrrh and unguent (ointment), spread all over the melt where you are standing, as well as lines above the drape and bandage covering their body; apply these ointments also on the wax that has been inserted into them which is already engorged.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, you will understand that decay is in its early stages within the body, and now examine bones or hard limbs; already it has been cured by fistula therapy as instructed above (upon standing).
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment for paronychia (infection of the nail) and torn/cut finger, apply dressing and bandaging.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have collected that amount of water we discussed in the division and do not interfere with your care, then return to collect all excess moisture from under the scalp, apply heat thereafter as needed for healing benefits.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is firm and healthy, and its additions will ascend to the parts of division, begin puncturing it with your needle and inserting that part into where you paused below a subtle angle on the point of the unguent (medicinal herb), pushing down gently so as not to forcefully move out from under pressure; ceaselessly doing this until all corrosive medicine inside has been removed, leaving no trace behind. And take care that your ointment remains within while healing takes place.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the deterioration is already present in the bone before you insert and extract it (for there comes none of healing for which remains once the bone has been decayed), then proceed accordingly, as nothing can be restored to health that has succum extricated from its place.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the heart and spleen go down into it (the body cavity), then trace that part as remembered by you, and ensure that such is healed within.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May you examine the foot by percussion or incision therein, whereupon if severe pain ensues, then immediately commence to perform an embolectomy of the groin area and dry out (possibly with a sponge) the affected site above the transverse section of the spleen below in relation. This will induce acute pain into the protruded organ—this is due to excessive superfluous flesh at that place, which now becomes necessary; herein lies care by means through which relief comes from moisture release (water yielding).
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May adjust it herein lies for the strong men among us who are entirely flesh and bone as well as in their joints or skin.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When there is numbness in it (the joint), or when it'thy original nature lies within these nut-like parts of the body;
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not he who is born from dry figs of this fruit suffer illness and that which originates in the joints greatly ails him.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Of those who are fat by nature, their section is tender, and it is that you must insert one into the bone marrow of a sharp stone (probably referring to using a needle or similar instrument made from hard stone).
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May those who are born at the junction find healing difficult; therefore, be mindful of their abdomen.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it happen to those born in this place that you insert into their meal the nutrition of themself within the bone, and use one of these instruments for cutting as necessary, taking care that what is inside remains healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When the constriction occurs between their motions naturally or due to birth defects of home (possibly referring to trapped wind in pregnancy), or from childbed recovery, or because they appear ill-shaped; thus preventing that which has become constrained within them returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place a layer of thin lead between them in oil so that they are not congealed together, and separate those layers, placing another one inside until it is solidified as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if there is congestion in the veins of your hand and you dry it out as soon as it forms on the limb'sup, then do so accordingly to prepare its shape for that part of the body.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From incompetence (insight), they become swolthy.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	When varicose veins are swolthy with melancholy humors and come in motion from the limbs of the body, they mostly appear in their sacks (creeps), especially among travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now when you administer purge for the stomach of black fever several times to expel it forcefully, and apply pressure on the patient' extraliving (presumably referring to 'vena basilica', which is likely a metaphorical term or an error in translation), here we go.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May the cure involve their iron as follows: one method is that it should be made clear and drawn out that sickness black (sickle cell anemia), and the other way of treatment is by raising the vein and extracting it completely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return it (to its cavity), and command that he refrain from black humors producing foods which bring forth these conditions.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment for phlebotomy when veins are filled and blood flows back up into the malady (abdomen).
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation according to this method: you who lift the cushion of the thighs, if in water they are tired from walking on feet, place them under bath and enclose the cushion with its own tail inside until it darkens (tires out) and veins become swolgy; or when exercised without bathing present at hand to cause a fracture.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity; place your hand over it either at the back of you (the patient), in the long part of you, or at the base of you (the patient).
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; clean and scrape off the vein throughout where it appears due to that illness which worsens towards blackening (possibly referring to gangrene).
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	When you remove it from under the neck, take that white thread back for its string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And take your tool that is within which has been raised and set upon the spine, and hold it there for an ounce of gold.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And if you need to secure another section of that same section with three days' force and burn the area below where the vein enters from above,
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Return that and cut it up here in the lower part of this foot segment, raise each piece above where the second section starts, and lift them out from over there atop which is located to start the third section; place those pieces back into their respective positions:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Here comes the sentence for translation: When you extract that from either side of what has been pushed out or extracted from all sides, then infiltrate everything completely; and accordingly insert it therein.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you don't obey and lift it up, then insert a double-headed needle made of iron into that place and draw it out; or introduce the lance slowly and turn your hand over the entire area until it goes down.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that entire atmosphere has escaped outside, then rest over the place where wool is submerged in wine and oil, roasted or unroasted; this will cure whatever is inside it.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is contracted and twisted around its partitions, which we have not mentioned before, now you must cut into that area of contraction throughout the entire course of tortuosity and envelopment of the vessel, and place it inside where it has been elevated.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Guard your limb so it does not insert into the vein and cause trouble therein, for raising that is difficult if you lack caution in doing so. Serve your prudence when dealing with such matters.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient in which he suffers is as follows:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of an ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not inflamed with arrows as they pierce the veins nor does it suffer from sharp pains so that it doesn'thy harm blood vessels; and because of its large flexibility, even if subtle, it can insert itself into the vessel through its subtleness; we have an excess amount in our bodies.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein in the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hammocks found on Arabic and Indian lands of tailor, where there are few trees or grasses that do not sprout herb or provide shelter.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And when it is caused in other parts of the body as well (in these areas), then also use cushions for them, and perhaps serve on their legs and chest (and hold hands).
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the genesis of this illness in Luke is putrefaction that sees toothache along with poison from snakes and worms, as well as other venoms emerging between teeth (inside) and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, wrap it around one of those heavy lead balls from which the patient's foot is attached to II dragons (two), and do not smell that metal suspended on the cushion.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Whenever there are movements of fluid from above causing issues in parts beyond (presumably the body or internal organs), wrap them up with lead and spices to contain it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is prolonged, then you cut a part and wrap the wound; do not insert that which comes out while cutting into it, for if you insert what comes out, it contracts inside the flesh and causes abscess formation and bleeding in the location and becomes sickly.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that treatment which is increased and extracted gradually, enter until it's out of the body and does not jostle or agitate any part of the limb again.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein in healthy men who are at the length of their forearm and fingers, I have already felt it reach me to here that one has reached twenty finger-lengths.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it occurs during the hour of his medicine, then insert the needle into the abdomen and pierce that long track down to the thigh therein, extracting all the fluid present in the matter for several days as part of treatment; applying putrefaction specifically for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And this vein sometimes has movements, and mostly when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and arrives with these excrements from each movement, which come down through every one of them (excretions).
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	So take care of that ache as we have discussed in division and about this fluid which has been mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the worms generated under the skin, it is called beefy disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in no land without us being frequently exposed to cattle and vermin; it lies between the navel and flesh, spreads throughout the body, climbing upwards, downwards, exposing each member'dict hand within which disrupts the belly button.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of him is due to the putrefaction of some humors, worms and snakes along with roundworms and pinworms in his belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es temut per la malicia de lu," (And because of his malevolence), when he goes on foot and stands up straight, his liver becomes inflamed within him, and it is destroyed in the process; thus doctors are frequently compelled to move.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you intend to heal and extract it (the patient), only do so if necessary with your walking apparatus and appearance; thus ensuring that as long as this is over the body part in question, keep it dry and apply pressure firmly until then, after which exert forceful compression.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a blow to the body and you do not cover it immediately with cautery on the spot where it resides, fear arises from this place which causes an increase in location along with our presence here together.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May if that being reaches the head of the belly tightly above it and secures itself there, and keeps dry on top of him/her, extracting what's inside; for when the abdomen uses its self-cleansing power from medicines to evacuate putrid humors bad meats cause, guard against.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of worsening illness above.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is well-known in our land, and the pain that appears on limbs, it can be transferred from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	When you have already seen that second person who recommends it to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called upon a sick woman to the village, and found her arm broken at the brachial vein of the arm, so I set it for an hour until that inflammation moved towards here, perhaps using bandaging as if she were still alive when running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And now it enters into that place of pain and tightens in the muscle, apply here for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Return correction in the other limb while entering into it from here (or referring backward).
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Recommend that I should rotate my entire body as it comes, and if there is too much movement from one limb to another, or the speed of members within themselves.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not water be found among women' extraneous parts today.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Even if it is not water but due to the fact that she was of weak constitution from both dry body parts and revealed veins, here arises her altered sensation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have a thick body of veins constricted by this treatment.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to heal the patient and they feel that pain, at this time it does not seem apparent as having a feverish blockage in breathing with them (meaning there is no sign of inflammation affecting their respiration), then stand over them carefully and drain away any excess moisture inside wherein lies the illness's essence, and cauterize that location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not time the removal of heat from their bodies immediately, then cure that which has been evacuated through the body and what exits due to drafts; these are foul pills (medications) and those similar in nature for healing purposes.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of stones (or gallstones).
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Say they are diverse according to species and by the joints where I cook them: for their diversity lies in those with large points, small ones, concave, hollow, dull-sounding; also of those having three angles, tongues (referring perhaps to limbs or organs), staffs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	E from the shoulders of the bed when seated in it and passes through the bones above the skull whereby its acid becomes strong due to intense drinking or drunkenness, causing blindness (scotoma), vertigo, groaning/groan-like utterances at the throat ("huels"), inflammation of the tongue, speech disruption and vomiting akin to cholera's appearance in flesh—and it ascends where there is moist white fleece resembling that of meat (likely referring to swelling), causing yellow exudate similar to skin tone.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if it appears in your limbs, do not engage in healing or removal of the stone unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	May the joints of the sagittis when they are in the chest so that it is close to the left breastbone and fixed therein as a cause not leading to death, resembling movements of the limbs like crawling of black insects, and causing weakness throughout the extremities along with feverish sensations and syncope; thus you understand that death will descend on all.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the satire has struck the lung and exhaled its vapors from the swarming flys, and the vessels in the chest are raised upwards, the color of the humidity changes; great spirit is expelled, demanding an air purifier.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the seat in the body is within the belly and pain occurs in the small backs (the lower back), it may be severe with strong pains and suffocation, not affecting all of the patient'se muscular members altogether.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is gas in the stomach, then strong vomiting of some improper food comes forth.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stone is in the belly and stuck there, a hole has been made by it or its thread/fabric through which there'se offers little hope for cure with removal from within.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the seed is in the bladder and it has expelled urine (indicating some sort of blockage or impaction), there are discharges from within you, possibly indicating a cause for concern at these separated parts; if pain occurs on the abdomen, wisdom dictates that this may be mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members be like face, neck, and shoulder; shoulders and spine of both sides, clavicle, scapula, ribs around them (these are related to the chest), along with cushions/support for limbs' appearance—all these parts shall remain safe according to major precautions when the needle does not damage a vein or artery and is non-poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And if you recommend water from being this way, so that it indicates the treatment for curettage.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in the home of laughter within the eye'thy tearful wellspring at the root of one's nose, extract it from another part taken apart after applying lead gray to its other parts; and heals therein without harming thy throat.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extract another lancet from a jar for use in the patient'thy knee area; occasionally touch with one finger, and it was hidden such that obtaining it required only their small extremity where they griped the staff, which was large among sharp swords of Turkic origin without any hilt.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Senate is present here, and there has been no accident in their hall.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extracted another poultice from a home in the quarry (Crus), which was Arabic and had healing properties; it is that one to which I applied my hands. It was already immersed in the hot spring of him, and so I gently handled it therein, extracting it further down into the hot spring until his Crestia (patient) was cured.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extracted from the home who was sick in his belly and considered that he died because of it; henceforthy I placed him on the forum for XXX days without any change caused by their dispositions, focusing on the extracted matter and caring for it, so that no accident befalls upon them.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	Here comes another man who has been struck and crushed in his face, the swelling is formed by pus, but not causing pain here, nor do they show any signs of illness to these people around them.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted from the home of the king' extricated at this place in their nose and had already descended seven stages into smallness, entirely concealed was its essence.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And they called it appropriate for applying the poultice of said saddle within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you grasp the child by their small parts (presumably referring to limbs or body), and examine whether there is something subtle within them that they do not feel, perhaps a tender spot detected through light touch with your finger; once identified as located on the extremity of said part.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And fill the place where it is acted upon and reabsorbed with plaster for I realize that this location becomes apparent to me as the site of digestion, over which attention should be directed.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	E never happened in the significant location that the sickness reached this place; and you continued to hold on it with an instrument, for not more than days occurred without such incidents happening here; strengthened was the patient'dict within these intervals wherein I felt my nose touch them each day.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then apply the acute and corrosive medicine for a few days until there is an outbreak of itching; take that on immediately with forceps to scrape off the subtle tip (which sticks to the bone), and crush down its extremity.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Even doctors judged that the nasal cartilage is not restored, and thus they rebuilt it, along with pus formation consolidated; healed the ulcer completely, without recurrence in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And you are recommended such quality of extraction for some herbs, which rests and signifies what I have not said before; these parts of this art and definitions that belong herein were neither comprehended by me nor included in my narration.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The skilled craftsman compares little above motions; and where there is water present, it stands over what is absent; new operations are required for external causes when sickness sinks in.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	So it is said that sapphires are not removed from the body parts in which they are fixed, but by two methods: either through the place where they intersect or contrary to the other divided portion.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When someone enters through that place or is descending into its flesh and being thrown out again:
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not observe treatment at the time of feverishness, then whenever possible keep yourself within these days until the flesh that is in its environment (the sick room) heals and your removal/exit from there occurs naturally.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Even if they are seated and do not purge themselves as required, let them lie there with the cold application and attend to it daily until gone; already cured has been achieved through this method.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not observe your treatment for more than three days, then when piercing the circuit of flesh within that bone on all sides, it will significantly increase in the area where the incision is made, and remove what has increased therein.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the splint is fixed on the patient's skull and has progressed into one of the chambers of the brain, appearing in its thickened aspect as those accidents which have happened to it; if the splint pervades the cranium, do not remove it but keep it there until recovery occurs. But if the splint penetrates through the skull, death will be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the stone is not fixed in the bone but only on its surface and does not penetrate into the cranium, let it remain there for a few days, without causing pain to you from these accidents; then your engineering will be done at both ends of the stone.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is not motion and you do not observe taking out (presumably medication or performing some treatment), then administer poultices along the circulation of the saddle area as we take them together, with care for the place where healing occurs inside.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the seed has been touched down upon the part of the body, and is affected by emotion, then inquire about this thing which you have tried; if you feel this thing as well, draw forth that substance from your bowels to what will suit for its accommodation.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot operate on it due to the contraction of the flesh and lengthening of veins, here neither nerves nor vessels are present; at this point, proceed over the flesh that has been expanded so that extraction may be possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you find that the flesh is covered with arrows (likely referring to signs of injury or illness), then tear away the meat where it has been completely separated, and use your knowledge accordingly; if you cannot remove the flesh from its detachment in a fracture caused by these arrows within those which protrude.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any part where it forms, then use your hand and forceps together to remove that swelling completely; subtly ensuring that the pus is not broken and continues its difficult withdrawal from there as well as during this process.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot press on that of your hour, then lie down for days until the parts in its circulation are healed, and repeat this action as long as you continue to be treated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May if your body has caused contrary flow of blood (perhaps referring to an imbalance or blockage), then apply the remedy that we have mentioned for healing in its own place/chamber (the physician'se room).
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Even your vigilance of the intellect or vein or nerve, and administer medicine as needed for escape from sedation; make it easy to relax and calm down quickly and firmly in all manners possible when you do so with what is within your power.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore make contractions of the saddle to ensure that the hernia is held in place by its figure-shaped focus where you must perform drainage (castration) for possible relief.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If it is not within your power, then use what you can manage for the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the sutures that are torn apart by the opposing parts of another cut or any part that has already proceeded from outside into these wounds cause swelling in the area above and below the incision, thus necessitating attention; therefore you attend to this; and if it is painful without instruments like forceps (which may be used depending on how much pain there), then pull out those sutures.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If retained in the bone, then twist it according to contrary action until the substance enters into the bone and expands within you.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave that for cooler days and repeat this within ashes (in smoke).
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is from the seat (of pain or ailment), then you will move that there with lightness.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May it be that the iron has been struck and you wish to apply pressure, then insert your finger or whatever is soft (if silent), into the hollow of his body within the belly-button area, and push gently so that inside the curve of his abdomen goes what was inserted.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the seat is concave, then you will push that substance strongly into it, whereby the seat becomes filled by that very same thing.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the saddle is inflamed, then you should bend all of the body where it really is if possible and take care that which seems necessary to do with water at that time.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the belly, or abdomen, or bladder, and it presses against you when you touch it so that you can feel it (palpate), then take care of that area which makes contact with your hand, pressing firmly on that spot; if there are any worms present inside as indicated by the urge to defecate or pass them along, extract those worms and place some soil in their location. Treat this area until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps by which hooks are drawn out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs with an iron hook that they will be as if in the blade when taking them upon the bed to prevent falling.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those are specials, large, small, and winged ones according to the magnitude of the seed' extraneous pulp (juice) quantity, as well as by its lack or paucity, fluid volume extent, and contraction of it all together.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of expulsion pressure from this constricted part is felt as a painful sensation in the limb, and forcefully with that dull sound:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pushing force from silent body part:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	ayxi cum rax pe sa qui è alliegiatu in la sagaeta concave et est promossa ad aquis tela,
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of which the blood is used to bleed in this way, these are pulse-carrying vessels that you touch upon your hands (palpation), herbs found on both platforms, and veins present at two tear ducts from each nostril; prepared vessel in the forehead' extrinsic region, and a vessel in the tip of the nose. Also include guides along the neck, lower lip vessels below it, upper lip vessels underneath them, tongue blood vessels (lingual), as well as veins known by name - algic ones - and those present at intervals on both sides of your mouth's lips; these are called labiales in Latin.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that have been cut in the breasts be hot (warm), and it is a cephalic artery; they are wild and migratory, composed of branches from both basilica and cephalica vessels; this people call them "vein of all the body," and domestic ones called “chickpea,” which vein pauses in the backbone (lat. vertebrae), named as ‘heel,’ where it appears above on the chest, that is to say, visible through its appearance: ligament; also known by vulgars or commoners as "vein of belly," situated between this small ear and butt, which are two branches in limb.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh are three veins; one of these is where it bends at the knee joint, similar to that found in wild boars; another is called saphenous, located within the fold of domestic pigs' hindquarters; and there lies the sciatic vein, similarly situated within the fold of wild boars. There are other veins here resembling those mentioned above.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of the veins that are attached to the ears is ancient and migratory, causing wounds and ulcers on the head'dictated by poor circulation or old age.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the cautery blade in your hand, which is that instrument being used here, and insert it into the vein within where the bladder (fluid-filled sac) exits at the back of the throat for drainage or treatment purposes.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	When you raise your hand above the vein and artery, divide them at their parts below and incise the vessel thereupon.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the intestine is equal to that of two fingers adjusted or encircled by water, and as much blood can be drawn out as desired, so it should proceed with suctioning (bleeding).
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength at the joints and place that which is healed within them hereinbelow.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the examination of free movement has already come about their dissection, and cautioning/cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	May the veins and arteries that supply blood to the temples during ancient barbaric practices, excessive palpation of above-mental fluids, and inflamed extremities be moved away swiftly by means of cauterization.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And according to what you recommend, tighten the thigh of your patient's leg within which their veins appear as a result during examination and palpation, then it is time for intervention by yourself.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Raise your hand over the vein at those parts below, introduce the inserted flebometer indiscriminately, raise the vein on them; and insert that amount you have in other veins of these legs as well - let it flow down according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And it is already followed by their memory recalling them and of that one' extrinsic attachment to the free space.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so, the bleeding cauterization of the jugular vein is applied to the cavernous venous hemorrhages in old wounds on the face and for migrathy or foul sores that have come about through roguing (which may refer to friction-induced irritation).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of this puncture that I recommend to you is such that it tightens the snake'dictating part around its vein; and with the instrument from which these are made, hereby forms.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the emerging point that is at the head of the fissure and hits it either lying down or for another cause in bed rest, as you wish; apply pressure to this wound'dictum until healed within your desired length of time.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the strength of both veins that go to the eyes from two humors due to grief and anger in the eyes contribute to facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bleeding is that it tightens the patient'dict chest with one bandage and applies such treatment to those areas; you are standing on their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if it is a flesh incision according to the transverse direction of one puncture (or two), where there is no meat; and if the incisions are subtle, then the extremity of the patient will be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the phlebotomy of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent coughs, as well as facial and liminal illnesses causing pain in the face, mainly when old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of his bloodletting is that it tightens his chest and places your left hand on his nose where there will be neither feeling nor vein visible here; at this place fluid begins to flow downward into the neck region below the second ridge of the nasal bone, from which point the venous structure does not appear.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you finally take your hand away from the little finger (presumably of an instrument or tool used by the doctor), and make it run along the second joint as needed; then apply that to a nail, which will restore its strength.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of cauterization for wounds guide contraction and treatment of leprosy, and address other diseases and poisonous sores as they come along with a haemorrhage.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Here comes the source sentence to translate:
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Return the ligament and strengthens the veins to prevent the swelling from spreading further away, staying within the bed wherein sickness is cured by the young folk.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt or are unsure which one it is among those, then think of the most prominent part and its visible manifestation (symptoms), that's what I understand from this line: If there is uncertainty whether to choose between certain symptoms/conditions mentioned previously, identify the most noticeable aspect amongst them as a starting point for diagnosis.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears as if veins are present in the lips below,
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May it be customary for some days to insert arrows into the veins that are in the area of choice.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the veins that are of the tongue'thy vitality be prepared for phlebotomy in the head region before going to places like the palate and mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And when bloodletting is required for each of these areas, do not exceed your hand' extrusion thereof along the vessels; soon after that they will be relieved from their excesses.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here come the veins that were punctured in the groin are located where blood circulates throughout all men's bodies; their catheterization is performed according to two methods, either inserting a berry or an olive gently into these subtleties, or using a needle and calling upon oneself if necessary (this is how it should be done):
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And for this purpose, they gather and collect such salts and subtle substances according to the extent of veins and their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of peppermint plaster:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	That which is inside of him circulates with times and it's necessary to open the wide-open vessels clearly visible externally towards those that contain thick blood within them.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how gout surgery (oil fistula) should be performed:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This surgical tool is of smaller length and subtle extension, suitable for the delicate operation on small veins that contain clear blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of phlebotomy on the basilic vein (which is one of three veins), which helps remove diseases that have entered through the legs and belly, come into play now.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When convened with the phlebotomist, when they perform that extraction thereafter, which will keep and maintain control over it in their fear or anxiety, as soon as an artery is reached through puncture by flee botomy, insert them into that hole made for such purpose so blood flows out but do not touch with the needle of the phlebotomist; otherwise they may injure themselves while attempting to approach.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear immediately for overt manifestation, then you should keep that and change to another (perhaps a splint), or if there is any protrusion of bone(s) in your arm where it ends, that signifies its appearance; once identified, treat with cauterization here at this spot as previously described.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the operation on your patient, then cover downwards from where in your hand is placed over their vein at a concave section of the phlebotomy site; and secure your arm and dry up that vessel with our previous discussion today; also keep an eye out for percussion sounds within the spaces around this artery location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you turn it tightly with the cord, in the place where you have inserted (likely a catheter or similar medical device), that inflates becomes an expansion of the artery, and thus avoids such occurrences.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If during the bleeding in the operation you see blood flowing together with infant's bile (which indicates it is arterial blood), then know that this fluid comes from an artery; and if your cuff or pressure bandage rests on top of this for a long time, tighten your cuff/pressure dressing, and if the bleeding has ceased, quickly wrap up your arm to prevent re-bleeding.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard the humors of his body, and be overly concerned about him for as many days until he is cured.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May it not be separated, and if you do not have medicine with you at the moment, then cut into the artery as needed; when the limb is contracted, the vein separates; grasp that which comes out during strangulation, and apply this to the location of the constricted vein or swolthy lymphatic vessels within other days.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction has separated (i.m., become loose), beware it; otherwise, take care of that which came before its separation in regard to where the dust particles from the loosened area have accumulated for recollection and treatment.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the abdomen of him is difficult in movements for positions at small places and possibility of arm ligaments.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the puncture of the black vein allows well upward ascent of blood from the lower part below the head and shoulder joints; for this reason it consists mainly of branches of basilic and calf muscles, just as we have mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	When the fear arises during the patient's bloodletting procedure, and after adjustment at the puncture site of the needle which is a nerve; consequently if you clench or crush this nerve while performing bleeding injections, it will lead to dizziness for the person, making recovery difficult. This nerve moves continuously with sensation; and when hidden among strong men who are subtle not showing their strength, pause bloodletting at the location where you perform your own self-needling technique (self lancet), avoiding this nerve in what constitutes your armor/strength for protection.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then draw out the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The action of cauterizing the vein of the cephalic is to draw out the blood from headaches and alleviate humors illnesses.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Here in this place, if you wish to lance the bleb with a lancet made of either olives or myrtle; it is safe from all veins, and will not damage any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May you hence convene to perform the operation of safeguarding so that the cauter does not pierce through the patient'thy scalp alone, and securely place it downwards; do not disturb him unless he reacts violently upon initial percussion over this very site wherein your treatment is applied.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Even if a lancet is inserted into the abdomen without first performing an initial touch (palpation), it may still be detected at this location later on.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May be the quality of that surgery and these accidents where you must think about correction in them.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le first of the which you know that surgery is not administered without conservation for health and hope, with caution to cure illnesses; it's performed on one of the veins in the groin area—the cephalica, femoral (fusca), or basilic vein; during breakfast time at dawn on Monday morning, and supper-time dinner at nightfall when signs indicate repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When a surgical intervention is needed, and it should be done during the third hour or at any time before noon today that has passed since this morning'thy three hours have elapsed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When bleeding is administered, it may be appropriate and necessary when needed at any time of day or night, always ready for use.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to be purged through clysters of lye for any malady they have, provided that there are fissures held within those who retain the clisters during expulsion, so as not for veins to overflow in the purification process of their bullae (bubbles), which are inflamed and do not harm the main body parts.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E they are not suffering from sacred cures or cramps and have neither left their illness nor succum extricated themselves while the remedy is being administered for colic pain, vomiting, abdominal issues, multiple hernias/trots (assumed to mean 'digestive disorders'), as well as causes of weakening throughout the body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider carefully in the subtlety of humors arising from what is thick within if it'thy blood is large (i.e., viscous), coming from food and drinks, or otherwise suitable for returning to its place through medicine.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Return into bath if any cause does not prevent it, or exercise for that matter to ensure the sanction becomes subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When bleeding from the patient is stopped in their chest area, it's time for third hour (post-procedure), as we have discussed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And when the patient'thy chest is guarded on that day of all misfortunate beasts and animals encountered with anxiety, anger, fear, as well as bodily accidents causing excessive discomfort and pain, hunches, and semblances to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in their medicine, they use fragrances and scents according to its necessity for these purposes as determined by possibility quantity.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the lancet over a follicle that has been pricked or upon which there is one to be pricked,
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Extract the arm and clean it with its moisturizer, applying three times, then strengthen the ligaments of the waistband using elastic cord wrapped around them for several turns; apply these actions accordingly.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	When the constriction is fresh and not caused by impotence of blood flow, or when it's excessive, do not allow fluid from the sanctum; rather, facilitate dilation, and restrict movement in the limbs of the sancitimus.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, for that reason which compels the surgeon to be closed and solicitous in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is apoplectic or swolthy, leave it for a day or two without straining the ligament, nor submerge in bath; otherwise apply pressure to treat apoplexy.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Return the incision (make an incision) if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and done subtly, fearing that it may expand, then perform cauterization in the second division of this section and place a few spots therein; thus prevention becomes immediate upon application to the area where puncture has occurred (the spot for which lies within very little spaces).
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If you see that point already made, do not move on it further, for there is no excuse in your position; pause over any division of the gap between bones (fracture), as this will harm the body'setup:
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better here than where others have oil.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a great abscess is formed in the location of the cauterization, wounds are cleaned and dressed regularly, mostly on that which does not bleed but rather continues to seep (pus), or at the site where small veins appear, then apply pressure with a sponge soaked in water infused with salt, slightly cut into pieces, tightly wrap it around for an hour, during which time it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up that which has been drawn out of this vein, or another vein as the complement to it;
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If any blackness or greenish discoloration appears in the location during some days of restoration, do not touch it; if you wish to pause on that for a cause of inflammation and dissolution caused by mullein juice or myrrh solution, or due to honeydew from figs or gourd sap resembling lime.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically excises and removes papules and prominent vessels of the base, with fine surgical incisions (vegetative cauterization).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	So you place your hand over that, and if you must apply moist compress to it, then the hump is wicked and evil; and so beware of any cause we have mentioned herein, for blood flows strongly from this vessel.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When poultice is applied in the water for which suctioning occurs, so that the place becomes hardened and care of it ensures its healing within.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	When you remove from the sanction as much as the patient'dicts virtue and according to their appearance, then that which is removed will be placed back into the sanction accordingly.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black, then you should insert and look inside that it may be rogued; similarly if thou seest it gross, inspect carefully for subtlety—and likewise, if gouty, take heed of its sharpness at once.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for that one who is weak and has a need to remove stones in the gallbladthy during fasting times, it's necessary to expand the cholecystomy of the bile duct as well (the) laparotomy.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In one who is ill and suffering from the contrary forces of that person'dicts them in regulated movements, where their body becomes disrupted or thrown out of balance:
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best that is administered through a venesection (phlebotomy) should not be the cross section of the vein itself; it's an incision or perforation we seek for treatment purposes.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This incision made by surgery is saved from bleeding and nerve damage, and a good healing ointment was applied according to tradition and length of time.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is inflammation of the complexion (likely referring to an infection or swelling), then perform cauterization by inserting a thread through it into its cavity using essential oil infused with spices such as pepper, ginger, gingembre, and cloves, or use scented and fragrant medicine.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you feel dizziness and it is due to the breath of an evil spirit, then cough in water drawn from flesh while using scents subtly; use aromaticity with any herb available, and apply your fingers to that spot as well.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When using other causes that have been mentioned in the division into the chief of collapses for elimination,
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever intends to raise their arm and dissolve the wound through which catheterization occurs by motion for effluxion of blood (the fluid being expelled), does this according to necessity, whereupon the volume is clear, little by little as dictated by the quantity present during continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May those who wish to heal their arm should strike it following the vein'dictated by nature and if their wrist is strong after the first session of bloodletting, apply pressure for seven or nine hours on that area.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May who wishes to pull the patient's limb against its departure from where it falls typically happens on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May this limb in which motion is made and cut has been scratched and hurt, causing fever because it was wounded during pregnancy or excessive birth whereby there occurs a significant discharge that amplifies inside until syncopes occur; thus you will have maintained all conditions of fracture surgery. Keep your hand on the patient's pulse while performing an incision in this limb wound, so as not to cause death during syncope when surgeons are ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you intend to unfasten the arm and expel phlegm afterwards according to good timing, when your claw is already oiled with venom blood flow (and painful matter within), press under that urge forcefully and restrain its extension limbs; for this situation is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have they already performed a lifting operation on you; or let the thickened blood within the vein coagulate there in its infusion place; or rest upon that of Tyr's alchemy, or Sage’supremacy, and compress this fluid out where the sanguine has escaped.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is swolthy (likely meaning distended or varicose), do not touch it there lest the thrombosis become agitated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to induce bowel movement, and this is not an excuse, then stimulate that part over there or in the other arm' end of a vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "vein of the arm" is cut into the place of the dark or basal (region), when not torn apart or pierced through, it consists of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bleeding that is in this way introduced into his body, where it will be darkened by fire until reaching a vein and becoming apparent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And fix its strength on that which is loose due to constriction or narrowness (migana), and apply liniment along the transverse and not longitudinally nor laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is both the broad and your incision at which you perform incisions on that spot, a small joint union.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of bile is prohibited, then repeatedly stir in the tail end and make the bile run downstream until you fulfill your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would be excused from bathing in the tail of water, and rest your legs there during times of youth.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And with this vein incision made it is a safeguard for all other veins and nerves that have not yet had their pulse felt.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The surgical incision of the sac on the fourth day confers healing upon the diseases of the belly.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the finger of the scalpel as you handle the exposed nerves of the hands that have been drawn out bare bone.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the sanction is extracted according to necessity, pause over the vein and salt so that it is not congealed together; seemingly as if you are doing in all of your body at once.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Mighty is the strength of that left foot incision made by us for those illnesses in the womb (the bowels).
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	When it seems in the foot incision like above elsewhere,
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The strength of the veins from phlebotomy is related to diseases present in various parts of the body; similar to menstrual illnesses and retained menstruation, as well as afflictions of old hernias and cushions on thighs and buttocks, resembling these ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And as for the quality of this bloodletting (phlebotomy), it enters into his tailbone and spreads over that frozen place within where veins appear; and on the joint between the foot and the leg, you must say "knee," which is formed by those branched vessels in the face of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply a poultice of soft and warm substance to the thigh or knee cushion where it needs applied on the foot sole, which is better for health benefits (implied).
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If a smallpox appears on the face of the body, then keep your nerves from being affected by that spot on the face, and pause your incision there if you wish to insert it laterally.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Whenever it is necessary for you (the physician) to insert a catheter or needle into them (
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Whenever it is necessary for you to insert a catheter or needle into them, take the patient'se leg and immerse in their tail vein; let the sanction flow within that space while they are being purged out of it.  
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the surgeon makes a mistake in the first operation, repeat it on their own body where they cut themselves (quar the location gets sore), do not fear of ill-luck; only be careful to protect your nerves as we have mentioned before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	When it is said of the other foot' extrinsic muscle.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	From the sciatic vein, it ascends with us as we discuss the tarsal bone of the eastern limb.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The translation of each line from Latin-influenced medieval text into English would be as follows:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the bloodletting for you is that it cleanses and strengthens your thigh muscle from within its narrow cavity below the knee with a long thin bandage; none will appear except when needed (water).
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, apply that poultice each time you can and along the way (translation is a bit loose due to lack of precise medieval Latin vocabul extrusion), either by insertion or sectioning, wherever it lands on him/her.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let the sanction flow as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return and place each one over the location of incision and tightening so that healing will occur.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of windy weather and of those virtues related to that which is carried by them (referring back to previous context).
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Venous swellings from corn, or wool, or leather come here.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And if it is a wound that bleeds profusely (second type of hemorrhage): one part involves cutting and removing the sanction, while another entails also treating its own incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This abrasion that is being scraped off according to their nature, either a point or a focus of pain.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	Here come the twelve places on the body where suction and extraction are performed, one of which is in the area where intermittent suctions occur, located at the nape (the back part), extending down to the middle joint of the neck; nose pressure applied over the philtrum between the upper lip's teeth using a small tool quickly inserted into the mouth from below; nasopharyngy with instruments such as spatulas and forceps used above, on top of the cheekbone region (cheeks); suctions performed at two points located in different parts by means of tweezers or scissors; tweezer-like tools applied to both nostrils.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And extract the sickness not from the veins thin and scattered in the flesh, but through those channels, as you are treating by flebectomy; nor should it be considered a disease caused by phlegm or pus within any part of the body that has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary due to illness or continuous occurrence, immediately provoke vibration in the whole body at mealtime and during the daytime herein, and also throughout the night and any time of day.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When in men there is cause from which they are swelled inside due to indigestion for consumption or overindulgence and within their own bellies, chests, and backs; whereby these bodies become inflamed on the face and head as well as darkness and heaviness upon their lungs; through what exit place of wind (gastrointestêtinal) they find themselves; from which those who suffer multiplicate in number herein; for whom tastebud becomes swollen with sin, or tongue is protruded while spitting out phlegm: likewise the sleep multiply and to these also add cries, curses past one hundred years ago as well as plagues along side other manifestations of their semblance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it occurs in any cause of those things, and particularly if it happens on the third or fourth day after sunr extrusion, they command that fever be taken to prevent passage through the following days.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And when the vitality of heat from the back is that which, when it conforms to gravity in the head and descends into the bowels; perhaps this will expel everything from the body as a whole.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This is in the location of trepanation for the skull (or "cephalic"). Here's a line-by-line translation into English from Old and Medieval Latin influences:
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not permitted that one uses such a heavy object or in which there is decay present; this brings great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Through which means I use that, and in the crowns where diseases fester freely.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May forget that which is continuing over you be forgotten by this; and fear the generation of forgetfulness if you command the bellows to pause briefly at each interval for breath in work with it.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May whooping cough is in the location of lung puncture: and for this reason it confers asthma, chest constriction, pleural effusion (fluid around the lungs), and cough.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When a small vessel is inflamed and rested afterward, weakness enters the body both in the legs and abdomen.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the wind from anointing (possibly referring to applying ointment or herbal remedy) addresses headaches and prolapse of the uterus, migrates away, prevents pain in the regions of the teeth; it is at the site of mouth surgery (potentially indicating a treatment for dental issues).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the windlass not to press on your hand so that it does not injure an artery and cause blood flow interruption,
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The tongue is comfited in the mouth and gum decay occurs therein; it appears as though they suffer from illnesses present within their mouth, located at the alveoli of those lips' teeth.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the wind chill that is felt on the hips confer to warmth, which is experienced through filling up with heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	E the ventosa of the divided parts of the focus conferred healthily by the phlebotomy of three veins, as from the basilica, inferior (or vena cava), and superior (or cephalic) vein; where that draws out all those fingers inserted into these thin veins in the flesh, which then connect to reach the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanded by the suction device that should not proceed with cutting in scraping away flesh where it has been stripped bare, and immediately afterwards his nerves and blood vessels appear.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is through which it blows over the shoulders and conforms to the anorectal diseases of the buttocks and purulent sores just now.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the windlass to create a large suction and that it be made of earth, strong at its joint where there is significant force in these delicate movements of the windlass, ensure thorough scraping with the lancet.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May the gentle breezes from the cushions slowly manifest, and they touch all parts of the body, soothing old rheumatism and menstrual pains in women and madness; stimulating periods, discomfort in both sides (hips/thoracic region), bladder issues, and conditions requiring operations by experienced doctors or barbers.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Even though they treat all parts of the body, it can lead to fainting in motion.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	When treating colds with pinwheels, it is directed towards improving the health of those who use such devices for their coughs in bedchambers. (Here "ventozes" refers to colds or respiratory issues; "alahorcoben" likely means using a form of therapy involving p
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	When it comes to the position for treating colds with pinwheels, its purpose is that it pauses coughing during mealtime and encourages faster expectoration without extending the duration of the cold; meanwhile keeping those who are wheezing in place until air reaches them. (Here "ventozas" means coughs or colds related to respiration issues, “comensament vueda” refers to eating during mealtime when symptoms might be worse due to relaxation and possibly less control over breathing; the term likely includes actions such as holding a pinwheel in place with one's hand. "Leugierement" can refer to wheezing, which is an additional respiratory complaint commonly associated with colds.)
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And cease applying it and continue until they see the place already reddened and swollen, whereupon the groan of pain appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you scrape and repeatedly suck small amounts at intervals, pay attention in the disposition of the limbs.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that house of tender flesh with rare pores is scraped and not rubbed off, so the place will not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When commanded by the windlass (a device used for medical procedures), enhance the incision and make an incisor that remains easy to suction through with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is swolthy, then cover it with medicinal herbs regularly; in the first application of this remedy, let there be an opening for subtlety and the humidity within you.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May occur during the second stage of acquiring knowledge about extracting the large stone (potentially referring to gallstones or kidney stones, which were significant medical concerns in medieval times).
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is filthy (suggesting impure or unclean matter), then cutting shall be made on the smooth side to continue with its purification/cleansing process.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And at last, when we extract the small stone from joint or knee area, it suffices for us one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a sick humoral substance, cut it with a cutting instrument (mota), and if the patient'dict is large in nature, then let us proceed for extraction by means of incision beforehand through an intentional cut (scarification).
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And in the incision for scraping where only the depth of the navel is concerned,
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the colon is thick, hard, black (implying decay or blockage), and its portions are strained, so that the places of the enemas become softened, purgative; if in summer time, then with aloe oil or wine vinegar, honey from beeswax combs, ointment for joint pain, or any resembling substances to these.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If there is excessive accumulation, be wary, then apply honey (sometimes), or myrtle oil, or ginger oil, or juniper oil; according to their appearance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be that the bellows is made of large pieces of leather from tendons, and must not use oil as lubrication; rather, let them apply moisture with water drawn from springs or dew collected at dawn, or cold water obtained through wells in caves, similar to these.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And it is from where the moisture comes that his breath was wet with water or mint and sumac, resembling these to them.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that which has excessive superfluities, wash their nostrse with vin antique or water of spring, whether it is myron (myrrh) or the juice of elderflower, or honeydew from acorns, and according to their likeness.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	E cover that the wound be protected from bathing; have some covered to administer warmth in accordance with the bath for one hour or two hours, and care for the wound afterward as well.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is required for a bloodletting instrument (phlebotomy) before bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the patient'dict condition: when the windy or those who deal with cold and exacerbated conditions of the colon and intestines, caused by chilling factors such as ash syrup, dampness from greens, phlegmatic discharges, diarrhea, and consumption of alcoholic drinks like honey wine (mead),
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When their food is taken with peaches and boiled meats cooked in broths, as well as vegetables that are pleasant to the sight, they take it all together (with pleasure).
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that from which the complexity is feverish, where it expires in breath and sweats of almiv or essencic acid seed mucus, and smells musty between winter and summer; for him let be advised moderation with milk and foods, pause consumption of legumes (pears), cabbage, peasers, waterfowl eggs, and ducklings.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in the day of wine-drinking and bloodletting, it is necessary for one'thy body fluid (blood or bile) to flow more than food intake:
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	When given to some patients by alchemists as an elixir of honey or musk, it is called 'muscad', or when applied due to wind disease or after a bloodletting session (or other procedures), so that the main limbs are comforted and sanction becomes subtle; but do not apply where there'thy scrabbling.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May these pains that are being cauterized be pains stopped under the feet and on the hips and umbilicus in the joints of the legs, where these limbs do not tolerate cauterization.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E it is not for these reasons but the attachment of humors from a member, when they pause with a vespid cushion on the breastbone during sickness caused by an excess flow of humor from the spleen and liver; using this method to dissolve airy effluvia in the body part, while placing it above the belly and navel. This action rarely frees up space within the limb(s) and relieves pain resulting from these wandering humors.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And rests upon their hips when pain occurs in the uterus or womb, for through strong attraction of the humors inside and expulsion from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When standing upon the sole and breastbone areas, where the breath flows within these confines.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These breezes are administered by sucking only, and some of them even with fire applied directly to the spot (implying that certain remedies involve inhalation or direct application).
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When water purification measures are fully administered in cases of jailbreeze illnesses,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When the wind is for that bubbling and much fluid are produced, it' extrinsic urine alone or in the liquid wherein they put thyme plants suitable for diuretic purposes.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of poultice administered at the focus: it is two drops according to what we have formed; and the quantity of powder is the size of a palm, and in its place within us, where location lies on our circuit line, so too the quantity herein present, as little as when an arrow enters.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Its pain is from bone or citrus seed, thick borders (perhaps referring to rheumatoid arthritis due to inflamed and hard joints), lion's claw, boar's skin/hide, thin margins, so it does not lead the body part in its place on itself.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever it is the hour of patient' extrusion (perhaps indicating a time for an observation or treatment), at that moment there will be held in front of the firelighted lamp.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great wind that we have recommended for that, and its small remedy according to those illnesses and the state of that person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When liver bubbles and distended abdomen swellings are other than those of youthful individuals and large bellies,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	Here is the line by line translation of this medieval medical text:
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Here the pressure is applied to the member of the thigh and this is over what we have mentioned earlier, so when they take deep breaths and do not support it with their mouth, causing steam (humidity) to rise above that obstruction, then at that moment the wind dissolves.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Based on the mix of languages and medieval medical terminology present in this text, here is an attempt at a line-by extraction:
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May a vapor be administered in the plague'dict (possibly referring to fever), where there is neither crosswind nor disruption, and it is not given but rather filled with water; allowed only on the limb alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it goes: And this is its form: The more the windpipe expands, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual text but rather a Roman numer
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting (sanguissuguas) should not be administered on small limbs where it is impossible to place plant-based clysters due to their size; they resemble the foot, tongue, and gums thereof. Alternatively, in cases of exposed flesh such as with injuries or surgical sites (member denudat de carn), these should be treated similarly using leeches (e·l nas) along with other suction remedies when necessary (resemblantz).
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those bloodsucking creatures that are found in the ears and noses of mortals bathing at public wells or fountains.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When filled and case occurs (implying that there's an issue when a body cavity or
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to suck the location back into itself with breath, one may relieve pain more gently (likely referring to a treatment technique where controlled exhalation or inhalation might help reduce discomfort associated with certain
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then the location is washed out and moved by water flow—it must be cleaned (suggesting that if initial attempts fail to alleviate pain through breath control or other means mentioned earlier in this medieval text of medical advice, a more forceful treatment involving water may follow).
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the body's course of blood is prolonged and residues remain after treatment with cupping (which in this context refers to an ancient technique that involves creating a vacuum on the skin using glass or bamboo jars), then apply wet linen over it while you pause there, holding down what has remained. This advice suggests cleaning up any leftover residue from such procedures by placing damp cloths (wetlinens) directly onto areas of concern and maintain pressure to ensure complete removal or absorption into the skin where bleeding might persist after cupping treatments were performed, as mentioned earlier in this translation. This practice was believed at that time to aid healing processes
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the body is multiplied (a term from this era that might refer to an excess or inflammation), then sprinkle sulphur powder over it; and with fragments of glasses meant for sharp purposes related directly to these causes, until such time as the affected area has absorbed everything into itself—meaning once all elements causing disease have been addressed (in this case using a form of purgative treatment involving finely ground minerals), or alternatively if there are dried fava beans placed and left in place while they adhere to that spot, until the affected area is resolved. This suggests an old medical practice where specific substances were applied directly onto areas needing attention; sulphur was used for its supposed healing properties (believed at times by medieval physicians), glasses as a form of sharp material possibly indicating cutting or scraped-off treatments, and fava beans that might serve to draw out impurities. This text implies multiple therapeutic methods based on
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, repetition of bloodletting when possible for changing those things.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the bloodletting is prohibited for suspension, then it must be restrained at the most recent sanction or leave an arrow within those places where there was a spark; and they shall remain stopped until I feel any new sign of inflammation.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice over those areas, take some ash or salt ground into very small particles, and apply it immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	After starting with restoration from the clean division of parts: recovery (Note: The translation here is an approximation as it's a bit challenging without full context, but I made my best effort to translate based on individual words and phr
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the practice of medicine as it concerns restoration from a clean breakdown: repair of bone fractures and displacements (Note again, this translation attempts to best approximate meaning based on individual words where possible; however, some interpretation was required due to potential language nuances). Here 'motas veguadas' can be understood as necessary or essential actions in medical practice. The term 'art
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child (or 'filh', as it might be a term of endearment or respect), wise people who claim this chapter belongs to doctors and scholars, those whom at some times they disregard the free willings of Ancients nor read these letters. Here is an appeal directed towards practitioners (medical professionals) asserting that even learned individuals sometimes fail to consider ancient wisdom or read materials thoroughly—implying a critique from someone who values historical medical knowledge and practices, perhaps advocating for greater respect among
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason we must keep it hidden here on our land; and no one will ever forget in that time or later—and never have I ignored what came after my reading of the works of Ancient thinkers, wherein from their wisdom (from these ancient texts) did extract science. This passage suggests a respect for knowledge derived directly from historical sources ("the entended understanding" referring to insights gained by studying ancients). The author stresses that this chapter should be kept private on earth and emphasizes the value of long-term study, particularly regarding what scholars have learned over time (presumably in other texts or practices), asserting its importance for extracting true scientific knowledge. Here 'extrayssi' means to derive or glean something valuable—in this case, science from ancient wisdom.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Return adjustments in experiments and studies throughout one'dict life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	E you have already described in this chapter all the water that has been explained to me according to my current science and on which I've spent time; forced open such waters for others by breaking them up, relieved occupational burdens of elongation (a process where body fluids are believed to become stuck or stagnated), opened it at the moment of ablution (purification ritual involving water); demonstrated this in the hour of declaration, and formed liquid motions with these substances for those we administer them upon—just as I have described previously in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Capital First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Sum total and collections from the bone fracture itself, which is necessary before we begin to recall the fingers or other parts of this injury, each for its own treatment consideration.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cover then that in the prologue of this chapter we present the essence of the speech, and capitols whose comprehension within the discussion is constructed by craftsmen and stone upon truthfulness; here you (the reader/artisan) and they who understand it well are prompted to know or learn about these noble arts.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so it is said that when you experience a bone break or dislocation and twisting injury (fracture, dislocation, sprain), then immediately apply pressure therein for an incision with the scalpel of this person'dictorship or amputation if no cause prevents. Treat accordingly to alleviate distress, whether it is that which you are inflicted upon, or weakened (fracture, dislocation, sprain), or during times when there is vehement heat and chill in the body fluids.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English: Place its content in soft greens and tender meats from birds and fish; prohibit large carcasses and fill with all kinds of food that stuff veins within, provided you serve it carefully to prevent effusion (leakage) into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Whenever he returns his thighs back to its original place at which it is accustomed,
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Here you understand that bones break when they are in the homes and among the weakened ones, it is not possible for them to remain continuous or become solid as according to their nature due to drying out of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are solidified and continue according to their nature for the duration of detoxification processes, as with the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature may adjust and heal over the broken bones of any part taken by something resembling gluten, where there is thickening inside that contains those ensnared within each other' extrinsic causes are as permitted when they eat with bread (gluten), just like a fire during communion.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	Because of this reason, it is necessary to pause the foods from Maia (a term that might refer to a specific diet or element related to health in medieval times), which have gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have mentioned before.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motor differentiation according to the part of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you know that there are various methods of breaking bones according to the different nature of each part, for a bone fracture in the shank is different from a bone fracture in the head; and a bone fracture in the chest is different from one in the thighs. It seems that all other parts are also diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When recalling all types of fracture, emphasize each one separately in its own designated section within the book.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion various types of bone breakage is in himself/herself (Note: The original text's grammar and vocabulthy may not be fully
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various types of bone breakage in them (Note: The original text's grammar and vocabulary may not be fully clear due to the mix of regional languages). Here they have different kinds of breaks on their bones; some is a curved fracture, others that occur upon impact with stars; also there are breaks according to the length of the bone: these include skull cracks and head dislocation, as well as minor splits.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The entire specialty is in relieving discomfort as it returns after the patient's recall of their specific locations within themselves.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motive for bone breakage.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For that reason a bone break is understood: its curvature and the prominent heights of it as felt by you here, when examining with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	So when there is no obvious curvature or misalignment in the joint and it does not cause severe pain upon touching the bone and thigh without inflicting great harm, then it is not broken here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Having joints that are twisted or small fissures, which you must cover with your hand and compression for all of it; there is pause over the medicines from which they remember at what moment this has come to be present here; also apply pressure on these areas as narrow.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	E discern that the place where it arches and does not divide into two or another thing which does not come upon him when he arrives at his sitting time for correction of what has occurred in accordance with your hour, now begins to cover the entire part of its body being cured.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an abscess occurs and must be cut, allow it to resolve itself within a few days as per your ability to lift and manipulate (engage). And warm that limb with whatever means you can manage for each movement of lifting or manipulation.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Beware that restoration and bleeding of it is better than the bones in which you have injured yourself.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	When strength returns for that which will come back in memory of him/her.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is satagged (set or fractured), it may be necessary to extend this broken part of the body, whether it's leg or arm; if the limb itself is small, then use your hand; and if there are multiple joint issues or one specific issue along with its location identified by you.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If your position is where it rests naturally, while parts of the limb are extended, then take action so as to restore those additional elements back into their natural joint and according to any manner you choose for them in these places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When you touch it at that time with your hand and if herein you perceive any different cause, correct whatsothy have found by the measure of their action.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive extension and compression, as doctors who use gentle movements say may occur during their operation, or they may cause a contracture in the limb where we have seen fluid accumulation due to these movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of a stationary limb is what I recommend; thus you understand that members are diverse in their smallness and largeness, as well as in their shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "When those who are small with arms and face seem like them, then cover it all under a fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who have large thighs or hips like a cloak and hard covering be wrapped tightly so that the belt connects with the strongest portion of their abdomen throughout its entirety, preventing them from swaying within it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the treatment, take care of your bowel evacuation when necessary at a convenient time for the patient near where that fracture is located (in three or four layers around the injured part), and tightly hold onto the bandage with just your hand.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Here the bone is stretched within the place of fracture by a bandage, and gradually loosens the tightness in that area with your grasp on it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Return the pause between the bones of stopper or cloth wherein is fixed the twistiness of the fracture if there exists a fracture; otherwise, there is no cause in it within.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Return the compression bandage to this other injury, and apply warmth on these dressings so that today's inflammation or abscess does not worsen if it is present here at all, provided there is no infection; leave it on for a few days, and keep tightly bound your limbs undernethy.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Here are the translated lines from the medieval medical treatise, line by line into English:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However the splint that is placed on top of this fracture should be large and a small one must also be used for the other splints; place it according to how much has been extended in both length and size over the limb as directed, placing your strength above those splints corresponding to each initial strain. And thus when you have stretched from where the fracture is located along its extent, this limitation will follow that location of the fracture itself.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When the threads are thick and thin in substance, and they come from wool; if these heavy strands appear during finger pinching operations by cloth fingers pressed down on them, it is a great mistake when such tightening occurs outside equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And when fine points are not convenient, do not force them through the thickness of what you wish to pass, and where there is a day'dict between two stones (or bones), it does not occur that nightfall comes for one full day.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the groin is led through the extremities of the legs and causes stricture in these places, then immediately after stopping pressure (either with a heavy stone or woolen hammer), it will not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some injuries are on the ground and there is a rupture in the spine; hence we come to remember that moment at the head of this particular circumstance.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You understand that when all limbs are broken on the first day; this causes them to break further if not properly rested for days seven or more according to your knowledge of the coming approach of an abscess formation requiring drainage.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how these devices were used by the ancients for which they pause over a fracture and dislocation and twisting injury.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of immobilization after bone healing is convenient for complex movements and mainly in the knees and elbies; it does not involve heat or moisture: hence, use powdered talcum and spinal marrow from flour to facilitate movement within joints. 
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When that comfort is with you as well, but if discomfort arises from the humerus bone's album (which refers to joint or socket area), then do not make it thick nor subtle; and use such things accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Other emplastrum recipe for fracture and dislocation: asafetida, lapidanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh (all ground together), of the salvage grain merchant'thy amount; myrrh and aloe from their own gold mine, each x parts and crumbled into a powder mixture dissolved in water or milk for those with complex dislocations—using this emplastrum results in good composition restoring broken bones while providing relief to patients.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other methods of splinting that comfort and prevent fracture or twisting: mix miraculous powder made from white henna, myrrh, aloe vera (aloe), acacia, and Armenian cinnamoman; x amounts as indicated. xx instructions continue here...
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All have been crushed in the millstone for grinding contraction, and they are powders taken from water or an alabastrum of oil, and administered to them.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of the splinter and bones apart from their respective places, causes pain in those areas; it is tightly bandaged with wool thread soaked in oil and vinegar, and placed over the location: this means that a suture (bandage) made of wool has been immersed in oil and vinegar, applied to where there are fractures or splinters.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May not in this plaster be for restoration or caution and removal of pains directly as they occur.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other means of cautery that restore cuts: twigs of fig tree and healing poppy seeds, all together make a plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of the plaster applied provides restoration for bone fracture and when you wish to resolve the condition of ossification: mixture of althea, chamomile flowers, honey flour from wheat, parts taken in totality; they are crushed into powder and mixed with water here.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	May it be broken, then hold that part in water or sprinkle with the same (water), and use of light for treatment.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Other method of application for plaster that in restoration when you have the first step is required: take part of rhizome and flaxseed (from this patient), honey, mint leaves, majorana, flowers of violet, chamomile blossoms; all chopped into pieces and soaked respectively in water from saucepan or double boiler, according to the quality of the limb and rest period necessary.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras not prescribe for you that is resting on the limbs torn apart should be restored with wax and oil, nor any other cause – recommend that he move between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Guilia observe that there are pauses in the broken limb for its restoration and causes where exsuction is performed with hot spruce gum, seeds, and substances recommended by them related to those reasons which they have advised.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Material for plaster that relieves wounds and pain: recipe from honeycomb of bees, hooves or pine bark pieces (from insensitive animals), salt chips and crumbles; they are trussed and compacted, and their paste is aplastic.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you break and separate ligaments be considered if not there occurs pain or inflammation nor bone fracture at its place; henceforthy do not discontinue treatment for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you feel sharp or severe pain at the location, then push it back in place and apply a plaster of earth therein.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that subtle obstruction undernethy and mildly encrust it, as well as strengthening the area through which it was healed initially by your primary intervention, gently applying to where it is recovering inside of there.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If times come when the ulcer and pain and fever and all accidents are already removed from that patient wholely, and there is indigestion requiring emplastrum (a linen dressing applied to a wound) and strictures (constriction of an organ), then perform that treatment as you did for the guest entering by foot.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of those causes mentioned, then wait three to four days or seven; and some healings may occur within twenty days after you notice the detachment of the limb, provided that fracture adheres and flesh coagulation occurs on it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	When adjusted in the space that is within you as much as your initial tightness, and fixed into the belly'dictum of the malady, according to when it comes back memories of him/her.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May you find the fracture location and dry out so it won't bleed anymore. You know that nourishment is forbidden to prevent reaching there; therefore bring water for your thirst every day of them; elevate a little, perform this operation daily on the limb, which will restore health.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When bones are not properly healed before returning to the table (meal), as they should according to their curvature shape—according to their operation, it's a mistake; and if done rightly, it greatly reduces antics in freely moving or warming up liquids.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	When they have not seen a doctor for them (their water), it is reasonable that their condition has worsened.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Secondly regarding bone fracture in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The spices of fractures are motes (impetuous or sudden), and their figures are various, the causes being distinctive: some a fall from space, which enters into the cranium where it is felt as pain in the head; others when they pierce through bone, entering flesh but not passing beyond to go undernethy's skull cap; this type of fracture injury is called dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	Here is the line-by extralinguistic translation:
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This crack or object that has already entered the periosteum (the layer surrounding the bone) and is now in contact with it; or it's within the facial part of the bone, and the matter from these broken bones may be either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	When a bone is broken and it happens in the subtlety of the little hair on the skin, this particular type of fragile bone breakdown does not have a name (or term).
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the medieval medical text to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it hurts in the bones of our feet when they are covered with phlegm (or effluvium).
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And with all these cracked bones fixed as separate plates (steli), they are set in place.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this fluid returns to its place, here it arrives at its location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	With all these spices for detection concerning those, and to investigate their attempts at restoring the corrupt flesh upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special kind of vein is discovered when it comes out through the skin as blackness (indicating a break), and thus restrained on top of it for temporary relief.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	When treating fractures consider the accidents of humour (i.dictions here refer to bodily fluids and imbalances), and if through these signs it indicates pain as severe as vomiting from cholera, or extension/straining, loss of comprehension, paralysis, convulsions, acute fever, the treatment of those humours and requests (questions) related to them does not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If an accident happens due to unruly spirits (implying a sudden illness or injury), then you begin the healing of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is when the plague comes into your common meal with you during wet days of winter, and it occurs throughout the entire day from noon till nighttime; that'dictates how much care must be taken in bone maintenance as done on this twelfth day.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, then cover your head with a veil before noon, as long as what has become of your pancreas, and that which causes you to have these accidents occurs (meaning possible flare-ups or attacks).
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has reached the brain'supreme matter', and consists of tiny pieces and friction, then it is necessary to insert the fragmented parts back into place as recommended by you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	When you raise the head of the patient suffering from malady and discover it over their shoulders following customary methods for observation as per your experience with children'thy behavior, making sure they are lying down on the sickbed.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you have to determine the bone fracture and apply blood or apoplasma cauterization immediately, then turn yourself towards the water that covers it (presumably some medicinal liquid), placing softened fabric soaked in vinegar and olive oil on this spot. This helps restrain bleeding from the wound while calming down inflammation caused by the abscess; you begin treatment starting at the site of bone injury and proceeding with its debridement (removal).
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When it is necessary as a second method of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One symptom is that you insert into each other such tightly sewn things, and this is the form of it: And with another suture thread (which is less than before), so doing.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And apply medicine externally with strips that have been laid down as the second course of treatment.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Using ease in touching upon the joints, that they do not press against their head and lead them along this way.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are hard and sharp, then when you administer injections into their veins before giving pills at the tabletops (which are not deep), do so accordingly.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	Not asleep is meant to be here instead of the bones at the end of the skeleton where it meets water that they are applying on, for this area' extruded extremity or margin near the lower part of their head resembling a small border or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the solid portion of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these many ladders of which each one corresponds to the sharpness required for any part of the body' extrémity with which it has an acute angle, its length according as long or short depends on the amount of precision needed for this organ.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of tools: The quality that allows piercing through the bone fracture and stops it on top of the bone, which you know has already been penetrated; then redirects this tool to another location, pausing wherever there remains the bulk of either the large ray or its environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	When you keep all caution that the incisors do not touch any cause of cholera,
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone pierces through and if it continues along its path in line with ligaments, extract that which is hot or forceful within the body' extruded from the bone itself—sometimes even more potent than other thorns.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If there is any misalignment or looseness in the small bones, take that which makes it easy for you to remove them from their sockets; and care for those clothes and ointments we have with us.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: For the lunate is like a lion and does not admit any cause, its sharp division into two parts beforehand in lengthiness; that the lunate should fit with the scapha under it as inscribed by the acute part on the bone. 
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E percusses upon the joint spaces of a small defect within which bones facilitate movement as they are turned over, and you yourself ensure that the pancreas does not encounter an accident in any action, especially if the physician is ignorant of all men; indeed, provided he sleeps.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When there is any additional cause associated with the patient'thy kneecap in certain bone locations, insert that piece into its extremity at that location and remove it easily; for once removed from itself, it causes harm to oneself and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what remains of the bone is its face, which has roughness and delicate striations upon it, take care that you remove such roughness and dissolve those fine lines for which you have prepared quantities in various amounts so as to be able at any given moment during your operation to administer them appropriately within their reachable areas and place them correctly according to the time of your procedure when dealing with the broken bone and the figure of the patient.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you administer in your ratio, which is where bones meet at joints for digestion and absorption of substances from below those points, apply what'thy applies hereinbelow, using thereupon that subtlety beneath them. You shall not cease until reaching the point required for administration of both thick pus (pus teon) and its delicate form (the subtle pus), wherever you arrive in your procession to administer these substances.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any small cracks or breaks in the blood vessels among them, where you should administer care according to what has been lost for their restoration.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because they have not been properly tended to all of which they have studied in that science.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	When we have shown great cracks in them,
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you remove the bone, cover it with cloth as many times as there are flies in its quantity and immerse that into rotten oil; then place another folded or tripled piece of cloth on top while submerging him into vinegar mixed with such oil, so that no pus remains above what you can apply to the wound. Apply this bandage loosely around his limb until there are as many flies touching it (indicating decay) only for as long as the patient's body allows; do not tighten but just enough coverage, and administer medicine directly on that dressing where applied to control pus formation.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here it says: "Let that day be for this cure if you are sure of apothecary care; and apply thereon both the one and another administering those medicines which superfluous dryness requires, such as linseed mixed with flour from hemp seeds, grains of mustard, powdered spices, and representations for these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here is the line-by extralanguage translation:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When pain occurs in the skull due to its being struck and pressed during the treatment of it, with accompanying darkness on its surface; therefore consider whether these are accidents that heal completely together.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not cure black bile but by the medicine that is paused above, and it' extrudes this blackness (disease), then take honey and oil in small portions; spread these on a cloth, place them over the region where it exits, apply pressure to stop its flow therein, and also provide for healing herbs as agreed upon so that they may restore health.
Capitol .iii.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided in English or
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When a nose crackles, it likely means there are issues with the nostrins (nasal passages). Here's
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	It appears the original text is attempting to describe nasal issues using archaic language similarities among Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's an attempt to translate it into modern English:
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the legs' bones is broken, then place a small object in your nose to insert it there and fix that fracture above their chest; until you can return the nose back according to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if it is needed for your ease, be careful that you do not harm the groin of yours during this operation on their thighs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper chest portion of the rib and does not move towards that area, then cover it with a material from where the large part of the bone ends.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the bone is broken into parts, then you make it seem like that (the condition).
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	When the hernia is restored in your body on the first day of injury if it'dictible; otherwise, assign rest days seven or eight for recovery from hemorrhage control:
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some times they enter through the nose, in places where there is a cavity (sinuses), pain due to being wrapped up with a woolen cloth from lion' extruder; and when their nasal fracture was put on forcefully and it should not be prevented during inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, apply this; if you want, use clogs.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you find a wound infected with pus or putrescence (otherwise known as suppuration), then apply honey paste on the nose and mouth area using cloth soaked in wine vinegar, or alternatively use mustard plasters for this purpose.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	May it not be that the abscess has not been drained with caution? Then place your hand on top of this spot where grain and powder (likely impurities or foreign substances) have accumulated in the albumen, and do not lie there for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If bones of the nose are broken or compressed slightly, then you must cut over those areas with instruments that I have designated for them; and also fix the fracture using this fluid that embodies it and consolidates it, applying bandages as needed according to necessity.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you injure a worm in the nose, then treat it with that medicine and insert iron tubes inside so that healing occurs for all of him.
Capitol .iiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Regarding the restoration of the jaw when broken:
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and it'dict not yet spoiled by dust (i.e., freshly fractured), and it has not been shattered into two pieces nor curved at joints, its knowledge seems light (simple or uncomplicated).
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is separated into two parts, then apply extension to those parts inside until possible for it (the patient) to swallow.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you have caused discomfort in the mouth that requires separation (implying dental issues), then tighten those parts from which you hope it will come out through silver or gold filament or softness; and place pressure on the broken jawbone, as well as over the doubled cloth wrap, applying a single finger along its length according to how your garment fits. Do this carefully so that nothing is destroyed in the process.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When commanded by the humors that must rest and calmness is brought about in him, cease consuming his food slowly (i.dict to drink it gradually).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you have swelling that has altered your figure in some way, then coil and uncoil this part today; correct what is already altered from it by applying powder made of lead or white chalk/albumen (egg whites), which will cool the body'thy. Here are translations line-by-line:
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is put on and the position of the bone remains unaltered, let it stay like this so long as the fracture heals slowly over three days.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another venomous puncture occurs as a wound treatment, apply what we have mentioned for these past injuries within the cavity where it resides to heal that abscess and treat this poisoning.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is in bone (plagua), consider whether it has been displaced or separated, and if so, gently adjust those pieces to where they belong during that patient'se positioning.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the poultice of the patient is smeared thinly, then thicken it as much as your need dictates at the footbath (fleubotomi).
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished those compresses and there is no more discharge from them, then apply dressing of soil if it'se broad; otherwise, pause on one of the hot stones that are designated for this purpose, until healed.
Capitol .v.	Captain v.: This line does not provide enough context for translation as
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the treatment of the wing when it is fractured: In this sentence, a restorative approach or medical intervention related to repairing a broken wing (
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Movements made while the player's shoulder blade is broken: Here, someone describes a situation where an individual continues to move with their injured scapula (shoulder blade), categorizing such movements into three types of actions or patterns likely related to rehabilitation techniques. The sentence suggests that despite being immobilized due to the fracture, there are still ways in which movement can occur around this injury site for recovery purposes –
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the shoulder blade is broken: It's separated into two parts that do not join together – and it requires restoration in these joint spaces, or alternatively, if there are nail-like structures present (possibly referring to small bone fragments), they must be addressed within those locations; otherwise, recovery may prove challenging. If the break is complete without pieces remaining joined at any point—or what could referentially translate as a clean fracture with no splinters – it might facilitate healing processes in that specific space (the shoulder blade).
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the operation on that takes place where the bone is fractured, it is that you make two servants present: one holds his hand as support for the broken clavicle and the other extends their chest to this divided area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And place the bone back into its sockets as it is formed by what has been broken, and not in a small or indented manner.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion extends, then slow down the stimulation of your belly through sheets or woolen clothes according to what you need; raise and contract your chest and compress with pressure as directed by me.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the clavicle away from its parts for treatment, it will reach the spine, and the malady (illness/disease) ascends to the neck; hold your hand over the muscle of them where a hernia is migrating in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The minister presses on the muscle of it at the joints until the bone in its socket is raised up there, and then he corrects the fracture with those bands tightly fastened around them.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel tightness of the shoulder and swelling in that area, then break them open over there and remove those tightenings for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If retained in the bone, you will use an instrument of yours that has been applied to this place (bone), and have already placed a stopper on the sternum's structure; it is made from either wood or metal - these are its forms.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It appears that the text is written in Medieval Latin with influences from other Romance languages such as Italian and Spanish:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of it be as much as you can for surgery; let there be enough arms and two different sizes.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the wound you have incisured when extracting the splinter from the bone is secure with apastemy (apostem), then adjust the lips of the wound stitched together.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the rupture is slight, or if you fear an abscess forming, then apply moist linen and pills according to the quantity of the patient' extruded matter.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you have sutured an abscess, then clean it with water and oil, and place your hand over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the bone when it is broken and torn, be wrapped in plaster made of wheat flour mixed with egg white (albumen), placed over a wooden board marked 'stopa leon' to hold its shape; then wrap that bandage twice around both the dressing and the stopa. Hold onto your hands using humerus bones held together, which will serve as long-term support for it. Wrap those bands in cloth covering them from underneilella stela (small tablet), wherein its width is three fingers wide by length; then wrap that bandage around the entirety of the break with a sheet and place beneath thereon stone slab, which will cover both dressing and arm above elbow. Hold onto your arms while rotating them overhead along with head movement (titillation), as well as for limb mobility; reduce it until bone fracture resolves into fractured parts — this should not be hidden on you anymore.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here is the line-by-line translation into English:
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Return the patient'supinates to their thorax on the chest of them so that they may rest there, and tap gently until tonight into a small cushion; thus enabling his helper from above (possibly an attendant or another individual) to lift him up which elevates the fractured clavicle either by lifting the muscle itself or raising their arm at the collarbone of them.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	No pull back the sinew if you do not harden or ulcerate at the place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	When you have seen the face of the patient turned towards water (indicating an injury or condition related to wetness), adjust the bandage tightly at the constriction point, and restore that which has been broken in the shoulder blade until it is healed and clotted.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Strict and comfortable according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some pains occur at home during that time of such.
Capitol .vi.	Given that "Capitol .vi." is not an actual
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The provided text appears to be in a mix of Latin and possibly some regional Italian, given the context of orthopedic surgery for shoulder
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The line translates into English as: "Spoon broken in its location is not torn out of it but rather the edges." In a medical context, this suggests that when dealing with a fractured spoon (which seems to be metapsychologically symbolic for
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	The translated line reads: "And when it is broken in the place of it — and fractured therein—it's not known but by touch, as per your guidance for preparation you will shape and reduce that fragment according to its natural form within all means at your disposal." In a medical context related to spinal injury or surgery on the vertebrae (vertebris), this implies careful manual handling of fractured bone fragments is required. The goal would be to mold them back into their proper alignment, which may involve some degree of artistry and engineering-like precision given that it mentions "total means at your disposal," suggesting various techniques or tools could potentially be used in the process for reconstruction after a fracture has occurred – possibly involving cervical vertebrae (vertebris), as indicated by 'C' from Capit
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	The line translates as: "Apply pressure on the spot where molasses and wax are applied, stop at the double layer of cloth; apply gentle touch with a delicate stone slate from the altar according to what is taken by your spatula—either all or perhaps just one." In this context involving medical care for injuries such as vertebra fractures (vertebris), it seems that there's an emphasis on applying specific treatments with precision, likely referring to a process of bone setting. The term 'spatula,' which might denote the instrument used by healthcare providers during manual therapy or examination post-injury—could refer here either literally as in spinal manipulation
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May it be that the stone' extruded in parts of the chisel is concave at those locations; then grip and align such indentation according to equality on the tool itself.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from below upward away from constriction and the closure of the spine within that place, so it is not weakened in its location therein.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, repeat this process to strengthen your joint (the stone).
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When gout is laid upon one'thy flesh as it were (meaning that when suffering from gout affects your body), here begins the treatment approach
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	It takes either xx days or x.x days for the spatula to be restored/replaced (the specific number of days is missing in this fragment; please provide additional context
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And so when this number of days is completed, then you break down the ligament and ensure that it is secure from those bones which I started not to fear or wish for its destruction (the context implies a treatment procedure involving repairing something over time—possibly surgical intervention related to fixing joints affected by gout).
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you progress through the area of the shoulder and neck bones and place pillows under them gently, then divide it here, as mentioned in cases of hip joint fracture with curative heat application when necessary at this location.
Capitol .vii.	The given text seems like an ancient medical instruction in Romance languages with some Latin
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of bone breakage treatment at the wrist." (Note: The phrase "restauracio de la fractura del piat
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The wrist bone sometimes gets broken out in the warmth of its place, and may have to use hands that are compressed or manipulated thereupon (to treat). Here they refer possibly to manual therapy techniques involving compression on the affected extremities—likely thumbs due to context. The treatment mentioned involves handling these parts with pressure which might be aimed at reducing pain or aligning a fracture, common approaches in pre-modern medicine before modern interventions were
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	From the mishaps when it gets cold out there they declare that limbs and joints may experience severe pain, difficulty in movement, coughing up phlegm (which might indicate chills or fever associated with inflammation), weakness of legs ("fort leu"), nausea ("vomeys sanc" - a term likely referring to vomiting due to the discomfort from injury). This is said particularly when bones have been broken and there's clear suffering as felt by those present, without any attempt at concealing these symptoms. Here they emphasize that pain should not be ignored or hidden in case of skeletal fractures; it’s a reminder for prompt medical attention according to medieval sensibthy belief systems where bodily signs were closely linked with health status and required
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	For the treatment of it being that bone has been fractured (presumably referring back to a wrist or hip situation from earlier sentences), they suggest: rest with heavy blankets over their two shoulders, placing pillows between the shoulder blades; and adjusting muscles as well as aligning thoracic spine curvature in such ways that are feasible according to current knowledge. Here medieval practitioners would advocate for gentle care during treatment—possibly a form of restorative body position or simple immobilization technique (akin to modern traction) before the bone heals back into its proper shape, indicating an understanding from their era that physical manipulation and supportive devices could aid in recovery. The text reflects not only care for skeletal integrity but also a concern with maintaining spinal alignment—which was considered important even then (though our current knowledge of orthopedics has since evolved). These methods suggest some level of practical wisdom, likely built upon centuries or millennia of observational medicine.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke the dismemberment of that which corrupts or causes pain in the location you have touched with your finger and needle, then remove the impurity (emplastre) from there immediately; if needed for a time period, reduce its size according to what suits healing on this individual'dictor. And adjust it so as not to allow that which is injured within him back into his cavity while maintaining strictures necessary for recovery.
Capitol .viii.	In this translation of Latin-influenced text related to medieval medical practices into
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When the coasts are broken, or when there is a need for restoration in these areas—here begins our discussion on beach rehabilitation
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You understand that a fracture of the coast does not occur in large masses but rather where their two parts are separated; and from these extremities, removed to those joints which have become calcified—these bony areas need addressing due to them being softened by water. Here we examine how beach injuries differ when involving broken limbs versus fractured coastlines:
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Upon learning of him/her not being bewitched by his/her feelings, I realize that he/she is seeking for truth about himself/herself.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration shall be as the patient can bear it according to their ability, entering when they are ready and applying bandaging or strapping where necessary on the broken bone(s), if required by that individual's capacity.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the spine is declining towards the parts where it has broken down, you will experience sharp pain and puncturing sensation therein, similar to when one cries, and for that reason your clothes should be removed; difficulty in breathing (panting), cough, hoarseness, vomiting of phlegm - all these symptoms are indicative of a difficult treatment.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	Even then, they are engaged in that action of motion within this place.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Here come their saying: cover that which causes the belly to inflate and tremble, so that the stomach is distended and pushed towards its divisions.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we drink water to prevent it from becoming the cause of an abscess formation if not already inflamed; and if indeed it is inflamed, may this aid in reducing it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the groin (belly area) is forcefully contracted and does not suffer, pinch it with a needle for puncture, fearing over it; when they fracture above that location, revealing the broken bone, then pause on that instrument which maintains the joint capsule, as remembered beforehand (likely an intra-articular tool used by medieval physicians), and this will facilitate their removal of what is already there.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	When we adjust the sores on the lower lip if they are large, let it be done with care and treat them inside where healing occurs.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an abscess that is sore and tender to touch upon the location, press gently with soft pressure on it and ensure healing occurs due to the fluid applied for the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When it is placed upon the bed where they rest, so that it heals there.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual Latin-
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The translation for the line provided, which appears to be in Old Spanish or early modern European vernacdict related to bone healing of the lumbar and thoracic vertebrae
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some days after a broken rib or backbone bones have healed and resemble those of the lumbar vertebrae (the "dos"), then apply compression to them, indicating an early method for immobilizing fractures in medieval times likely aimed at supporting recovery. The translation captures both the treatment approach taken during that period as well as a sense of urgency or routine care required after such
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When water has cooled and you wish to know if they will heal or not; when their spirits are soothed and calmed down that it seems deadly motionless in them - at which point the bones must be carefully compressed, but without further extension nor strengthening of those limbs. If there is pain present within these restrained movements using needles (probably as a form of early acupuncture or palpation), you understand that they are not healing; and during times when their conditions worsen - which I infer to be signs indicating the onset of complications like infection, sepsis can follow. This suggests an awareness among medieval practitioners (doctors) about secondary issues such as potential spreading pus or blood flow beyond simple fractures – a concern for serious consequences if not properly managed with restraint and immediate medical response. The translation delves into the treatment process, highlights critical observations made by healers indicating what was considered healthy recovery versus worsening conditions leading to potentially life-threatening complications at that time in history.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If those and feel in them contractions and piercing, you will know that the bone of the body is saved and the humors guard their cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see in your backbone's likeness the water and wish to know if it is healing or not, then pay attention to his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you find that it has already softened, apply these waters to the areas where they have occurred on your body, and as soon as you lie down over your back, hiccoughs may occur, leading to vomiting or an urge to urinate; at this point, understand that death is near, hence there's no need for treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If there is not any cure for that cause of them, then it'se worse and more painful.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E la cura del male è che tu ti purifichi con il calore dell'asportazione chirurgica che ferma sulla vertebra schiacciata o rovinata, oppure fango di ruscelli d'acqua; si posiziona sopra quella alcune volte al giorno finché la lesione asportata è sedata.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	When one of the cushions for comfort and exists, rests upon that which is tied with thread; commands the humors to take a pause and tranquility, not sleeping on the place where pain resides so it can heal.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you decrease the bone'dict of the joint or any cause that is already separated from it, then apply pressure on the spine and hold onto that bone; adjust the lips of the flesh if there is a large wound, suture if necessary, and care for such skin with what has been encased in grease until healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the bone at the hip joint is broken and it's the end of the coccyx (tailbone), then where you insert your left hand under their butt cheek, doing so with caution as possible for the fracture on the other side; apply pressure over this area if indifferent to these interventions. And strengthen that part accordingly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel sharp pains in the body, attend to that area and apply pressure therein; this will aid healing as long as it is restored within which it has become unwell.
Capitol .x.	Given that "Capitol" is not followed by any text
De restauracio de la ancha.	The phrase provided, "Restauracio de la ancha," appears in Italian and translates
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The phrase translates to English as follows:  
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of it is that you stretch your hand over there which is on top of the breakage, representing its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only in one of your limbs, then you should apply that second piece which has been carried into it by means of an embrace until it forms naturally to its figure again.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May it be that the fracture is in the long bone or already declining into its parts, then you shall speak to the malady within your belly while preparations are made for the healing of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have applied the plaster to that area, pause over there on either a beam of wood or bone, and press firmly without fearing chiseling for a fracture or removing the spine from its position.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May you apply an enema with caution so that it ceases from your body and restoration within until the application of such has calmed this inflammation; return to the patient's normal state afterward, applying pressure on what remained above once more using a cover for its absorption.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you break your shins or they are fractured, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	CXI. Here it goes as translated line by line into English
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	In this phrase, "Capitol .xi." in Latin suggests a reference to a specific section or chapter labeled 'XI' of some
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	This translates into English as: "Here the adjutant is between the shoulders, at the top of the shoulder." This line appears to describe a character or individual'dictated by their position relative to other parts of the body in this context
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	This translates into English as follows: "If it is broken, then the restoration of him/her (the adjutant) must be done with two types of rope tools; one that you grasp in your hand to pull out any fragments due to fracture according to this manner." Here, 'trencat' means broken or shattered. The sentence suggests methods for mending a breakage using specific implements—likely some form of binding material such as ropes made from natural fibers like hemp that were common
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	This translates into English as: "They are two types of cords; they should be hung from the raised location." This line suggests that there is more than one type of cord or sinew available for use in repair, which will then need to hang at a certain point—possibly
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	This translates into English as: "Follow the humors down a channel; and apply gloves to your injured arm inside which it will arrive at this pillar of light where its curve forms with the staff." Here, 'malaute' likely refers back to body fluids or energies in medieval medical theory. The sentence describes placing an object (possibly representing these humors) along a specific path—a channel within the arm and using gloves for protection as it reaches some therapedictated position where its shape aligns with, perhaps symbolically represented by 'the pillar of light'. This
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	E the other manipulation is that the hernia rises above the lower back and suspends its head from the neck joint; and commands two ministers, one of whom holds their urine with their tongue (indicating bladder control), while the other touches it gently below them (possibly referring to stimulating or massaging internal organs); they extend these actions throughout his body.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish the extension to be forceful, then hold it tightly on the fracture and that other lameness, so that both of your servants stretch their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the bone fracture is near a limb'dictor muscle, then hold one splint over the joint and another immediately afterward on the fracture site itself to stabilize it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if there is a break in the knee joint, then it should be bandaged over that spot and on the knee itself.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "He then makes it easy and secure for her/himself, applying as much of it as possible when covered well by good application, otherwise this hardens that ulcer.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you apply cauterization and tighten the strictures within a day, placing small stitched wool padding on top for five days (and resting), then continue to stretch that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And when the injury to the arm requires an interposition plaster (cast), and wrapping involves covering that cast with a woolen shroud; additionally adjust your arms around this assistant' extrication of dislocation, holding their hands in place over their muscles.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	When the sheet and strength are placed over the assistant' extricating hand to keep it in place for bone fractures prevention if there is not any other cause of injury (bone break).
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then they use tweezers.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence: When breaks in that stone which was pushed and driven out by other stones; pause between any of those stones, where it is at rest according to their heights, being three feet from each end of all parts divided.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength over the stones at which I have mentioned as constriction in the meeting of heads,
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your constriction at the site of the fracture is loose/loose-fitting, it means that something has been adjusted or loosened properly in place where there was a break (implying he
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when you have lengthened the area of the fracture, it implies that some form of extension or stretching has been applied to alleviate a minor constriction associated with
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you find the situation of your bones and constriction as we have described when restoring the limb to its position, then that's what you should do (implying a continuation or an action based on previously discussed treatment methods for healing). This line suggests following specific procedures outlined in medical texts from this time period. It implies adherence to established wisdom regarding bone fractures and related constrictions within the context of medieval medicine practices.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear atrophic contracture (which refers to the wasting away and tightening of skin after a fracture), then apply pressure on the constriction, keeping both bones within reach by day seven as we've discussed today—emphasizing timely intervention. This line underscores an immediate response when specific conditions are met (fearing contract
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then consider the bandage in all parts for three days to ensure that it does not become conspicuous or inflamed at the site of application, and avoid excess food intake on limbs due to unnecessary tightness caused by constriction—thereby correcting everything as we have outlined. This line advises on dietary considerations following a fracture (to prevent issues related with too much consumption that could exacerbate swelling or discomfort) and reinforces the importance of proper care including rest, nutrition, immobilization in treatment duration, as well as adhering to previously mentioned methods for ensuring optimal healing.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If today you are on bed rest and there is no cause for the swelling, do not remove the bandage but rather leave it in place for up to three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his leg rest over his back, and have your hands on their belly.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the assistant'thy warm wool garment is complete, and consider in every hour of day or night that neither his figure has been dissolved nor damaged by any means, then correct whatsoever according to your intention.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the food of the malady according to the order we have today, so that the food is subtle during consumption within which it should be consumed; and when heavy food enters his body.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom of the assistant and the bed linen, they should be firm within forty days; moreover when they become loose and are bathed in water or anointed with ointment that corrects it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the bone is broken and rubbed together, do not remove that bandage or splints from it for days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii. (The label "Capitol" followed
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Translation of your provided text appears incomplete, but I will attempt to understand and translate the context related to a bone
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The provided text seems to be a description in Old French or archaic Latin related to the anatomy of the arm (brachis), which includes two bones connected by joints: one small and referred to as the "finger," while the other is larger, located proximally from where the finger articulates. Here's a translation into English line by line for clarity:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	When either the large or small fire is broken only once, and their pieces are used together as one instrument.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small flame below is broken, then restoration and healing of it are made easier for him/her.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the patient's fire (body energy) is broken for a long time after an injury of the body part becomes ill and healing it gets difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that hump of it (the cold humor) is when two bones are broken,
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that has been broken is the small one above (possibly referring to a part of the pelvis or hip), it is convenient for the doctor; you must restore this bone so briefly until such time as when that piece becomes stable within its place.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that if the great fire is what we have ignited, then I will hold back its violent extension firmly.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two fever spots are connected and you pause their extraction forcefully, then do so with caution/carefulness.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of the hand must be rested and extended over a pillow, placing its palms at the body' extricable parts (the head), put all others as directed by them, positioning their ears on top of other things, with malady underneath an inverted cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	When a hernia is present under or above him therein now, in order that the humors may not worsen.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Extend the arm of the participating person quickly with their hand or bandage on it, and another minister extends downwards like a drape.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And let the doctor gently insert the bone into that which has been swolthy, following its best shape as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone fracture there is swelling throughout the entire body part where it occurs due to your action (implying injury or treatment), then address and reduce all pain at that location with what you have as a remedy, according to your ability/knowledge.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in you separate satiety that pushes the navel and is not within your hope for its restoration, then upon it act according to our previous indication.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May it be that if there is a bone breakage (fracture), you have felt pain in one place only (singular), and therefore take the care of that particular spot.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you prick the patient's wound with cauterizing needles after their restoration, then tie a linen soaked in olive oil and white wax around that spot where the abscess is; also place pause emplastrum prepared from powdered honey mixed with clay for healing. Afterward, replace the wax and apply pressure bandages again until it subsides; thereafter secure a stone placed over this fracture point which was set in place by you using force.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You understand that the name of the bones in the arm is found mainly in two major positions, either a fracture at one focus or at two foci simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the text to translate: Return your pressure on the location of the fracture very firmly and vigorously, and when you may even release the tightness from the parts above or below the fractured bone, return it with just a little moistened pressure following its recall in the main discussion.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb (body part) with its natural elasticity today.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any cause that requires correction, address it immediately to the affected limb and ensure that you bandage or wrap the limb with water-soaked cloth until the inflammation subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let it rest inside where it was compressed, and return its tightness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the dislocation has been softened and the bone appears to be returning back towards its original position, then straighten out all of it with your willpower.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if the nourishment is prohibited to prevent harm to the body part due to excessive tightness; when this occurs, it's necessary that you soften that little bit and strengthen over time until they can have what they need again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If in the patient' extramundan cause is not alleviated within two days or sent away from these causes, then do not attempt to separate it further into parts for more than that timeframe.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	When it is necessary for his abdomen' extraneous fluid (suspendua) to be lifted due to its active motion causing him discomfort and sleep on the chest floor should occur:
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You understand that this fracture is restored in either xxx days or xxxii days, and all depends on the complexity of the injury and the disposition of the body.
Capitol .xiii.	In translating this text line by line into English while considering its mix of languages
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	The phrase "Restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz" in a medical context related to English, seems like it's discussing the treatment of a
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	The provided sentence appears to be from Medieval Latin with some linguistic elements possibly influenced by local Romance languages like Italian or Spanish: "Sapias que a la pinche de la ma endeve fractura, e non accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas." Here's the translation into English considering historical context and medical terminology of that era:
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you have the patient' extruding or herniating their bowels, then take hold that the humors follow out and lie in such measure as is of equal parts by ten, and place your hand over it thereupon which covers its extension.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Extend the minister'se fingers into those broken together where they have joined well (good congruency).
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	When you have stopped the bleeding with plaster and lint (bandage), and placed pressure stone under according to the quantity of blood present in that place, then you already have wrapped it all up in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the bruise is in the parts of your belly, and it appears like drape fabric, then order the patient to press that area with their hand firmly held together (as if holding onto a long cloth); this will strengthen the pressure applied by the hands on the bruised part.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it is necessary for the body's core to rest on the cloth wherein it rises, then tightly hold that second one with your strength.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the parts beyond repair, then stop below these two stones from the parted joint and hold them with your hand so that it becomes protected (healed) and stiff; also pause the swelling, as when you rotate the movement of the hand back between the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break the bones of your fingers, and it is in your thumb, then gently hold them as close to the palm as possible, if you wish, pause for a little while on this small stone under their finger (palma), so that the fracture can be raised and not deformed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be so that if the fracture is in those other places (the hip joint or groin area), similar to where there was one initially, then hold and place your hand on what they call this; otherwise, continue placing them all according to continuation, which would be better. Alternatively, pause over a small stone as when we placed it between the feet.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider when restoring, and position that which is applied for apostemy caution – as in the treatment process – according to what has been narrated about you (the patient).
Capitol .xiv.	The given text appears to be an ancient or medieval medical treatise discuss
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	In restoring a pubic bone fracture, one might interpret the line as referring to treatment procedures for a broken pelvic bone (coxa), such as:
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the pubic region (coxa) has been broken and is considered displaced from its normal position, as per what it feels to be separate now rather than together with adjacent structures within the body or pelvic socket (os piriforme). The Latin phrasing indicates that medical professionals have assessed a fracture where there seems to have occurred an alteration in alignment.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of him is done so that the sinew is tightened over the fracture and another bandage afterward; the humidity settles on his abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Whenever it is necessary for the minister (physician) to extend their reach according to the quality of the break in bone location during feverish heat moments:
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Might it be for the knee joint'dictorium (assumed term here), then apply one lashing to the tendon at the thigh segment of the femur bone, so that extension occurs in them, and another as soon after a fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the dislocation is promoted by dryness, then it will be treated with linen bandage and its extension to the joints immediately.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here the doctor gently wraps the arm around their own twice as much until it reduces that second back into its natural form and good union of bones; provided they do not paralyze a member affected by apoplasia (tissue decay due to poor circulation).
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If there is an ulcer present, then you should keep it clean for as many days until the sore heals, and return to your usual care afterwards.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The contracture of him is painful: the hard bandage that covers the fracture, and folds it twice or thrice a while, removes excess; and properly wraps around within so as to reach up to the ankle and knee joints of his thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Here the leather strap is inserted between the thigh and calf of that particular body region where pain occurs after using too much bandage, then their extremities (hands/feet) attached to this belt by means above those joints which are on top for balance purposes.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return your pause above that bone at the location of that breakage, and a stone placed upon the bones of her thighs.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return the empty spaces between the blanket and thighs with molasses, to ensure that bleeding is stopped.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here begins the constriction of a tight band around the site of the three-layered or four-layered breakage; and as you move away from the location of the fracture, your tightness decreases, and softer pressure is applied along with moisture.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return their limbs from the patient' extrémities (feet and hands) back within where they enter into the cavity of the foot, stretching out the extremities of other tools used by another part so that its thread does not escape its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Here comes the translation line by line:
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	May if the bone of the arm is pushed by it that putted it together, then you must cauterize such a second one; and if not possible, press upon it here and remove what' extraneous thereof may be present. And take care for which remembrance precedes healing within this period allowed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Here come some hardships of the hip joint that have been adjusted with these tools, as we discussed earlier in this chapter and on our arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even in the act of restoring him in such a manner, he does not feel relief for his limping leg; and if restored alone, another cushion that is applied must be used on which side it hurts most when walking.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	E understand that the thigh is tense for up to four days or a few weeks depending on the complexity and other dispositions of each individual case.
Capitol .xv.	The text provided appears to be from an ancient medical document discussing treatments for
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	When translating the given phrase related to "the restoration of a humerus (upper arm bone) dislocation," here is how it could be translated line by line into English
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Understand that the shoulder (humerus) dislocation requires careful manipulation movements to restore it back into place.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If you break the bone of it (the patient), then what comes is not a simple crack or disruption in their parts, but rather fracture or displacement, and all about this there stands established feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The restoration of it is achieved by applying warm water that has been broken up from its parts inside where they are gathered, aiming for joint conjunction and ease as well as production according to necessity.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Return an ointment plaster and pressure over that round stone if you find it within her; apply force below to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.: (The original text does not provide enough context
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	From the restoration of the patella." - This sentence suggests a focus on healing or fixing an injury to the kneecap, known
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	As to the patella (kneecap), which consists of two bones—one large and known as 'the knee,' and another smaller one called a sesamoid bone ('sesame seed')..." - This line is describing the anatomy of the kneecap, detailing that it comprises not just one but at least two bones within its structure. The larger bone might refer to part of the femur (thighbone), while the smaller sesamoid b
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And from the same essence of humors that harden within each arm bone—these are what cause a break (fracture)... Thus, like in healing one's entire arm together, so too is this operation." - Here, it seems to discuss how similar principles apply when treating fractures caused by the solidification of body fluids inside both arm bones. The treatment and restoration are presented as comprehensive actions that address not only individual parts but also consider them holistically for effective healing—this suggests a medieval understanding where physiological processes were interconnected, echoing practices from other cult
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If both bones are broken inwardly (intricately or concurrently), then the kneecap is transformed into all parts." - This sentence indicates that when there's an intricate break between two components of the patella, it essentially affect
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If even the small bone undergoes breaking—then the kneecap is transformed into parts named after Dentes." - This suggests that if an especially fine or delicate component of the patella (the sesamoid bone mentioned earlier) breaks, it leads
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If your bone is cracked or broken (trincat el os pujós), then straighten it quickly and these are causes beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	When applying extension and flexion of the joints according to that manner,
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	May God be with you, if the crack in the coccyx has caused spasms to occur and it is stretched out painfully, then seek help from your physician.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is any cause for operation on the arms, and when you grasp the tongs to perform the entire arm operation, at that moment take wooden pincers with which has been paused previously in soles (i.e., underground), as they are used for bone setting or manipulation of joints; apply these tools where there is fracture fixation needed immediately after discovery and not by hand but using the fingers reserved, according to the length corresponding to that part's extent, entering into the pus at once.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Envelop a cloth around any of the garments as per their length, and pause one over the division between the cushions of each side, ensuring they are within the putrid matter at the foot' extrices (the area being treated).
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Assign them their pains in three locations of extremities and at midnight time, wherein this position is forbidden for lying down on either right or left side; it's good reason.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a trumpet of wood is administered according to the length of the cushion, and it is placed on the cushion in such a way that allows for its continued motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you apply cold in a fracture, and at that moment it is children who are properly affected.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvii.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance languages with Latin
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	From the breakdown (fracture) of the calcaneus (heel bone, known as "talo") and the bones in the leg ("osses del pe"), including those around the
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	From the calcaneus (heel bone), not all experience complete breaks in their breakdowns; from time tos (`veguadas`) some of the leg'se(bone) fractures, and those involving joint dislocations—as they are situated at various points within dispositions. In such cases where there is a partial breaking or less severe injury observed among these bones (osses del pe), it may not be as critical; instead, immediate repositioning of the displaced part becomes necessary for proper healing and alignment restoration.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot have been broken and their positions are sometimes raised above themselves between them, then let the humors settle on the affected part upon a ground prepared as occasion requires.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Return the leg over that which is lifted from these bones and apply warmth to them; press and massage those limbs until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Return and apply pressure on his abdomen using a small table with two covers: Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that part of the body' extrinsic structure downwardly placed it, so you have wrapped it up and addressed other potential causes for which patients seek remedy.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, and if bones are broken or displaced (fractures/dislocations), these issues must be addressed in those ways with splints.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If your teeth are loose (the source sentence seems to be about dental issues), they will be restored and brought back into the mouth as you eat, along with recommendations from me for their restoration.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And set the pause according to its length, and place some padding under it as you are directed, tightening that area for proper alignment of this joint structure which is recommended by you.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May it be that if the bones are cracked two or three times (or more), then you pause over each part of the patient's body covered in a lion-skin, and stretch the table at the bottom of the chest for the tongue to stay good. Holding restraint.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you not to overlook that which has been mentioned to you about the causes of these accidents, and I will address everything related to this water-borne incident.
Capitol .xviii.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise written in
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	This line is likely attempting to describe a bone injury involving the hip (femur), forearm/elbow (ulna, which could be what "pent" refers to in this context if we consider it as an abbreviation or misspelling of 'ulna'),
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone (femur) is broken, it lies in its current position and leans slightly towards the upper body's joint involved ('partita'), with hands placed behind to provide support or stabilization. This translation assumes "conh" refers to 'córa,' which means thigh/hip area of bone injury contextually here; however, due to possible language mixing in this excerpt (Medieval Latin-like phrasing combined with some modern Spanish terminology), there may be interpretative variations:
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Here the matron places her hand over the wound, and there is pain in it during breathing; she also touches the woman' extruded body parts piece by piece until they are fully inside again as soon as respiration occurs while bone fragments return to their position.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place soft pillows on the two of them (the patient), when they urinate, it reduces discomfort and facilitates urination; return that second after using as directed by physicians' instructions, returning to their first position afterwards.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	When applied for seven days or brought into use herein, that individual is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take once upon the sheep'thy and tighten it over the patient’s abdomen with a bamboo canula; insert your entire bladder into said catheter until inflated within its chamber, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Return its inflamed area covered with bandages for several days until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of either home or woman are broken, administer in their restoration and massage the fluid that we have recommended for use in the thigh bone'supreme.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And when the root of this particular break is not hidden and rarely occurs to him whom I am instructing with my book, that fracture indicates a major dietary route in restoration and restriction herein; thus, it'm understood by you.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When in the womb it is broken, take linseed oil and apply it there; place pressure on that area with a cloth wrap, cover her up entirely, and leave covered for three days or send them here to be cured.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. (The original text does not provide additional context
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When bones are broken in children." The phrase indicates a situation where there is a medical concern involving the skeletal system of young patients, who have more malleable and rapidly
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	At the convenient location to which you apply for fracture when bones are broken in children, and mostly if the bone is severely displaced like that of the knee or adjacent area, where someone who has performed an amputation on such a part tells them they can do so there as well.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the patient'thy humors flow out freely, then you must sit with him to prevent his body from scattering its essence dispersed on earth, unless another cause is at play.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When bone healing begins on that day, do not extend it unless there is an ulceration formed.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you cauterize the ulcer, then heal it within one day (until the ulcer recedes), but do not apply to him on the third and fourth days in total; otherwise, ill-fated accidents may occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	May it be evident above the discovered vertebra if your bone is fractured; should that occur, then you must act to reduce and reset that very same thing with ease for yourself and a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be your preparation and the equipment of him that is at hand, then reduce that which you have on yourself; this thing by iron made for its length either seven digits or eight, and for width second as much as there's need according to what he requires in his care throughout all fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And give rest and a little bit of relief for that it is not twisted beyond the comprehension in the hour of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it goes:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E it is common in Greek "swooping cautery," hence a small one (pallet).
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that body part which is being held up should rest on the top of the bone protruding outwards.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When they enter a fasting period so that bones return and their tongue is placed at some chairs (likely for rest or observation),
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus you should grasp the limbs of the fracture, and if that part is delicate and does not take on that intervention for good reason, then it's necessary to insert what instrument has power into that bone which was broken.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the swelling of all that we have recommended, then decide on what amount of fluid has come from those abscesses which we advise upon; cut off or use one of your saws for this purpose if it is within your means.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	When returning that which is hard in the bone and sharp small pieces into its cavity, place your hand over it so that nothing extrudes from the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and you hold onto that reduction, there will be a strong pain in the dislocated joint as it does not return to its original place naturally; hence at this time, provide great care for the dislocation.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and you submerge the linen tightly wrapped around the head, especially in summer when there'dict be neither dirt nor other cause that might make it happen, so that nothing will stick or decay on this covering.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And administer ointments in the hour of tooth alignment with restoration, apply what is discovered beneath soaked flax as a poultice and according to its quantity found therein.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a looseness of bone that tightens or constricts unlike other types of fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the child is large or ill-formed and it has accidents that physicians have recommended for treatment, causing pain in the place where they rest on their supports, perhaps cease those pauses there; then wrap them tightly with hard sheets at the site of support and hold onto them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the patient is allowed to urinate once or twice a day, which in that time produces bile (choler), then lift up the cloth where you have previously placed them restrained and apply medicines made of wax for what our custom dictates we treat pus. When combined with four-drug compounds and resembling substances directed to it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when you make sure that the bandage is applied and consider the patient'se condition daily during morning and evening times, so that their limb becomes prepared in such manner for easy insertion of a poultice (or treatment).
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the patient stays for days without rest and their brace does not solidify nor fall off from them, you will understand that small pains in these places are being sought after because they attempt to go out (perhaps indicating a desire to move or seek relief).
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (probably referring to foul or impure substances within the body) that are removed and separated outwards, those which cannot be entirely severed from each other and put back into place causing pain, therefore take note of them according to what you can do with them.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you crush the worm or excrete it, they become sickened (suffer), and so doctors pause in applying one of those waters which are necessary for treatment as previously described in their medical writings.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xx.	Capital .xx.: This line appears incomplete or possibly an annotation for
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The translation of the given Italian phrase related to bone healing post-fracture is:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Movement is guided in the healing process of a fracture herein primarily at joints and mainly along with the figure of the body part; by law it must not perform its own movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	And consider if the nodulation is recent and administer in those medicines that have stitched wounds closed with threads or sinews, ashes, poultices, ointments; apply some of these to either a few or all affected areas, applying them externally on gauze (or bandages), which constricts the nodes and provides comfort for those treated.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Leave out any extraction that doesn'thy not decide in a few days; and remove what thou hast decided upon it repeatedly until the nodule is purified, or stretch over its bone layer made of lead, for lead has property to draw out all moisture imposed on the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that the wedding has turned and torn apart your body in such a way, so when this thing causes pain inside of you urgently, cut away its excessive parts with care until nothing remains except what must heal; take care within to make healthy again.
Capitol .xxi.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or additional sentences for
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the restoration of bone is completed and according to nature'dictates, subtlety and freedom are restored to the limb gently as per Roman tradition. (Note: This translation attempts to balance elements from Latin ("Roman"), Italian, Spanish, and French structures while interpreting medical terminology contextually; actual translations may
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, according to Roman tradition: not for arbitrary reasons but due to causes such as overuse of the ligament and tendon which has been injured; or because excessive tightness within these structures prevents nourishment from reaching the limb. These could be caused by continuous motion outside its natural timing (overextension), superfluous padding around a joint that impedes circulation, sudden movements causing undue strain on muscles and tendons, accumulation of fluid in tissues leading to swelling ("pauquesa"), or excessive pressure inside the abdomen affecting lymphatic drainage.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Care for the excess water is to drain it away from the body and make the patient's heart tender within, apply washing, and administer gauze and tendernthy balm on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Return the pause (pressure) on the limb so that it draws nourishment into itself or remains embedded in water vapor within its body cavity, ensuring that nourishment circulates back to restore the body'dict normal form.
Capitol .xxii.	The provided text appears to be translating medical practices or conditions from an ancient language
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	When the bones are set in a twisted manner, it is forbidden to operate on them now (implying that immediate surgical intervention should not be pursued). This sentence emphasizes caution and suggests rest instead of or as an alternative before considering any kind of operation. It's likely addressing proper treatment for certain types of bone
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the limb has been properly set for tortuosity and elevation of the broken bone, it is guarded by way of binding; however, this member cannot be precluded from natural healing surgery at present time (implying immediate intervention should not occur). The text implies that while a bound or immobilized limb isn't eligible for an operation under these circumstances—due to the focus on nature’dictated healing of recent fractures—it does suggest future possibilities if natural recovery fails. It stresses careful monitoring and management, with surgery as a last resort should conservative methods not lead to expected improvements in bone alignment or reduction over time.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	If doctors and restorers have caused this in our treatment, such surgery would be lost without merit due to great fear of the quality with which we are associated; they imply that if their interventions led poorly or negatively affected patient outcomes (perhaps implying a previous unsatisfactory situation), it could harm one’s reputation. This sentence indicates concern over professional consequences and stresses not only physical but also reputational risks in medical practices, underscoring the importance of excellence both clinically and interpersonally within their field for do
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If stiffness and binding are recent developments (meaning not long ago), then it is said that they should be bathed in a bath containing soothing herbs, similar to aloe and rice bran; or perhaps their poultice consists of the mucilage from these same grains along with linseed oil or sesame seed oil for application on such limps (swollen joints); alternatively, they may be treated with a mixture that includes flax galls which are known in certain apothecary arts as agents to consolidate and heal wounds. This passage outlines various home remedies or medical interventions for stiffness possibly related to inflammation—emphasizing the use of natural substances like aloe, rice bran, flax galls (which might form during a process involving linseed), as well as oils derived from plants. The procedures involve external applications such as bathing or poultices and suggest that these are traditional remedies for consolidating wounds with their medicinal properties in mind—emphasizing the importance of natural, plant-based treatments within medieval medicine's scope (context provided by language structure which often hints at classical texts).
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some substances are dissolved by continuous exposure to cold fire that is applied on the body in all parts and at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May it if tenderness has been increasing recently and turned into stone and caused the need for care with iron tools as its pus descends from above cessations below bone dissolution, excess fluid production by that metallurgist down to where joints become loose fitting together due to continuous use; this is administered easily in response to urgent requests.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii. (Note: "Capitulum" could
De sermo en dislocacio.	The phrase "de sermo in dislocatio" translates to English as "from speech into
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	The translation of the provided medieval medical text into modern English is as follows: "From speech dislocation whereby no movement occurs; hence it necessitates an intervention for the limb and brings upon severe foot pain and large bruises." This line describes a situation in which someone has suffered from a joint being forced out of its normal position, resulting in restricted mobility (no movement), consequent injuries to their feet including significant discomfort ("foot pain") and potentially extensive swelling or hematoma characterized by "large bruises". The mention of speech may relate
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When fever accompanies joint dislocation, it is necessary to promptly perform reduction; if delayed, the location becomes fixed and water (blood or other fluids) accumulates therein making subsequent attempts at reducing a locked joint more challenging. This line emphasizes that when an acute infection like fever occurs alongside a dislocated limb ("ad alcu"), immediate action is required to reposition, known as "perforsar que sia reduzit." Failure or delay leads to the affected area becoming immobile (fixed) and resulting fluid accumulation makes further reduction efforts difficult. Here 'accideys' may refer metaphorically not just to physical illness but potentially also psychological distress
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	Therefore it is not necessary to bind or tie down the limb while attempting reduction; however, if movements are too frequent during this process ("motas vegetadas"), cramps and sharp pains will ensue. This statement suggests that constraining a dislocated joint with bandages (binding) isn't required when doing so for immobilization purposes at the time of attempted repositioning ('apostemacio'). However, if movements happen during this
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When you acquire acidity, cover yourself with the flapper of humors in the malady (body), and place your body inside so that restoration begins; also return your member to its position in water caudle and oils, and reduce it for ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	All body parts are cured by this water from which memory will come back in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And when the displacement occurs as described in a fracture, it enters from one side of the body into the other.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Given that "Capitol" is not accompanied by additional text in this context,
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	When it comes to the treatment of a displaced jawbone injury:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the jaws if not set; and for their displacement there are two methods: either they are slightly moved from their places with a little removal, and treated briefly at that location—here saliva comes out of its place (mouth) due to blockage in it. Alternatively, complete separation accompanied by conjunctivitis occurs here where the patient'se tongue is wrapped within his/her speech; treatment prevents them from holding or closing their mouth because they cannot retain what goes into and outside of their mouths any longer.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	May when the displacement of it is slight, in the major positions returns by itself a little bit.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it should be promptly addressed with its reduction, without delay in total.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The minister holds the chin of the patient, and inserts the doctor's finger from one jaw joint into the area of dislocation in the lower part of the mouth (if it is just one side), or both fingers simultaneously if it involves two sides, holding their hands. The doctor commands the jaw to stop moving and release any parts that have detached; then gently manipulthy relocates the jaw back into its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce him/her (the patient), and mostly if both jaws are dislocated, administer a poultice of water and oil inside the tailbone entrance, so that even with difficulty he/she will eventually be able to return reduction for both, thus completing what we have discussed.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and their mouth is closed and not soothed yet, place talcum powder on those pills of cloth therein, the wax and oil rubbed upon them for ease in speaking with breaths.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	E when the patient lies on their back and their head rests between two pillows, so that it does not move to either of its parts nor for some other reason; do not force-feed them bread (their food), but wait until the pains are alleviated and the jaws stop drooling, then give water.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is to be administered easily, and not work on the opening of the mouth for food intake and drinking until the jawbone becomes numb and heals.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and cannot be converted back to their respective positions during events, then constant fevers occur, and you must urgently press on the abdomen under pressure, and likewise forcefully apply cholera pure.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it again, then realize that I have lost it; and proceed carefully to the place where this fluid has accumulated over those days.
Capitol .xxv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	During the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone (furcula) and the limb's tendon/muscle, it is necessary to carefully manipulate these structures back into their normal position without causing further injury or pain.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not typically dislocated due to its attachment at the chest (pectus), but it can become so if an action causes displacement; and when this occurs, it's noted in terms of sensation or feeling within that region. This suggests a link between physical trauma resulting from movement outside normal ranges (veguadas) leading to dislocation – emphasizing the importance for medical professionals to be aware of symptoms indicating such injuries as they can provide vital clues about patient experiences and potential damage
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration process involves applying pressure to the affected area, so that it can stabilize under its own weight (mula) and extend outwards using supporting structures such as straps or bandages – implying a manual technique used by healers where external support is applied directly onto an injury site for immobil
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Apply pressure to the location with your hand as you attempt containment or reduction – indicating that manual compression by practitioners may assist in repositioning dislocated joints towards their natural alignment for potential return (retorna). This line suggests a hands
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Pause pressure over the bandage and cushion, then strengthen that – suggesting intermittent application of force combined with supportive devices to maintain or correct an injury's position during its healing process; a technique likely used by medieval
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity that holds the hernia remains in place every day and is not displaced on any given day – but when it's reduced (put back into position) as instructed by those who are knowledgeable about this, or according to your apparatus; implying a reliance on expertise for treatment adjustments based upon the state of healing. This emphasizes that professional guidance and possibly physical devices were considered in managing hernias during medieval times – ensuring proper care was tailored as needed by observing patient'severyday condition, with particular attention to how well-maintained a reduction is according to expert direction
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Return your hand pressure over that plastering, and light pulsation/massage, extractive technique; command the humors (fluids) within it to settle down and return into rest until healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this treatment method, pain from the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text appears to be translating medical practices from Middle Aged Latin or
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	From the reduction of muscle dislocation." This line suggests a treatment procedure in medieval medicine for correcting what they describe as an 'muscle dislocation
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated but in three ways: one where it becomes dislocated from its origin at once (immedioption), and another way." Here, two methods of what they believe to be 'dislocation' are described—one immediate ('immediate option') and potentially others ("another," which could refer to additional techniques that follow). This indicates an understanding in medieval medical practice that muscle dislocations might occur rapidly or through a series of events leading up
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is that it becomes dislocated below the muscle fiber, and this happens (translated as 'it takes place'); it's not dislocated in the parts behind concerning shoulder; nor on the ends of nerves." This passage clarifies a specific method by which they believe a muscle can become misaligned ('dislocated'), with reference to its position relative to other anatomical structures, like those around the shoulders and within peripheral nervous systems. The notion here reflects medieval attempts at understanding human physiology in context of injury or dysfunction as it relates to dislocations
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is a displacement and escape of the tendon from its joints (ligaments), mostly in those where veins are thin; maybe also when muscle fibers themselves move out." Here, they describe what seems to be 'dislocation' as an issue that often involves movement or slippage ('escape') of connective tissues like ligaments and tendons from their joints. It further suggests the possibility of dislocations where veins are thin ("thin-veined") areas—a reflection on how they might perceived connections between different parts, as well as potential challenges when muscles themselves move out or become displaced ('motas'). This line reveals medieval medical thought concerning anatomical relationships and pathologies that arise from them.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And when the acid touches or casts upon his bones through palpation or fracturing, and he has a paralyzed muscle due to loosening of joint connections, it is being compressed by fluid that already caused displacement (dislocation).
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now cover that which you breatthy exhale while standing overboard of it; and proceed with its healing process hereafter.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is a dislocation of the knee or joints and you show restraint without touching them directly, do not fear intervention will cause harm.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation it is feared that a light reduction will occur when fresh and the malady descends into the abdomen.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of it is that the servant lifts her up to their parts above and places gentle taps there quickly with drumsticks on top, elevating the joint back to its strength at this place; and then rests them briefly before returning gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May it return not and from the common sense that dislocation occurs (occurs), for days at a time until the hump of the tumor is immersed in tailwater and administered with broth made to soften and line up its ascent, using fenugreek, melilot, and honey dissolved in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to perform this action: and there should be present a long rod from the patient'se groin area belonging herewith (which is referred as 'laz in the source text), positioned under it, immediately insert your muscle into the hernia quickly while lifting what comes out of the abdomen with another servant; this will suspend the hernium within air.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	May it be that the thigh is weakened and another cause causes its suspension, thus making it return with such force as soon as possible when loosely repositioned/realigned.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And by another method of treatment is reduced as follows: a long staff with its head held downwards, similar to a mortar's handle, ensuring it isn’t thick nor too slender; fixate near the top of this stick within the patient's maul (belly), so that their pause remains there. The pressure above the staff is maintained on the belly, and its extension along the length of the staff aligns with intervals from another part belonging to it for strengthening purposes. This extends also the limbs back towards their original joint location rapidly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce the hernia for all these reasons mentioned, then use this treatment: take a stick of which its length equals two arm lengths, and the girth four finger widths wide at the palm's base (the thumb), where you hold.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place cloths or linens on his head, so that it does not press down the abdomen (the patient's stomach).
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Here the patient is already placed by delaying their titillic (touch or caress), extending the arm over the body within the parts immediately and placing the staff on assistants, arms, and hand extensions.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the intestine is completed according to any possible manner for you, and then you pause briefly its sperm of wool in quantity; and a plaster prepared with powdered lead mixed with egg white over all the muscle so that it can be turned upside down, and strong pauses applied thereon at the stricture points; and the ligature is twisted on top of this plaster, and your hand remains placed on the body to ensure that the bandage does not squeak for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When food from an excess of phlegm is stopped and the body part becomes comfortable, then it will recover healthfully.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Return food given more abundantly and exercise it with motion; hence if one closes up without softening, that too will heal.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	May it be if the joint is dislocated by moisture or for another reason, then in that case treat with three kinds of cauterization as described in the book on cauterizations.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all the pain is here and needs to be tied off for seven days, then the suture and tightness are reduced on it a few times, and it's not closed with cloth or cords at its joint parts, which you understand that these nerves of yours, which run through the muscle head, as well as extensions or softening treatments applied to them.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation that is happening in your chest and thighs or parts behind them, reduction is done by pushing and extending until it returns to normal position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it is administered in that other constriction, and its cure within which heals,
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you harden the body'sin health and delay its movement, then let that obstinate humidity be washed away by repeated baths until such obstructive condition is relieved and returns to your patient's original state of nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Curación of the joint's displacement." In this context, it seems like an instruction or reference in Latin related to tre
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You understand that the shoulder joint is dislocated; and it's displaced in all parts, mostly towards the posterior part of its articulation, and your own manipulations or touches according to any form are not dangerous if done carefully when realigning a previously dislocated shoulder. For once repositioned correctly, that juncture becomes concaved; hence it cannot bend the arm nor reach for what'dict.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When the hips are cracked and you reduce the displacement so much that a cautious application of force is needed (and if it's necessary to apply such force), difficult or nearly impossible will be its reduction, unless at the joint areas where all other species from dislocation exist in totality, causing greater pain than usual along with continuous movements towards them; hence they are more likely leading to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When the restoration of it is possible, which means that their body should be stretched out and extended in position (arms upward), and hands placed on hips or under chest area to return its joints into place at hip points or between fingers/palm touching each other where metge's hands are.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the parts nearby (implying it's close to or affecting a joint), then return them so that your hand rests on its surface until you hear the click of the knee wherein their palm touches, indicating proper alignment has been restored.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the dislocation does not submit to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And when two ministers stretch their arms and hold that instrument between them, it is to prevent excessive extension from happening.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And they turn over their arms entirely, placing a long cloth or bandage wrapped around the body of them, held by lariat.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, anoint that with some oil to help alleviate its causes and thus lubricate the joint for effective healing: apply massage techniques until it returns (to normal).
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if it is needed that he be unfastened; and therefore when the joint formation occurs at its place, then loosen the bandage of him and apply that to the said location.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not straighter, then apply the plaster and bandage repeatedly until it is extended outside again; after that, remove such thing.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you apply pressure on the joint to reduce swelling, and its position is in movement, then administer moisturizing care with warmth and gentle heat until it subsides; when there's a hernia at the fatty motion site, secure it and place that over the bone during daytime and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Here comes the translation:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Am inserted into that which is within (introduced or placed inside), wherein it settles down/retains its position (adheres
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And pause over that hollow of moist and cut cow hide at the edge and stretch upon it; make several passes whereby it becomes wet again and returns to its original state (shape or condition).
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The reference "Capitol" followed by
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Regarding the care for a joint displacement where it is between the arm and the body (possibly referring to an elbow or shoulder), here's the translation:
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When some of the masses are displaced and reducing its dislocation is difficult, it may occur at other joints as well; however, if reduction happens quickly when it's displaced, so that a fracture becomes immobilized (apostem or closed fracture), then:
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you stop the joint between the thigh bone and its socket on a table, and have the attendant extend that part, with either your hand or palm over the impending joint intersection; then push it back to where it belongs.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Whenever it is considered that the palm has been left on the belly of the patient, then the hernia must be pressed down with two hands upon a table to extend and reduce; if dislocation precedes, then place the position of the body over that intrinsic so that the doctor' extrication can occur at that impending joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	So if it returns shortly afterward, all is well then; but if not, that painful spot will harden and worsen until you intervene with today'thy treatment which has passed these days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	May the joint according to its twisted nature; and there is nothing in the malady that affects it, but rather it becomes soothed, with no cause being able to strengthen it; understand then that the nerves are compressed or squeezed, and you will realize when stretching for treatment purposes and strong water confer a cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when they are returned (probably referring to some form of therapy or treatment), place the one that has been prepared upon them, and have it laid down with strength for days; furthermore, cut off its excess and exercise both sides thereof daily.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	May it happen that the patient' extraneous movement is ceased and some cold water poured into its tail (anus), along with a few warm baths, until they are relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Given that "Capitol" is not actually part of the medical text
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The provided phrase in Latin, which translates to "On the treatment of dislocations," sets the context for a discussion on methods used
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	When discussing joints (the Italian term 'dita' refers generically to body parts, but in this case it suggests fingers or potentially other appendages), some occasions lead them out of place
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a finger (or similar appendage) is dislocated at the base of one's palm or abdomen ("la ventre"), you should hold it and gently move the joint back into place until return to normal positioning occurs, which implies realignment through physical manipulation. This line suggests an early medieval approach where direct hands-on techniques were commonly used for such injuries without modern medical equipment; however, care must be taken as incorrect handling could worsen the injury or cause additional pain and harm.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Support (or hold) the head of the finger that was dislocated and suspend it at which segment caused displacement; leave this for two days ("layssa"). This statement implies rest or immobilization as a key aspect in treating joint injuries, aligning with medieval medical philosophy where minimal movement post-injury often led to recovery. However, the lack of
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Furthermore suspend and extend that segment where it was dislocated until straightened on that very day; this indicates an intervention to align the affected part of the body back into its natural position, suggesting a hands-on treatment technique reminiscent of practices from medieval medicine
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	If the finger is not straightened quickly as recounted (or described), hold that segment and gradually return it to its former position during daytime, but leave for night rest without strain—this implies a cautious approach respecting both healing time ("alcus dias") and preventive measures against further injury. Here the medieval medical practice leans towards patience combined with limited mobilization under careful supervision; it emphasizes gradual recovery while avoiding overexertion that could lead to additional damage—a concept consistent with humoral theory, where balance in bodily fluids (humors) was believed key for
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems like water (i.dict "aquo"), if the patient's belly is dislocated ("dislocat al ventre de la ma"), bring that to this part and make an initial operation for cleansing/healing, until they are healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it seems as though fluid (likely referring to blood or bodily fluids) enters other parts of the body,
Capitol .xxx.	Since there is no actual text provided for translation beyond "Capitol
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The phrase in question appears to be related to the treatment of vertebral displacement, which can typically involve a medical term from an archaic or specialized form
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in the back or neck are dislocated and immobilized at that location, it is not treated immediately because if pressure on these displaced spinal bones continues for too long, death may occur due to interruption of blood flow (commonly referred to as 'blood supply').
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	E swelling of the bladder is called an outflow disease because it wants to leave and cannot be retained; thus, we soften either its members or legs at will (or two), including one for these reasons as well: when moved gently, they are removed from their place; repeatedly moving them causes removal along with healing of those parts into four sections.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So then she has become swollen behind and is without coloration (or pallor).
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure for him be that you will consider if the greasy effluvion of youth is not a curing and healing treatment for all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May return to the proficient way of treatment by speech through which they may go back; and if from that part where it escapes, you have opened it up today for new arrivals or examination purposes, returning is due because of your close proximity towards understanding their condition better. May also open what has escaped there (from the body), using various tools provided by this very one who demonstrates and places them here to be expelled properly.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E dic that in chillness wherein you have cooled down from below, there is neither healing nor recovery for that illness; and seemingly it occurs twice.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From those it is not healed but that which you apply directly on them, as recommended by water (which may refer to a poultice or treatment).
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the swelling is extended over the patient' extrusion of gas from their abdomen and pushed out slowly to ensure it does not enter into (affect) the chest area.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister grips the sword and it is not fixed in a trench; another minister holds on to that form with their hand.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places their hands on the spine for strength to return it into place and adjusts their own weight over that table until they go back in position.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return through this method, take a table of which the length or breadth is three feet, and carve into the wall where we have indicated that the swelling should be situated within the limits of the table' extramission.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to take the current situation as it is; and you must stay with your head on the patient's buttocks for two sticks in length - one arm long, and another from the top of their shoulders down to the backside of their feet (where each stick measures roughly a palm), there will already be an affected part somewhere along these lengths. Each limb must rest upon its own base so that it does not become gouty.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take a staff in which he turns himself back and forth between the two sticks of his arms.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a disruption in which it forms a staff of length equal to that for rotation; and in the other two staves, they appear similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Return the ligaments that you have stretched in the hips and thighs where it needs to be held by your hand, and those same ligaments that are stretched between the patient'thy knees when twisted for which they need to hold their feet upward as well.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Each turn and position must have one appointed who tightens the joint at its place; let the doctor manipulate the spine as we've mentioned before.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes: (in this context) It refers to a method or procedure in medical
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Return the spine to its place and secure it with bandaging after applying pressure dressings soaked in warm oil from an herbal booklet; apply padding over the cast of the lumbar vertebra where three or more inches are inserted vertically into this area, covering as much wetness loss due to inflammation. Over the spinal fracture site is placed with these layers: pressure dressings soaked in warm oil from an herbal booklet first for its healing properties; then padding over the cast of the lumbar vertebra itself—which should extend three or more inches vertically into this area to cover as much wetness loss due to inflammation.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Return its ligaments as we have mentioned, and place it under moisture for healing of the malady within.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any possibility of infection at the site during healing, then medicines that moisten and cleanse have been administered for a long time as recommended; and now such medicine has already been applied to this location with lead (plumbing).
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxxi.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from what could potentially be a
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocated hip (ancona dislocata):
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Understand that the joint between the thick and the muscle does not break apart significantly; only at those smaller connections where there is also concave, when you injure them similarly to others already injured here, understand this:
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the large is dislocated according to four ways, it may be dislocated at the parts inside, or at the parts above, or in front, or behind;
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is dislocated at joints downwards and little upwards or in front of them.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When the dislocation of his limbs is at its parts here it stands long and high that I have stretched out what was healthful, so as not for this joint'se neckbone bendable by means of my tongue-sticking cautery, until he whose head came down from above has reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The title of that person who suffers from displacement is because the accidents (ailments or injuries) are contrary to this misfortune.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	E the one to whom you dislocate is lying down with his cushion supported undernethy parts hereafter complimented, but not allowing that pain in the joints which he has now may double; if it perforates and moves beyond these points then urine becomes retained within him and fistula forms at those places. You must walk on your toes therefrom.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	E the name of that person to whom dislocation occurs behind is such that it does not expand the chest cavity nor can bend what has bent therein, and this cushion under them is short as compared with another (possibly for their legs), which eases the joints, and its collarbone lies at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May reduction of these spices for this dislocation is what you consider, and if the dislocation is old and ancient, then it has already been addressed by your current management here at home according to its disposition; hence there'thy no need for further remedy in that regard.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	May it be in the place where dislocation has occurred recently and is one of the four species of dislocation; therefore, turn that which was displaced back to its proper joints on both sides (thighs and feet), left side and right side alike so well-restored. Once returned, no further treatment from others will be necessary for this specific injury.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Mayhaps, if it does not return in this phase, the one who prepares must act firmly and extend from below the part previously placed under cushions at intervals; or directly on those same supports (cushions), another servant extends their mattress above that level. Another attendant stretches the said material further upwards to meet the joint pains, holding onto hands tightly with a leather bandage applied over it - and an additional minister tends to maintain this position firmly on each extremity (hand or foot).
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	When there is extension from the area of the head towards the shoulder joint or vice versa between the chest and back parts, it indicates movement in these areas which may be painful for the patient.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	When all of these are stretched within a period until the humour is lifted above its place in the earth and begins to descend,
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This specific type of extension is characteristic throughout all four (or regions/parts).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Therefore, if the displacement returns with water that we have mentioned, do so quickly; but if not, it is necessary for all special waters required by their treatment plan.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the patient's reduction, when dislocated and displaced to their parts, cover so that the malady is rested on its chest; hold back the ligaments at the junction between the top of the thigh and where it joins with the pelvis; extend the ligament in the part belonging to the shoulder joint towards either end portion of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Here comes another servant with strong suction to the limbs of the patient, and compresses deeply into the hollow of the thigh area for vigorous extension; when this force returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular substance is of yellow bile which heals this member that other substances cannot reduce.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you are able to stand on your feet and not comply with this specific method of treatment, it is essential that two weights be placed between the thighs linked together by a strong thread or rope; both legs must also have corresponding straps (belts) attached.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of his body corresponds in length to four fingers and the groin cushion is extended as far as two fingers can measure it, then so be that every aspect follows this proportion.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Return the spleen situated on the head of the staff and ensuring it is in position as well as its length corresponding to that of two cubits from the ground.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Now commands a strong youth that lowers the head of the hip socket, and another boy is suspended above it; likewise, another young man lowers the coxal joint itself back into its strengthened cavity quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it dislocates to the lower part, where the hump of the belly presses down according to how much we have rubbed in the warm oil; and its ligaments rest directly on the protruding belly and chest area.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends to its respective area, and the doctor holds his mouth over reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So then if you obey the reversal, it will greatly improve; and otherwise, rest on that which we have discussed in detail regarding its application for this particular illness through touching/massage.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayhaps the thigh will rise over their knees so that they can restrain it there (referring likely to a patient who is experiencing difficulty in movement due to pain or weakness, and requiring assistance for them to elevate
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When dislocation occurs in the limbs, it is necessary to stretch out that which has been displaced; and according to this method of treatment described by doctors, they pause their hand's thumb over the misplaced joint, while another person presses on that same part with a different palm. They hold pressure until the extended body segment returns to its proper place at once (likely referring to immobilizing or repositioning an injured limb back into alignment).
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If dislocation occurs at the joints behind (the hips), then: do not allow the malady to spread outwards onto the parts below; having those who are bound above due to hardness that have been detached from their anchors and placed on top, they should be positioned over its face. There is no place for restraint here as stated before (in this treatise).
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When a compression is applied using a table at the location where joint pain occurs,
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is complete, as indicated by "cover," and it's not my concern to fix this (the term for 'reduction'), you extend limbs supported on hammock-like cushions; once these are adjusted so that they expand outwards like wings, making sure that none of those wide belts is stretched too tightly across any body part. Then make the folds and expansions in place for three to four days while keeping pressure applied with bandages or similar aids.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the ligament and bandage (ligamentum et empastrum), and compare one cushion with another (unam comparatis cum alia).
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those peculiar in their state of being bound together, you understand that the dislocation has been fixed, and so let the humidity go thereafter.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of softening, return and bandage that part according to your first application, and leave it on for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Return that one back (to their normal state), and allow them time to walk on crutches for as many days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing symptoms
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	When it comes to the treatment of a herniated disc, here's how one might translate and interpret such medieval Latin terminology into
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The hernia is displaced according to three methods: it can be out of place in the parts beyond (possibly referring to extremities), and within its own divisions, between segments or joints – but not at this time where we are observing it now; essentially indicating that when a disc dislocation occurs away from certain points around an injured area like shoulders or hips, medical attention should be sought immediately.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of dislocation is that you command the hump to apply its cushion at the thigh, and if it does so, understand that this means a dislocation.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the limbs is that you straighten out the malady rightly; so much so that your foot can be stretched over it if possible, and attach the thighs to the face of the patient, pausing the leg between the feet; moreover, apply leather attached with one'se hands (the servant), placing another on their legs and chest holding hands.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it is said that a man' extricates himself from labor, his cushion stays in the area between the thighs at rest without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Return that and fix it on the couch leg (limb), applying those adhesives to one thigh area with bandages for three days or four, and apply those as well.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	No use the limb for walking until it has healed and become comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of the patient is waived off you must apply firm extension force on their ligaments as mentioned in the previous treatment of the hip joint.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The given text appears to be from an old medical treatise with phrases combining
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocation, here's a line-by-line translation:
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The heel occasionally becomes swolgy due to slight motion, and at times it gets dislocated either in the joints or from above.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The translation of the given medieval medical text line by line into English is as follows:
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May the healing of his body be through gentle release and ease for their limbs to return as it should.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the treatment comes according to its complement and you fixate the thigh directly with this tool firmly held by a servant who is behind it at that spot in his place, during dislocation correction time:
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Here comes the line to translate: And take your right hand on the head of the patient' extraneous limb (swollen leg), and place it in its proper location at the site of the cushion, holding their left hand as well which is also present on that part.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Return the leg to its cavity (the position it naturally occupies), and move your left arm back twice, then extend your left arm outward; push on the chest with the right hand as much as necessary for the operation'dictated by these movements of the arms/legs.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When fluids have been taken according as they come in time (regularly or at specific times).
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And pushes the chest of the patient into the firm cushion, and you are at the bedside.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if he returns to health within a cure or two from this treatment and his foot swells up again, then all is well—but if not, repeat the operation until that return occurs.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are not allowed to reduce it at home as recommended by the water we have here (implying some form of liquid treatment), then complain about your knee over its two on earth, and immediately start a herb poultice firmly bound between their thighs; moreover, this is covered with cloth so that you do not expose your knee.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The minister of care holds their hips together, and another minister extends either the leg or arm that is above them on the chest; extend each one against the patient' extrusion, so that it does not move away from its position.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Here the doctor elevates the displacement back to its place in their joints, and another minister'supinates the healthy hip joint into sections again when the displacement returns; this is for ease of movement.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you as health restored from its reduction, then apply strong binding on that bandage and secure your foot with it attached to the sling/bandage.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When you fear or protect the nerves behind which are located on the foot, to prevent the ligament from being violent and leading that one'thy strength be not diminished.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return it within two or three days, and if the bandage softens, extend that amount.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return that part of it either in the morning or in the afternoon and prevent the humors from rising for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it not happen that if one goes beyond this space, the dislocation will not be safe and sound therein, nor will they receive medical care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply cold application (cold treatment), then immediately after doing so in the place where we describe it herein for healing and bandaging purposes, ensure that your patient is cooled down sufficiently at this location of care.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Based on my understanding of Latin-influenced languages such as Italian or Spanish mixed
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Concerning the injury to the joints of the feet." (This translation attempts to convey a concern for injuries related to foot joint
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	And if it is a case of the limb being dislocated (likely referring to an arm or leg), gently extend them as far back into position; and if this can be easily done without undue strain, return them." This translation attempts to convey instructions for managing what appears to be a simple dislocation injury. It suggests that gentle extension of the affected limb is recommended when possible (without causing pain or further damage),
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if the dislocation is in one of your arms (the forearm), then take care to lift or raise it over the shoulder joint on that arm above ground level—or even resting upon a tabletop, keeping it as you were before." This translation advises how to position an injured limb with a possible elbow dislocation. It suggests lifting and placing the affected forearm in such a way to stabilize what is possibly already causing some form of inconvenience or impairment ("ayssi cum si anava"). The aim appears to be maintaining mobility while preventing
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Maintain your posture while keeping the elbow on something to stabilize it—perhaps a tabletop or similar surface near where you find yourself during recovery; and notice that it rests there without appearing out of place." This translation provides instructions for maintaining an affected arm's position, possibly after dislocation reduction. The patient is advised not only to keep the elbow stable but also observe if returning its usual posture does so without causing displacement or apparent misalignment ("engualhat e no aparesce en le loc eminência"). This suggests a focus on proper alignment and healing positioning of an arm following dislocation treatment. The use of "loc" may indicate the immediate recovery
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or actual text for
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	From the spices of displacement which are ailments in children or bone breaks, or any other wounds they might have:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of that comes upon you and through your treatment for it as well as its restoration brings success, death is delayed.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so now you must make the reduction in the common cause thereof, thereby obtaining an abscess draining.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we pour, then apply the treatment that will subdue inflammation and heal what is necessary for it at this time due to the dried ointments used on them.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation occurs and you suffer from bone breaks that are separated apart, then perform the setting of their limbs accordingly, to have in water what was mentioned previously at these locations for simple waters (likely referring to a poultice or cold compress).
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid according to your judgment the one of my teaching as it precedes you in matters of fear; for this is better from God'supreme, potentially forevermore (or until) serving His glory, aiding health throughout all times present herein.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi finesse these utterances of Albuccides excellently, so that God may not find fault with them.
Amen.	Gratae. (Note: 
