Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Assuming that "Ayssi" might be a misspelling or an archaic term for someone else (e.g., as in Spanish, it
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	And you have completed this book of medicine for me, which is the second half of science and comprises explanations from your work on it; through them I perceive that you've thoroughly handled what concerns surgical procedures within its scope, in line with our discussion today about medical operations. (Note: This translation attempts to preserve as much meaning as possible while making sense for modern English speakers.)
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	When the operation is prostrated in our region and at all times of total privacy, only because I have witnessed its science, and they (the doctors) study it; except that a few descriptions found freely among Ancient Greeks are modified by me herein for errors to which their intentions belong now closed off from understanding due to the lengthening of time's span as well as art itself.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here it is said to me that you have seen my order in the second part of this text according to its method of presentation and explanation, as well as abbreviation; therefore, for the purpose of these tools' use (cauterizing instruments) and other devices needed for carrying out this task, which requires.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through what Aqua Ippocrates says is necessary for health and healing, it mainly concerns the work of the body (and possibly also in a larger capacity within its nature).
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we already have the knowledge of that in this book'dict; who do not know what we told them about anatomy, they will fall into error and die because they did not see much of these things themselves, which are formed by this science and taken from its teachings and experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	Here comes another doctor who ordered the patient to drink a stone from a jar which he had processed in his state; the stone was large and came into him through a straw held by that same doctor on the third day, leading to the death of this home (body).
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have called it out (to remove), and because of the greatness of the stone and due to the positioning within the uterus, come under here that they might die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And there is another doctor who takes pay from our duke of this land for surgery; and with him comes a black instrument which he claims was broken in his patient'se thigh, using it on the ground among pillows and tables where its strong structure does not permit breath.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here is the line by line translation:
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And they called upon him (likely referring to the doctor), and used tools to loosen the ligaments, achieving relief from their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even though corruption in the limb has been confirmed, it cannot be restrained and will not stop moving within while being under the influence of humidity.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And another doctor pierced an abscess, and it became ulcerated within days, as its evil spirit was at the lord'thy service.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the head is burdened by melancholalic humors; it does not occur in all of him, but rather in the member which has suffered throughout.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For you, it is necessary that the operation be planned in two ways: one associated with health (the surgery for healing), and another where there is danger in major procedures (in surgeries involving significant risk).
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	So take up your weapons in solicitude and for the protection of God, and your illnesses as fortification and strengthening.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Whenever gout appears in some of her mixtures:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Not a doctor treats bad illness without naming it.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already fallen into this book for the second time three chapters in length.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin with the separation of free will, and first in primary division.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the head of weight, concerning the tools and instruments as well as for what is necessary in operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	La division of the second portion.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter on cauterization and puncturing, and of pills, poultices, and extractions from herbs and simples to these matters is fully organized according to the forms of instruments used.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the clean separation.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third part of restoration and dislocation management, as well as treatment for twists and appearances to these matters; the head positioned within the pelvis, with forms taken by instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery (fire) and acute medicine and memory of obstruction.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all free parts.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When you pour out the quality of that poultice and its applications within him, wherein it is forbidden to use a poultice.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So the translation goes: Thus it is said that the discourse of cautery and its non-essential (the irrelevant part) is long and elaborate, requiring delicate knowledge; they speak much about this topic, are in disagreement with each other, which for me suffices a small portion of their discussions. Here we understand doctors engaging in detailed conversation concerning the use and application of cautery tools while also expressing divergent opinions on these matters—the speaker finds enough information to satisfy them after hearing only part of this discussion.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	So it is said that the art of cautery treats all matters universally as its subject or material, with the exception of two complexities (which are referred to here simply as 'complexes'), these being parts related to his/her matter. Here doctors recognize a general approach in their application and understanding of this medical tool; however, there seems to be an acknowledgment that some specifics regarding its use might require additional consideration beyond the universal method described thus far—perhaps referring to more nuanced cases or
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complexity of dry matter they disagree; some argue that it is beneficial for this type with respect to its quality and aridity, while others counter that in such a condition (quality/dryness), application or use of cautery would not be suitable—as water itself embodies both these qualities. Herein doctors are debating about the appropriateness of using cautery on materials characterized by dry and specific nature, with some suggesting it's beneficial due to its inherent properties aligning (or being similar) to those required for effective treatment while others believe such an approach would be counterproductive. The underlying concern is that applying heat or making something wet—essentially the function of cautery in this context —to these conditions could potentially undo any therapeutic effect, possibly causing harm instead due to contradicting essential qualities like moisture and dryness inherent within water which might be required for healing. This indicates an important aspect where medieval practitioners considered the specific needs of different bodily states when applying their treatments—highlighting that even then they recognized conditions
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Through that speech of his, I have discovered some things for myself at times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Even if there is a need to withdraw over the one that has already been exposed and exercised in the field of cautery for today's practice, understand their complexity as humans and how maladies are positioned within them; know also the causes of these illnesses and what should be done about them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May occur in other complexities as well, not out of fear but primarily due to the presence of moist and effused humors; all doctors are agreed on this, without concern for bleeding during drainage in those areas.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And learned physicians who understand the art of healing by fire and know their patient well, they use surgical tools on the focus (area being treated), which only affects the limb that is cauterized, without causing harm to other parts of the body at all.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine' extricate come to that in his limbs which has been unattended upon and forcefully bring relief into the ill-limbed member, causing it also not to withdraw from its healing course quickly.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the focus (or center), due to its sublimity and benevolent nature, only serves when there is excess; we have come to know this through experimentation and long study of servitude in pursuit of knowledge about truths regarding causes; thus granting an excuse for lengthy discourse. And if it were not that I am bound by my time here (in the pause), during which you secretly manipulate me, your aim at focusing on this focus will demonstrate a philosophical argument made through speech, proving itself convincing in our minds as well.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And learned ones (doctors), who understand when it is most suitable to perform cauterizations and restraints during the first days of life, they do so accordingly.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	So do not put pressure on your feet or legs; ordinary people and medics only estimate it poorly, hence healing through cauterization is not complete at once, and thus the consequences follow.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not due to the absence of water which our bodies need, rather cautery tools are only used in medicine that alter and dry out these fluids whose lack leads to pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Even though there are excessive points above medical practice due to the patient' extraneous vitality and greatness of their lord, they may use cautery where necessary for treatment.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	Here is the line by line translation:
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	May the vulgar language be that of medicine'dictors and proper instruction; they do not come to ask questions here because I have not furthered my knowledge in medicine nor understood other causes for which this instrument is used.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here come the instruments that are used for treating medicine from this place, according to what I understand as common and various among doctors' practices.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And those made of gold are better than those made of iron for caulceration, and they were not used except for equality with gold in terms of their substance quality.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through which we apply pointed force, placing it down on our patient and applying gently for the operation process.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And in the instruments of cautery according to these books and those within their heads (i.dictums), they have ordered them for use inside the feet, that he may ask from it what he desires.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cold and moisture-induced pain relief using points of caution (cauterization).
Le capitol primier.	The capital primary or main point.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers moisture and cold on the accident that is your cause; it arises from bile and excessive flow of rheumatic fluid, which presses down forcefully, from head to limbs and fingers, as well as from prolonged sleeping, toothache, gout, and universally throughout all diseases brought about by chilliness.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the hump to be evacuated by medicine-taking for three or four days, according to how much exertion it takes and their habitus (constitution).
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And order it so that the patient'dict head rests on their chin and place your hand above them, between yours over a lowered bed to support their hands.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Return your hand resting on the back of your palm, placing it over the bridge of your nose between their nostrubs (nostril).
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Whenever the patient says they have felt warmth in that place where it has been reached by fire (suggesting heat or an inflammatgy), signs indicate this spot, and with bellows apply fire to the cautery made of olive wood used for these purposes.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Here comes the line for translation into English: And hold it there without attempting to forcefully tighten it where straining occurs; now turn that over.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Return the intestine or hernia into its cavity, and place your hand over that area for three days to prevent it from protruding again.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand over his chest, where that which has been broken out of the focus lies undernethy therein; place it above thusly and keep hold on such area firmly to prevent further rupture or escape from the wound's location within him.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	When healing is done with four potions inside until it is cured.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the patient cleans themselves after a bath (as in Rome), they wash their arms with water so that it may be better and more beneficial for health.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And those who are also lamed within their bones shall be burned inside the body with caustics, and have the instruments inserted where there is already some inflammation of the organ.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Return its fluid that has accumulated in the bone, and care for it accordingly.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Here come others with the needle that has reached the bone within it enters into the strong bone and here is how small puncture works (i.thyroid extraction method):
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	E from that location exhales the breath of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If the patient has been long unbathed (or dirty), and then it is cured within that time when it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see all these kinds of cautery tools for everyone here; but should you be among those wise men in this place who fear the practice'dictated by us today—and especially when your head is bald due to sun exposure, as often happens with melancholic individuals (referring back to our observations made while examining other body members), then I would wish it better for my health if you were here.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The translation of the provided medieval medical treatise from a language resembling Latin, Italian, Spanish and French would be as follows:
Capitol segon.	Capitol second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the pointed cautery of the head
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in total the head suffers chronic and long-lasting pain, which is prolonged within the malady, using swords and lances and scourges and thumping hammers and heavy axes and clubbing devices and bludgeon weapons, as well as servitude when already cauterized with a single instrument that does not further explore any of these causes; provided that the head's swelling within the malady is due to excessive phlegm in its nature—it is not cruel nor brutal force but rather an alternative treatment using other instruments at once.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that over the head of your skull for it is necessary to perform caution within when the spinal column has been divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the neck and reveal the bone'sup to which we have measured out and treated it with a cauterizing instrument in the part of the back where you call for treatment—this is also the place where air pressure has been applied (the term "ventosa" refers here to manual or suction cupping, possibly used by medieval doctors).
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And raise your hand firmly, and do not touch the belly, for that which is aggrathy in it causes a great different pain from other brandings on the body's surface.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Here you direct the cautery to its place, four covers whereby that which is inside these very cauteries becomes what this instrument here represents; and thus it constitutes our method.
Capitol ters.	Capital pain or discomfort (assuming "ters" is
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	The Latin phrase provided appears to relate to an ancient medical practice, likely involving some form of treatment for a condition that was possibly referred to with the term used here (per
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When joint pain becomes severe or when the aching penetrates deep into the body as in a feverish limb (likely meaning an arm experiencing inflammation due to heat), physicians should apply immediate care and administer another form of treatment, which is referred herein with terms that denote healing remedies for diseases; thus not neglecting this condition. The twofold method of cauterization used consists either as a direct medical intervention burning away acute combustion (a historical reference to treating inflammation or infection), or by means of iron, perhaps suggesting the use of hot irons or metal for similar treatment purposes.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May scalpels of medicine burn to take hold a vessel (potentially referring to the body or an organ), and you extract both ends from them together with these instruments, holding onto their limbs as well.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	When you apply pressure on the location of pain within one limb using a sharp lance hidden inside where it pierces through bone to reach nerve endings, when its presence is concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Return strength to him who has been halted by descent constraining force and apply it over three hours; afterward adjust the spleen (or its equivalent organ) with stretching, place pus under two or three days until the space that was filled is cleaned within which he rests.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is healed inside with care; it should be treated gently within its cavity so as not to disturb or harm what has been restored. (Here, the
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you will use some of these prescribed remedies in water within the treatment regimen for inflammat0ration, be cautious as they may burn or react when dissolved together. (This sentence warns about potential reactions between different medicines used in a liquid form.)
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here, the treatment mentioned likely involves using heated iron instruments for purposes such as removing unwanted tissue or closing wounds. The specific form of this technique appears to be heat application (possibly through burning). This could refer historically used medical procedures where controlled fire was applied—a practice which may have been considered therapeutic at the time
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	Calls for a tool resembling a nail or pinpoint instrument that maintains its shape and can induce slight curving; this is employed in the specific area being treated to facilitate penetration (likely referring here to skin) with precision, as indicated by "in the place of it stands out." Here, there might be an emphasis on using a particular tool for delicate body work—possibly acupuncture or cauterization where needles are inserted into specific points.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Maintain your hand over the location of pain to ensure that the instrument (possibly an iron needle or pin) does not become stuck, and rotate it slowly—in small increments for better control; this technique could be aimed at relieving discomfort while using a pointed healing device. Here, there is likely advice on how delicately one must handle sharp medical instruments to prevent injury during procedures like acupuncture or other forms of physical therapy that involve touching the
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity of liquor that is absorbed through the mouth has reached its measure, then your hand should be placed there to prevent the vessel from being filled further and not allowing any excretion flow downwards (flux sancti).
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return the bandage in saltwater and place it over the location for three days, then pause the application of liniment at the border, and provide care with oil within which healing may occur.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you go on, perform the lancet according to cautery instruments, and ensure that there is no incision of an artery here without proper care at this time.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quart (This is not directly translatable
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	The phrase "Cauterizacio d'emigrante antica" can be translated as "Ancient emigrant burn treatment." Here,
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the ancient emigrant's ailment, remember what has been said about healing before and within the divisions of diseases; if not proficient in either medical cauterization or focus burning techniques to alleviate pain along its long lines—these are where suffering resides—then you must use fire for these cutaneous (skin) burns, purifying them until they become white. Place your hand over the location of discomfort along this lengthy line; rest there with a vigilant and steadfast grip using an iron dagger or sword to return it inside through openings made by arrows while ensuring that you maintain pressure for some time within those incision sites, until help arrives.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuous movement of the jaw, which grinds its teeth (bruxism), and ensure that there'thy not a lockjaw nor tension in those nerves affected by such action; so as not to provoke spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the guardianship and caution of blood flow from the artery that opens up, there'thy fear in this opening itself, mostly towards what he does not know as cause or effect, which escapes his understanding—therefore perform surgery on him with care.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When you come at recall of the regimen for the flow of sanction aftercare according to our rule'dictum, in this free place hereby provided:
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you feel this malady does not supply the necessary amount for this treatment and if it becomes intolerable on the part of the swelling in your head (which we have mentioned before), then cauterize that area with a heated lancet where blood has been drawn, as noted previously. Care must also be taken to ensure the inside is healed within these bounds.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you come now, administer the one we have mentioned in the chapter of steel sharpness for hot lancets used to perform two cuts, and this is considered a better cauterization method.
Capitol .v.	Capital .v.: This line appears incomplete as it lacks context
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	For alleviation of the pains in joints." – Translation: The Latin phrase "Cauterizacio de les dolors de aurelhas
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ulcer there is pain due to exudate and for its other healing that I have mentioned herein, it is not relieved by mere medication; this is where cautery comes into play. Here refers to what has been discussed regarding treatment methods—specifically mentioning when conventional medicine does not suffice in alleviating pain from an ulcerative condition (likely referring to a sore or wound). The use of heat, implied by the term 'igneys' which translates roughly as "fires" or could be understood metapreviously used treatments), is suggested for cauterization. Cautery here means applying localized heat with an instrument (likely metal in this context) to seal off bleeding and promote healing,
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And with punctures of cauterization applied where needed, and it is carried over the entire area affected by this ulceration—like a wheel being turned or along various parts if pain occurs within them." – Translation: The passage instructs on how to apply heat treatment for healing (cauterizing) an ulcerous condition. It suggests that punctures should be made where necessary using the appropriate instrument, and this process is intended not just locally but across all affected areas of the body—comparable in motion to a wheel being turned through rotation or along
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	And love you, this heating tool (cauterizer) of the ulcer's base that is near your flesh wherein to attempt." – Translation: The line appears poetic and somewhat metaphorical in its reference; it seems as though a caregiver or physician might use affectionate language when using cauterization tools on someone who
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points made with hot irons on the entire body need care and repair of places that are healed, then take proper precautions for those areas to ensure they remain healthy.
Capitol .vi.	The given text is written in an archaic form of Romance
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Cauterize bruises." (This translation attempts a direct interpretation based on the Latin root "cauter,
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The one that is healed through caulking and not just by the medicines coming in via veins," according to what has been mentioned about their division of diseases (the implication being spices or other substances administered topically). Here, "cautery" refers specifically to a treatment involving heat application—often with something like a heated iron tool through which medicinal herbs are burnished and applied directly onto the wound site. This aligns
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid caulking with dryness or by nervous cramps." The speaker advises against the application of certain remedies that might cause further discomfort, such as those which could lead to dehydration (dryness) or exacerbate
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you heal that herb of caulking for erosion and purgation, making sure your treatment does not hinder it, then take three types of cautery: the gold needle (aurelha), a small touch from your statue [idol] or idol's temple ([templar]), and lips joined together by kisses." In this guidance offered to those performing medical care at that time—which predates modern understandings, sterilization practices would not have been in place. The writer here provides specific instruments for their intended purpose: the gold needle likely serves as a thermal device due to its conductive properties; touching or kissing by lips may be seen metaphorically as applying personal energy during healing rituals—a common belief held that spiritual and physical forces could interplay in recovery. This reflects an era where medicine was both empirical, through observation of effects like heat from gold needles on wounds (their thermal conductivity), but also mystical or superstitious with practices involving personal connections to
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Pause the pointed cautery for the contrary parts of the diseased area; therein it will only relieve in the portion that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you apply the lancet directly on top of the head bone, and in the temple area (the length corresponds to the patient's height), where your hand acts as a guide for the application of the cauterizing instrument until it has burned out the necessary amount from the wound near the jawbone.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how the cautery works, and it belongs to those who perform incision work (surgeons). Here we present this form today.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it be subtle that such a few bones are pushed out of place; and when the excess is in unnecessary bulk, then also only a little must be removed.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Return care is given where it flows currently as part of the healing process.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The translation of this line is not possible
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Caustic treatment for ancient apoplexy." The phrase likely refers to an old medical practice where a caustic or irritant subst
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and the remedies we have described do not confer your medicine or there are no feverish illnesses among them, then you will apply these four caustics: on all of their ears; at the location where they lie down (likely meant to be underne0) head treatment with a pointed instrument used for cauterizing—on each earlobe and possibly between eyebrows or in mouth/throat area, as suggested by context.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The action of the pointed cautery is said according to its use.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and that may now be healed with the water you are proceeding through.
Capitol .viii.	In this translation of "Capitol .viii.," it appears that
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The phrase translates to English as:
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	When taken with food in a meal, large and pills that are made of ground substances serve as supplements.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Return their head on top of the thigh and place your hand undernethy to immobilize it with a crutch described in the treatise for splints.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And after some time has passed, that is when it becomes necessary for caution (with a pointed cautery).
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	When that doctor has already said what is necessary for him thereafter,
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if there are sanitizing waters for them; otherwise, they will need three cauterizations in the back portion of their head (the area from above the nape to just below the neck), which belong respectively to that partition coming forward and one partaking of it going backwards.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each of these cautions is placed its own care, and appropriate attention given the fluid that has come forth.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you increase and the humors are tolerable in this place, then apply heat with caution here at the joint location; if there is more addition of swelling, then cauterize that over these two bumps.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for that which is healed within it; and use those olive-shaped instruments as they have been provided by the deity above us nowad0bviously, apply proper care to maintain its health.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol IX" does not provide enough context
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	For the treatment of worms and to soothe all parts of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the mortification of the head and touch what we have said; and raise up the head from undernethy (under thy skull), and apply that which cautions there at its heat spot on your head, and cauterize all your heads' corns, and caution over the back part of thee, and three cauldrers upon thy spine.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the illness of softening of the foot' extricates those who endure and suffer from such ailments seriously, then apply four cauterizations to the vertebrae of the lower body with one instrument while ensuring that they are comfortable below the navel line; raise their pain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which is inside it (the body part being referred to), and this will be an olive wick for healing.
Capitol .x.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from what seems like
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Cauterizaio di eterne," when translated, refers to the act of performing a form of medical treatment or procedure
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The provided text in Latin discusses conditions and treatments related to what appears to be an understanding of certain types of convulsions, which are associated with the brain (referred to as "flemen" here). The phrase translates into English line by line
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	So, we cover the brain of him/her with potions at mealtime and also for other types of treatment when an excess or intolllusion occurs from beyond that which has been dictated in division times – implying a time-specific regimen possibly related to dietary control. The text suggests using specific remedies during certain periods, likely aligning with daily routines such as meals (referring perhaps to fasting and feasting cycles of the day). These 'times' could indicate when treatment is most effective or necessary due to changes in humoral balance associated with digestion – a common conceptual framework
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If it is an untreated child who suffers from the medicines (meaning perhaps a lack of remedy or failure to respond), then apply emollients and demulcentes externally for several days through motions, when foods are beneficial – suggesting that certain dietary components might aid healing at specific times. This indicates an approach where external application with medicinal substances is timed according not only daily cycles but also to the perceived properties of consumed items; possibly implying a holistic view on nutrition and treatment timing in medieval medical
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then lift the head of humors (perhaps a metaphor for bodily fluids that need balancing), and apply therein any caustic treatment at the crown spot where it has been previously applied, as per prior instructions – indicating an individualized approach to applying remedies. Moreover, another cauterium is placed on their occiput (back of head) and all over every horn or bone segment undernethy; suggesting a comprehensive method that addresses the entirety of each bodily component likely thought to be affected by imbalance – again reflecting an approach where localized treatment can have broader implications for restoring health. These instructions underscore not just sympt
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the humors are strong and enduring, then you will perform such cauterizations on those which I have indicated herein; this action brings paralysis to the limbs' vertebrae of the back and lower back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	When it is necessary for the pointed cautery (the olive), as previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	May it be that if the malady is in the belly, then apply delicate caution following this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The text does not provide further content
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Cauterization of melancholy." - This line suggests a medieval practice where doctors would use heat or chemicals
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and thick humors," they say that it is at these points where we apply our caustic treatments to relieve paralysis. - This line indicates a belief in medieval times that certain types of 'rotten' or overly dense (thick) bodily fluids were responsible for causing melancholy, which might lead to physical symptoms such as paralysis. The remedy involved applying caustic substances directly at the sites affected by these humoral imbalances in an attempt to
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excess and decays in the spleen," then drink what purifies your mind as per what was drunk before division (treatment). - Here, it's implied that an overabundance ('excess') at the spleen location within a person can lead to 'melancholy.' The remedy would be consuming something believed to cleanse or clear one’s mind in line with what was taken before some form of treatment. This suggests early thoughts on balancing body fluids as part of medical practice, where dietary habits were seen directly linked to mental
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Return the spleen up to its place and use feather therapy above it on the head circle," then apply warmth at that spot of where the hat rests upon your head - This line describes a therapeutic practice involving returning any displaced organ (the spleen) back to its proper location in the body. It further instructs using feathers for some form of external therapy directly over this region and applying heat,
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The joint pain is sixty-fold increased in severity and has spread throughout the entire body.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply pressure with anointing oil; it is worthy of sheep'supremacy remedy (implying that this particular liniment or salve, possibly made from materials like wool grease/lanolin which were associated with animals such as sheep
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And apply it gently over the area warmed by a preheated iron for measurement purposes; this is when they feel pain (suggesting that applying heat with an item like an heated metal tool or similar, used here to treat localized inflammation and associated discomfort). The treatment seems aimed at alle
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And apply it within the warmth of their head's neck region in a circle and rub vigorously until reddened (indicating that heat should be applied locally to this specific area around the patient’s neck, with friction intended as part of its application). This could suggest an early form of manual therapy or massage aimed at prom
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And apply a poultice to the malady in its entirety throughout the week; within this regimen, keep it warm inside you until healed (suggesting regular use of heat application for treating an illness over time). Alternatively, if necessary, we will cauterize small points on your head according to what is appropriate: these are types of cautions that moisturize the brain evenly. Here a special kind of cautery which not only serves as treatment but also ensures balanced hydration for sensitive areas like the brain (indicating an understanding in this text from medieval times about the importance of maintaining fluid balance, particularly within highly vulnerable organs). This reflects early knowledge that specific treatments should be applied carefully to achieve optimal therapeutic effect. The use of poultices and cauteries also shows a holistic approach towards treatment where warmth is used not just for healing but
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	When you place that stoppage at the border or in areas of linseed,
Capitol .xii.	Capitolo XII. (Assuming "Capitol" refers to an
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	When water drainage occurs in the wound, it is customarily referred to as a fistula or sinus by medical professionals (translation: "and when
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you declare the water discharge from a wound through joints as observed in divisions (this likely refers to an anal fistula or similar condition), it begins and gives out into the mucosa that lines your rectum, while guarding against all moisture therein. (Translation: "And when you declare...into beare al malaute aquo")
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that soapy water is used for bathing during these days of illness.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make cuts with the cautery on all veins and arteries, which come from below (the thigh), and these are considered as local cauterizations in that length of time under the temple'dictions.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	When your flesh is being cauterized; and if you see blood flowing from it, take some medicine for yourself, which may be within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	When one arrives with knowledge of what is outside the arch and abdomen, and caution for fluid flows;
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	When some bones are cauterized in the joint of two or more tools, it means that certain areas on the body have been treated with heat to stop bleeding and prevent further injury through this method using multiple implements created by hands (tools). Here is the translation line by line:
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: This line appears to be referencing an edition or
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	The phrase "cauterize the ancient tears" can refer to a medical practice from historical times that involved using heat (often with substances like
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise describing the procedure for addressing bleeding caused by ruptured vessels in various body parts such as ears ("cap defora"), eyes (possibly referring to "eye" with archaic terms), and head areas, presumably related to nosebleeds or similar conditions. Here's a translation into English:
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If ingestions of excess contribute (indigestion), then heat is applied to that part throughout the entirety of the groin above the pubic area with a small caustic instrument for treatment.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The roman numeral "XLIIIII
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Cautioning for the foul odor of the nose." This line suggests that there is a concern about an unple
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating that water which we have discussed in the division and without profoundly applying your medicine, you will apply poultices to the affected joints for three nights; and above all this, cover their head with a cloth while performing cauterization on the inflamed area." This line indicates an alternative treatment method where instead of directly administering medication (which has not been thoroughly explained), cold compresses or wraps are used to treat swollen joint areas overnight for three consecutive nights. Additionally, covering the patient's head during this process suggests a holistic approach that may involve considering various humoral imbalances ("cochias") while treating painful inflammation associated with conditions like arthritis or similar disorders (referred to as "olivar" in Spanish medical terminology, which historically could refer
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then you will perform caustic treatment on that part, applying two burnings over the ends of their hair for a small amount." Here, it seems like an intention to use heat or chemical agents (implied by "cauteria") directly onto specific areas near someone's scalp ("clauselh" which might refer to 'head') as treatment.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Keep yourself away from the acrid smoke that does not burn you." This line suggests a preventative measure, advising someone who may be handling or exposed to potentially harm
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 "Regarding this method of burning pins (or needles), here it is the form/application." This line appears to explain that a specific
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV. (The Roman numeral "XV" stands for fifteen
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the instruments used in eyelid softening treatments.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the patient'thy eye is softened by illness or moisture, thereby it shall be treated with this caustic herein described234, and thus constitutes its form5.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you (medical practitioners), cauterize that area on both brows with two small cautery tools at once, and they will lengthen the pores.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	When it is necessary for any of such points according to the quantity above them.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery, depending on how much the moisture of the eyelid is drawn tight.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.: This line seems like it might be referring to
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	From the eye lids when their hairs turn into particles and fingers pinch (or hold) the patient: This line suggests that during an examination or procedure, doctors might use their fingertubs to inspect areas where fine detritus of "hair" could be present. The term 'cauter'
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the patient'thy hairs turn into particles, and consequently get pinched (or held), two kinds of treatments follow: either they use caustic substances or apply medicinal fires as remedies for this condition. This statement outlines a medical approach wherein doctors might resort to cauterization using corrosive materials ("cautery") and the application of heat (which could refer metaphorically to "medical combustion" like hot irons or fire) in response to certain symptoms, likely referring back to conditions involving hair particles resulting from
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If I use cauterization on it focuses where the malady enters through their hairs alongside those with which they inhabit; tighten until not even a worm can enter, and if one applies pressure to that part from my hand (the patient's), then bind them by bandages so that nothing may crawl inside while there are still newlings within. This directive implies an approach where cauterization is performed at the site of entry for any parasites or worms, tightly applying heat until no additional infestation can occur ("not even a worm"). If direct pressure from fingers (or another part used to press) causes discomfort upon application against this area in needing treatment, then secure them with bandages so that external intruders are prevented while the internal newlings continue their cycle of growth. This indicates an ancient medical practice where removal and containment through manual methods like cauterization (using heat or sharp instruments) followed by immobilizing applications such as binding were common strateg
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when babies are born and crying occurs in the throat of him/her, place your hand over their forehead (their palate), which is called "second helmet" according to its shape like a shield'thy figure it provides for his skin. Here this refers not only as comfort but also partaking in communication through touch and care with infants whose sensitivity requires gentle handling of both the head where they express their distress, by placing hands over them (palpating), which is considered an important aspect to communicate during these early stages of life for those who may have difficulty doing so.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Return your hand pressure above in an alcohol-soaked cloth or poultice on the abdomen, where it has begun to soothe down into heat and reduce inflammation.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return the cautery of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: And cauterize over her body figure by small steps repeatedly until it is burned through where there was fat from myrtle plant, all seemingly properly done.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of sanity for his eye work is that you use your finger on their eyelid, and they have their hair raised significantly due to the needle prick.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and place it over the area within which the shield is erected for three days to prevent its collapse or falling down.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside it so heals (is cured).
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	May it return to them for any reason due to their own actions and because the eyelid is softened; then use those same instruments on that entire body as they did in their first attempt.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eyelid'dictly, then do surgical treatment there where it is raised to its natural place and ensures that the hair does not prick the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery be medicine that commands the bloat to draw out its extended and inflamed hairs, and apply its form of wool fat for treatment.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here the rest stands on medicine and gently presses it so that the malady feels the bite of the remedy in their chest, which is like a toothache when lying down.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient feels what has been extracted by forceps, apply that medicine you have chosen; and once the extraction is done with forceps, wash away that which remained on teeth or incision sites if it's wet due to cleaning—if so, consider whether your eyelid has also come up (possibly swolthy), as long as these conditions are maintained wherein you perform and contract the patient’s body.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Place the bandage over there within which his hernia has been cured, and take care that this dressing or another is inside to maintain its healing state.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: You must be vigilant in your care so that no harm falls outside of medicine; if the eyelid is softened and any cause for hair growth appears on it, repeat your treatment at this location where the eyelid was softened, properly applying yourself as necessary for healing.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one uses pepper as a remedy for joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, and
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Be aware that human bones are diverse according to size and shape, hence the treatment you receive will depend on it.  
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If inflammation has not been alleviated through this study' extrication method, then do nothing further with it here in our teachings.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (The provided text does not contain enough context for
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	From the given Latin-like snippet, it appears to refer to a procedure involving caustic treatment of an abscess (possibly within the tear duct or lacrimal sac) in someone's eye:
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula caused by the humors we have discussed in the divisions of diseases and do not provide care for it, then when you cauterize that second following this method: command the humor to stop its flow at one'thy head under thee as follows so your servant holding thy hand will neither be struck nor agitated on your crown.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your hand's warmth or apply pressure with woolen cloth or pillow on the patient's body to alleviate discomfort.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	When it has been reduced and formed into a shape similar to a cane or sword handle, then with such an instrument (the pointed cautery), the tool used for this purpose is from one limb wherein pain occurs due to treatment.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go, it will permeate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to come out as an attack.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Mayhap that which is convalescing will be better for its healing work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	When an abscess is opened (and cleaned out) from under it and washed away with saltwater.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not unbidden (i.dict if one has not consented), then work that out and extract from the patient what needs to be done.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place the burning instrument therein that is ignited, and hold it thus with your hand; so that neither you nor the humors within are disturbed when placing this tool at the nose' extrication site to prevent its movement during application.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	So if the bleeding from the cautery enters into the mouth, be; and otherwise, repeat the cauterization once or twice a week as per medical practice, leave it there for three days, then rest over that spot at the border until you send out healing ointments within which it shall recover.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been days and is not healed yet, then the pause over this potent acute medicine will allow bone to be revealed and aligned as needed in its own way within these walls of our hospital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of caustic treatment for a fistula that is performed initially includes applying it at the location of the fistula and maintaining pressure on that cracked spot where its form lies, which consists of one lead pellet. Apply your hand undernerem (pressure) over there with good retention force so that the molten lead does not reach up to the patient's chest; moreover when pauses are applied above the fistula hole in a lithotomy board or water, whereby the molten lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it wonderfully.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have from cautery and treatment, then it is well; but if not, you must administer intoxicating substances and reduce the fistula to its nasal cavity as soon as possible at its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	And when there's a cut on the finger, perform cauterization.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motions habitually cause cracks in the lips, mainly in children'thy mouths are often subjected to frequent motions or movements that lead to cracking of their lips and mostly affect infants (the translation captures a common medieval observation about babies experiencing lip chapping due to
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So then you treat those cracks caused by what we've discussed about the divisions and without properly addressing your care, here is how a small cautery needle should be used according to this form as it comes forth:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And according to its subtlety in clitoris (where "lu" likely refers to a woman and "conquavitat" suggests something related to the body or condition), it follows this
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And place your hand gently over those cracks where the caustic enters to touch the sensitive area of the crack itself (implying that care must be taken when applying heat or a substance directly).
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	When that person is taken care of so they can heal (aprop), take caution with what goes inside them, ensuring their well-bedicture remains intact
Capitol .xix.	It appears you've provided a fragment or code snippet ("Capitol .
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	When discussing the treatment of an abscess in the mouth, it seems like we are touching upon medical procedures that would have been understood within certain historical context
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the abscess in your mouth involves uvula or tongue inflammation and rupture, it is considered outdated treatment, requiring immediate care to prevent further complications of an abscessed area; you must use candles as recommended for its quantity within the lesion. Insert that flame into the fistula's tract until hot metal from inside reaches your tongue (or another target site), and afterward maintain contact with it so healing can occur, following guidance previously given on proper care to ensure recovery is achieved while preventing complications associated with an abscessed lesion.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if the illness is cured and health returns, be well; but if not, it's necessary to discover where the disease remains and hold back the damaged bone as it comes forth in its course.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX. (Note: "XX" would typically represent specific
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	For the treatment of teeth and for softening/relieving gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth become decayed, treat those conditions with medicine without attempting to cauterize them; then pause at the base of the thigh in the belly, apply fire to the form that will come forth accordingly, so you can stop bleeding where it occurs on the tooth and introduce a heating instrument into which the humidity center within the focus (belly) brings heat upward towards the decayed tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Return your hand (place your hand), and repeat some times with caution as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Return the mouth to its cavity and put salt water in it for an hour, so that they pucker up; when the slackened tooth is tightened, and the soft gums become stiff, and the corrupted humidity dries out.
Capitol .xxi.	The text provided seems like an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Cauterization of tooth pain – Translation suggests a treatment method from the Middle Ages or old European medicine
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or a cold within the mouth, it does not respond well to treatment by medicine; in such cases, two types of caustic treatments are employed: one involving cow horns (horn licks), and another using hot irons. Translation interprets medieval medical approaches for treating dental pain when conventional medicines were deemed insufficient or ineffective due to inflammatory conditions within the mouth, suggesting alternative methods like thermally activated materials such as bovine horns (for their supposed antiseptic properties) and heated metallic objects.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Apply the horn's edge to heat that which is forged from cowhorn in fire and wrap it around the extremity of your touch; also apply cooling if previously heated, covering whereby you wish to cauterize (cauterize) inflamed areas within the mouth. This line describes a specific procedure used by medieval physicians when treating dental pain with heat as part of their therapeutic approach – likely involving some form of crude or rudimentary medical equipment made from available materials, such as cow horns and heated iron for direct contact to provide relief through cauterization.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Apply that again until the virtue (heat or power) of the focus arrives at the root of the tooth – here, they describe how long and often one should maintain heat application on an inflamed area in order for its curative effect ('virtue') to reach where it's needed most: directly into a problem
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, submerge wool or a cautery in the space below it, and place that above the sore tooth, placing it over where the hot iron enters during scaling of the cavity of the affected tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Even if the cauterization is at the focus of blood or iron (the blacksmith'se tools), and there is any swelling in the chest, ensure that this heat does not reach the mouth of the womb.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Return the cautery to its shape, and place it on your teeth so that the cautery is scalded; make several attempts until the pain subsides either today or tomorrow.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When the patient opens his mouth due to that which causes it, and after one hour we scrape it with this instrument—this is how the cautery works.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply what you have extracted according as it is within your capability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the catheter looks like:
Capitol .xxii.	The provided medieval medical text appears complex due to its fusion of Latin influence with Rom
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Caustication (or burning) treatment for external lesions or ulcers: The term "cauterize
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external lesions or ulcers are caused by infiltrating humors and do not submit to digestion through medicinal means; thus you must apply the cauterizing instrument with both ends ignited, ensuring that each end is sufficient for burning while maintaining control of flames. Do so briefly over those areas affected: once lit, hold one end until it cools down as needed (as required), and then insert this into another part afflicted by the lesion to continue treatment; proceed with caution such that you reach the root cause or focus point without causing additional harm.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is little, then stop the application of cautery according to the quantity of the abscess; apply pressure for three days and pause until such a time that heat from the fire has diminished its size.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	When such care is applied with wax and bandages within where it shall heal,
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the lancet or pointed instrument used by such practitioners is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	In this translation of the medieval medical text line by line into English, here is
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	The process described appears to involve procedures for treating joint pain and constipation (interpreted from the Latin-influenced text). Here's a translation of that specific line:
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidities come upon the lungs and primarily when there is congestion in the chest, it becomes necessary to evacuate phlegm with medicinal expectorants, and apply cauterization at the site of pleurisy for treatment by medicine.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Guard yourself so that you do not reach for the hot cupping tool nor burn your neck skin with its heat, but only a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	When that joint is burned by another cautery, it should be applied at the lower end of its spinal column.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The lancet of him is cut in a certain way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return that care which has entered before it shall be healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.: This appears to be referencing a specific section or chapter
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Cauterization of the chest illness and cough: Here, it is implied that there may need to apply heat (which could be interpreted as a form of treatment such
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When the chest illness and cough are caused by humidity, as they lack fever or inflammation (indicating a less severe condition in traditional medicine terms), then two types of heat application should be used: one on the sternum at joint points for lungs' relief; another is applied to body temperature under breast-like structures between breasts. The cauterization instruments are arranged according to previous forms/methods as indicated by context or tradition within this specific medical practice from medieval times, where treatment often involved direct application of heat and tools such as a pointed instrument (cauterizer) for healing purposes like expelling excess humors believed responsible for the malady.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish to continue with the same type of point-based healing application for chest pains associated with auricular issues (pertaining specifically here as pain related to one's ears), follow these earlier methods, employing punctures precisely targeted at relieving earache discomfort: This line indicates that there is an established method involving the use of pointed tools or needles for treatment purposes. Such techniques were often used in medieval times before modern medicine was developed and reflect a broader understanding among he
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Within these chambers (which could refer to the body or specific treatment areas), place those needles/points that have previously been introduced, accompanied by water meant for healing purposes contained within said chamber: This implies a sort of poultice made from materials often found in medieval medicine cabinets—likely infused waters with therapeutic properties used
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Already, three applications of caustic have been performed for this purpose: you can perform three such cauterizations in this manner.
Capitol .xxv.	Given that "Capitol" likely refers to an ancient Roman temple dedicated
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	The phrase you've provided appears to be in a mix of Latin and possibly another language, with some words potentially being medical terminology or colloquial expressions related to medicine from the medieval period
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the assistant'sin head is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not fix in place when it should during its return journey back into position; for as we have witnessed firsthand, once you reduce the displacement, revert your limb so that vertebrae or pelvis are over where his body parts previously were—and raise the cushion of pain located at which point is involved and in those below when it's dislocated to lower joint areas; do as follows: if the juncture has been dislocated upward, elevate the neck (the part above) that divides into upper and lower parts where your left hand lies.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Returns the hotness of the cautery has two covers; this is how it looks like:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Return and apply the cautery inside where it enters, and there will be a figure of cauterization with these hot cups as instruments;
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	So that it follows according to its quantity, here is how things are this way:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	E for some measures it is adjusted according to this count, and these are the number of cauterizations. (Here 'alcunas veguadas' means "for some procedures", 'ajustat segon' translates as "adjusted accordingly," 'este
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then rest over the cauterizations applied to coarsen flesh and attach the humors back to tranquility, ensuring that the member is not weakened for any time while comforted. (Here 'apos' means "after" or "following," indicating a sequence of actions; 'pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal' refers to rest over these coarsening treatments, and ensures the humors are brought back into tranquility while providing comfort without weakening.)
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at those joints beneath and if pain occurs when pressing down upon them, then apply a caustic to muscle or one of the sharp cauterization points used for treatment; this confirms congruence and eliminates moisture (or effusion), allowing humors (blood fluids) to normalize. (Here 'la dislocacio' refers to joint displacement, which when pressed down indicates pain—a symptom often relating to musculosskeletal issues in medical context; applying a caustic helps by restoring the alignment and reducing excess moisture at these sites.)
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitulo XXVI: (Here 'capitul' refers to "chapter
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Chapter XXVI pertains to the topic of caustic treatment for the stomach, likely discussing
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When humors accumulate in the stomach and multiply within it, if you continue with healing treatments without providing restoration (the use of cauterization here suggests an attempt to alleviate excess fluids or pus), then blood will rise above its natural position when supine; extend your hands over those that are not properly adjusted so they may perform poppy inducement. This involves applying three types of caustic: one for the bone, wherein you determine dosage as per a specific cauterization method (implying tailored intervention), and two additional points on either side of such treatment to expel what is referred to metaphorically as "the triangle-cauterized figure" – likely indicating an area or set of symptoms formed by multiple sources; moreover, prolong the time for those not properly adjusted which may require further poppy inducement. (Here 'estomac' refers specifically to where fluids/pus have gathered in excess—a common medieval medical concern often treated with cauterization as a method believed to draw out and remove unwanted elements; dosages are carefully measured, suggesting tailored treatment approaches were customary for different body parts or severities of conditions. The reference to 'blood rising above its natural position' aligns historically with understanding fluid dynamics within the human anatomy.)
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery equals the quantity of both sides of the small intestine'setup (assuming 'groclesa setup' refers to a part of medical practice related to examining or treating parts like those inside an instrument used for surgical procedures). The term 
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if it follows this shape/form, and you wish to perform a great cautery at the stomach's place according to this form; then use one shaped like a circle as per this design. The text suggests using specific shapes for medical instruments when performing procedures such as cauterization in certain body parts (like the abdomen).
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if that which has been caustified by this instrument scares you: then be mindful of the amount on your stomach, as per what you wish to attempt through these cauteries; and also take care of whatever healing that preceded is within until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii. (The original text does not provide a specific line
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	From "cauterize the foot wound." in English, this refers to using heat or a chemical substance to burn and thereby se
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When joint pain in the foot occurs due to moisture or chilliness within where normal bodily function has become excessive and there is discomfort from swelling (often caused by fluid accumulation), it's treated with water that we have provided, without causing additional burden. Here comes a treatment method: firstly elevate the malady above heart level; then apply three types of cautery in this manner immediately under physicians’ guidance at their bedside for therape extraneous cause and quantity management over joints such as feet afterward – all according to these instructions, ensuring that excess fluid does not accumulate further.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Where each space between every two cautions is according to the size of that part and where each caution follows the length of the body'dict:
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not use your pointed instrument for cauterization anymore.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of humors that has entered is equal to the quantity of bile produced by the liver'thy joints; and it does not get adjusted; and if an excessive urine remains on his feet; then they will swell, which already have extended their limbs, lift up their breasts.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is how the points of cautery are formed:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	When you can perform this delicate and careful art of using these instruments for cutting the skin (cauterization), then it is possible under your subtlety and prudence as a healer.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence: Ensure that you do not proceed with cauterization and hold your attention to the entire spine so it is healed throughout the body and enters into the hernia, where the spine here can be subtle; understand this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The ".xxviii." indicates a specific
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	From the puncture of apendicitis for cauterization, it translates to: "When appendicitis requires intervention through cautery following its diagn
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When appendicitis excites or brings on an abscess in the foot and you wish to know if that abscess is within the flesh of the foot or inside its covering (tunic), if it' extruding from within, a swelling worsens quickly with pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the breeches of the patient and the pain is great and occurs many times already fatiguing doctors with their care for him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So that the evil humors are directed towards the cervix (possibly referring to the uterus or womb), and set upon its ulcerated spot; and warm up the cautery already assembled by fire, as described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And in that place apply the caustic and insert them where necessary until it reaches throughout the spine, up to the site of illness.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Return that for healing of other appliances within it is cared for; this implies proper attention and treatment are given, ensthyng its well-being alongside the others inside as part of hol
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	But not with this form of cautery that they use according to the principles studied in medicine over time; rather, we must follow what has been established there and adhere closely to it for our safety's sake (our well-being). Even if some experimentation may seem possible on these operations, caution is still required. We are guided by medical tradition here – this implies that while innovative methods might be tempting or appear beneficial in certain aspects of treatment using cautery based techniques for joint pain caused by cold humors (as described earlier), it remains essential to adhere strictly to the well-estreemed and time-tested procedures outlined within medical science. We must prioritize patient safety above all else, thus following tried-and-true methods rather than unverified experimentation or deviation from established practice guidelines for treatment of such conditions
Capitol .xxix.	This appears to be a continuation note indicating the manuscript's chapter number (
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cautery Treatment for Ulcers: Here begins our discussion on methods of treating ulcerations through
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Regarding the use of ancient cautery techniques for ulcers as per this methodology (according to these principles), and herein lies what you must grasp: take dry old razors from Aristotle's teachings, wield them with care on long-standing sores found within oneself—and such instruments are made of the very substance itself. This implies that one should use well-maintained (possibly aged) tools derived or inspired by philosophical texts, specifically those linked to Aristotle's medical teachings regarding ulcers and cauterization methods; these ragged implements—once used for their intended purpose of curing sores through burn induction via removal of the affected tissue—were made from natural materials consistent
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And when you purchase your hand for the purpose of the cautery instrument, it appears in the act of the knee joint.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And have already provided those same tools that are used by men in the use of iron cautery like a ray and flame, placing them where between the ribs, until they arrive at that very spot which disease has taken hold upon him, as we described for wounds on horses.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this incision there is no fear of the knife; for as soon as you injure it in that abscess where healing will not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" is not an understandable phrase
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	The translation of this line seems related to the medical context provided and suggests a procedure involving mel (which in medieval times could refer to mercur
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you care for the mercurial illness as we have described in healing and without dividing your treatment, then there are three ways of performing cautions (cauterizations), all done correctly according to what has been shown on the fingers' figures—the shapes of which precede. These methods include making either three or four incision lines following the length of mercury as indicated by these finger shape guides that have come before, indicating how deeply and along where exactly each line should be drawn for treatment purposes.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Among each lancet or small instrument used for cupping there is a large handle, and its manipulation technique we have described herein in regard to finger use within the cup on the foot.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand in the caustic; and gout is above on its two sides.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of cauterizing is that you ignite the caustic has already been applied on two limbs, causing detachment in the head portion of muscle dislocation due to cold malady (spleen), which lies at the base of bone marrow.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if it is your lifting that raises the chest according to the length of the body part, so that they become cautery as dictated by the course (or proper position).
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	When you bring together the two ribbons or threads in this place where they come into contact with each other'thy cord of the opposite side:
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return the cautery; hence they apply four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you go, then apply three kinds of caustic treatments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Then apply your treatment that has been placed on gauze for several days; perhaps this will also address other underlying causes of healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .xxxi.,
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	The phrase "Cauterizacio de ydropici" when translated into English, particularly in the context provided by
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	In translation: The procedure for caustic application is not on joints but rather on internal organs appropriately (or "alcinte3" which may refer to specific bodily regions or
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating the ydropic (likely referring to a specific internal issue), do not confine your curative efforts only to these measures that have been outlined in division but rather perform caustics as follows: one will be applied within the boundary of the abdomen, and another on the stomach itself; similarly, there are applications for both legs (possibly indicating an area beyond just joints), a tongue spot ('melsa'), two between each pair of spinal vertebrae in the backbone ('spondils del dos' implies lumbar or thoracic sections relevant to medieval understandings and terminology); one at the top of the chest, which may refer to an area above the heart; another directly on the stomach. Here there are two applications between each pair of spinal vertebrae in total for back support (possibly addressing pain or structural issues), adding up to six specific caustic treatments as outlined within this division's instructions, excluding any external joint treatment but focusing on internal organ care and the skeletal structure.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the length of the penis.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Return the caustic that has been used for such long periods in order that it may heal properly.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And when the malady is to be drained using cups of water poured for that they may join their efforts towards healing, and if there'supreme feasting occurs with assistance from health aiders;
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what it burns to treat the abdomen and that' extrinsic form determines its treatment on both sides, following whatever came before this specific external form.
Capitol .xxxii.	The provided text appears as an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Translation of the given Latin-influenced line:
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swolthy and full of thin water, cover them with cautery on both sides between the earlobe and the ring finger; raise your hand holding the cautery without twisting it; lift your hand further, but do not return all at once, as the thin water recedes.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop sobre las doas coysses dos cauteris, y en cada una de esas cosas se hace un hierro caliente cortando la punta del cauteria cutellar.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes a line to translate, following the provided text translations:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lay down patiently for a long time so that no water remains in him/her.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes which have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or content for translation
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	The phrase "Cauterizacio de cos de ventre." refers to the medical procedure of burning a wound in the
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When wounds in the stomach and intestines caused by dampness are purged away because of their excessive digestion and retention within these organs (the belly and bowels), they require healing through medical interventions, which will not be provided here. Sometimes when a malady shows wounds in the stomach exposed due to previous cauterization thereof—as was done on this very day regarding the internal caustic treatment of the bladder with precise and subtle instruments (fine probes), for both external and inguinal regions, as well as a range within the umbilical area encasing delicate structures. Here are specific cauterizations: over the navel on hips or above knee joints; also two caustic procedures specifically aimed at these areas where urine is stored in an adult male's body (prostate gland).
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see excessive humidities and the belly' extruding them, then burn that upon the pentacle (a form of protection or symbolic circle drawn on the body) and over the swellings (likely referring to hernias), firmly adjusting those cauterisms above the stomach and below the inguinas (groins/testicles for males; it could also refer generally to lower abdomen area in a more gender-neutral sense as per medieval texts often lacked specific anatomical language by today's standards), thus curing effectively without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The given medieval medical text in Latin-influenced language can be translated into
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Capitol .xxxiv." likely refers to a specific section or chapter denoted by the Roman numeral "XXXIV," commonly used in medieval texts and manuscripts
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When old hemorrhoids are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture in the body and cannot be treated with water as prescribed at division time (which may refer to a particular stage of treatment), they require lashing using three cauteris placed on the posterior part just above the two small ones, along with one more applied below the little triangle-shaped hemorrhoids. Here'dicted by ancient practices for curbing such conditions:
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food has not deteriorated, and if they have swelled up considerably, then it will be necessary to cauterize that area with great caution following what preceded; there will also be a cautery on the belly, another one on the chest wound, each using forceps for some time until signs of healing appear.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text or context for
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	When performing the caustic treatment of gout on their abdomen, return (restore) the intestine to its cavity and place your hand over it so that the intestine does not pro
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove gout (which I interpret here could be referring to an inflammation or condition associated with the joints), use the caustic that has been assembled on its implement, which may likely refer to applying heat from some source—possibly as part of a traditional heating method.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Return the fire into that joint where you have excised (removed), and ensure it enters so fully within its venous opening through which blood circulates, applying heat to alleviate conditions such as constricted vessels possibly associated with inflammation or poor circulation in historical medical practice.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Use water or oil if necessary (which suggests using these as healing substances), apply caustic treatment to each of them one after another, according to what we have discussed earlier; also ensure you provide those waters and oils that confer health benefits within their liniments during the application period. This indicates a multifacs approach not only treating with heat or caustics but using various substances like water/oil for soothing applications in traditional medicine, likely as part of wound care to help manage pain, inflammation and possibly prevent further complications such as dehydration.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you apply a large caustic over the area affected by arsenicum (which historically refers to mercury compounds sometimes used in medicine), it may strengthen and invigorate that particular body part or region, suggesting an application of stronger remedies
Capitol .xxxvi.	Based on my understanding of Latin-influenced languages (Italian,
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	And for the treatment of ulcers that are naturally formed in each limb' extrication by means of a healing substance or remedy, as per tradition and understanding at this time. (Please note: This translation is hypothetical since Latin has highly specialized medical terms not directly
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the natural substance we recommend is not present at this location and causes fear in the patient, it shall be healed through a form of treatment or intervention involving caution (possibly referring to a specific medical technique). This translation attempts to maintain coherence with medieval Latin terminology while conveying modern understandings. It's important when translating such texts that one considers historical context and language nuances, which may require cross-referencing multiple sources
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Thus when any one encounters an ulcer in the natural way (the body), it is ancient and dirty-washed by humors corrupted within, so that a delicate cautery must be sought to address this issue – carefully considering both its depth as pertains to our specified intervention. This translation integrates medieval medical concepts with modern understandings of internal treatments while emphasizing the need for precision in understanding and responding to such conditions according to their perceived profundity or severity at that time. When interpreting historical texts, it's essential to balance fidelity to original expressions with clarifications grounded in contemporary knowledge when necessary.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Apply the caustic as if using fire – suggesting that they should use their treatment (likely some form of heat or chemical) with great care and intention, similar to how
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And apply that caustic within this ulcer according to the extent of our intervention; here again we see an emphasis on measured application—likely referring to a precise and potentially dangerous procedure which must be handled with expertise, likely involving heat or chemicals as mentioned previously in translations. This suggests medieval practitioners understood that
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Iterate while the cautery is inside until those parts are repaired after one or two diets (sometimes three), according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Guard your burning nerve and vein here; or if the fistula reaches the area of the bladder or the intestine, guard all these places; do not apply anything unless the fistula is in the solid flesh and you believe it will not penetrate further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the location within which it has healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the location is sealed shut and materials have been removed from it for a long time, then you know that the patient has fully recovered.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not laid out within it (the body), then you will understand that they permeate or rot in the bone of it, which is caused by those very causes for which memory returns to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.: (Note: The provided line appears incomplete or n
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	From "cauterize the sores": In this context, it likely refers to using heat as a treatment method for
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the sores due to dampness or heavy breathing, and thus heat from within (possibly a warm compress), apply it directly over each sore as if you are cauterizing them individually for enhanced healing recall: Here "ccautez" means applying localized heat therapy ("cauterize") on the affected areas to aid in their recovery. The idea is that by focusing targeted, gentle warmth (symbolically represented through cauterization), it could improve blood circulation and promote a more efficient healing process at each specific sore site mentioned. This medieval approach assumes heat can both alleviate discomfort directly from the cause—be it moisture or poor breathing causing inflammation of skin lesions ("ronhos")—and serves as an aid for
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And thus apply it again briefly (implying that the application of heat should be periodic), so three different liniments are used to ensure lasting vitality: The practice here involves reapplying warmth or a healing ointment ("cauterize") in short bursts, using possibly several small-batch treatments. This could mean preparing and applying multiple concentrated remedies (liniments) with each application for sustained benefits to
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii.: Continuing the theme of direct, localized
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Continuation on "cauterizing" (treating) the bladder: This directive likely comes from a
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When acidity in the bladder increases and fecal matter accumulates causing discomfort due to retained urine from uremia (a condition related to renal impairment), it's recommended that they cauterize this area on top of where pus has formed, using hair or wool as a medium for application along with three specific burners placed in different parts: Here the text advises treating areas prone to urinary tract inflammation ("cauterizing") by applying heat (indicated through "couterize," suggesting use of some form of thermal agent) using various materials. This could mean directing warmth or a medicinal paste at specific spots on and around the bladder region, perhaps with woolen cloths to soak in this therapeutic medium (as suggested by "les pels del pentennielh"). These three distinct local treatments ("cauterizer") are strategically placed—on a spot of pus formation near urine leakage sites and spread across specific
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each caustic according to the number of notes on the foot; and cauterize that which is necessary in the lower part of the leg or both caulstics if needed.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And when it is necessary for the pointed cautery to proceed further.
Capitol .xxxix.	Based on the mixture of languages in your provided medieval medical text—remin
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	The translation from Latin, which seems related to a surgical procedure or treatment likely pertaining to medicine: "For
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When moisture enters the womb and sexual intercourse is forbidden as it corrupts their menstrual blood flows—delaying them — they suffer pains wherein are said to require three cauldrations within the belly's circuit, similarly done during cauterizations with tools used in those areas; or two lashings, and such treatment by means of these instruments.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (The translation could be speculative due
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Caution for the detachment of the ankle." This line suggests a medical context, possibly advising caution or care when dealing with cases where there is loss (dislocation
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture seeps out from the joint of the ankle, it causes humors within its location; hence, when compared between them, the knee appears extended over." This medieval medical text indicates that if fluid leaks (indicated by "moisturize") from a bodily joint and this results in imbalance or build-up of internal fluids ("humors"), it may manifest as an outward appearance change—specifically, the knee might seem to be protruding due to these excess humors. This line likely comes from a treatise discussing signs that could indicate health issues related to fluid balance and joint integrity in medieval
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the detachment is becoming weaker." Here, it's indicated that where a possible injury or condition (like ankle dislocation) has occurred, there are signs suggesting deter
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore apply cauterization to the moisture above the joint of your ankle in a manner similar, placing yourself there where it has been twisted and thus ensuring that once applied, heat will settle into its place." This line advises on how to manage what appears like trauma or dislocation—particularly around the affected area. It suggests applying cauterization (a method of burning) specifically aimed at drying out moisture which may be associated with swelling and further injury, using heat as a way to restore proper alignment ('settle into its place') after an incident that has caused twisting or misalignment in the joint. The application is done by placing oneself directly on top of where it's been affected while ensthy@
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if it is about those instruments that were used in the stomach'cination, then so be it with respect to their use here as well.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not with you now, then apply three other pieces of large cautery as substitutes.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When using caustic points according to the quantity of all parts of the intestine, pay attention that this part gets healed.
Capitol .xli.	Given that "Capitol" appears out of context here, it is
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The provided text discusses medical practices related to treating joint pain and specifically gout as well as addressing issues with intestines or
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is in the part of anguish and it' extricates due to frothiness or impure spirits contained within bladder stones, wines that we have prepared herein should not be consumed but avoided; there are remedies for these excess humors. Here comes a cauterization treatment specifically targeting the veins of anguish (sciatic nerve).
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The translation for this line from medieval medical treatise would be as follows in English:
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And for each space between every incision, measure its size of bulk and the type of instrument used (cauterizing lancet or large scalpel).
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May there be some cautions about where the cautery is applied on the head of the anguish, so that they are four cautions in number.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, caulk within the circle where shape was previously shaped during the cauterization of the detachment of the ankle; that it be a contained and burned circumference encompasseing all of the knee joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how it occurs when pain clings to the area and does not extend within the hip joints through cautionary measures (cautery).
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May it be extended into the thigh, and there applied both of these caustics on the area where the humors enter that cause pain—and one application over this space with a small amount will take care of half its exterior portion.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the depth of the pointed cautery exceeds the length prescribed by the collarbone'dictum, then so it should be used accordingly.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the humidity envelops and extends pain within these parts of the feet, then here it is necessary to perform cauterization in this place where you have found them; do so for three points or four as required by that which has come into contact with there.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If inflammation of the spleen circulates pain down into the hollows of the thigh, then hereby apply this blunt cautery to that area.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Here comes the first source sentence: And guard in all cauterization so that no more lancets or large surgical instruments are used on you without necessity, and for this reason because of your unwell abdomen (abscess) hiddenly presenting itself not visibly.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And when you have seen another of these that were cauterized on the bone and final in the cauterization process, the fire within the bed has consumed the tumor on the skin, burning it through completely.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When abdominal distention occurs due to excessive fluid in the belly, and when it is necessary to release that fluids (presumably referring to purgation or cathartics), then apply accordingly what is
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain occurs in two different parts of a joint and needs to be treated according to this guideline, then apply one point on each affected area using pointed cautery as directed herein:
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the third instrument used to dig it out (presumably referring to a surgical tool), and those spaces between them are equal in quantity of knee bone, and they form two parts. The length of these joints equals one or two units of foot bone, and clothing is neatly fitted within these circles; this represents the shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Apply fire within the furnace and start sparks therein, and apply it over the division of the thigh, with the malady above pressing down on their lapbelt.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So then apply those three caustic instruments in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that thing for three days, apply bandaging to it and return the outcast (impure substance) within every few days, taking care of it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh children, of this particular kind of instruments seldomly used for staring (or examination), and therefore only rarely have we encountered them here.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who endure from these burns have pity on him and remove him from his place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries be attached to medicines that you make by piercing a hole in the handle of your instrument, such that the length of their arms is like two hazelnuts or lengths thereof along with them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the spaces between them contain as much of their body'supremacy', and are open below and above, then they must be kept together in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand with the tool and wipe off all the vile water from inside the body, which is called foul or excessive moisture (humors).
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Here applies the poultice to it for three days and rests on that border until the blackness of excess humility subsides, applying water therefor daily during light exercise; this improves its condition gradually.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When that poultice is within where it heals,
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends within the coccyx or the saddle area, make it stand in such a way that contains water as soon as it is felt in the anus (anal opening).
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how water downward disease manifests itself, and I have already written about it in the treatise on medical correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and cause to extingdict both parts together as one, pierce the new hole with a small spear according to what enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Pause the flow of other or alternate boiled water immediately and place it over that basin to bring life back into it using only gentle, good-compression poured from there; apply this cooling liquid repeatedly between now and then on top of already cooled down body part.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E so de las medicinas alcunas are for which is cauterized wide open, as such they mix honey and vinegar herein you know that it merges.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Gualia recounts of an ancient home for the operation and cure whereby one is healed from knee and sciatic pain, which are great pleasures to have it there; they say that no further treatment is needed beyond what this place recommends, as long-term stay ensures recovery.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is pressed by certain stones, and does not spit out stone itself, then a recent fracture (broken bone) will be present; moreover, the pressure can also occur in the thigh area where there is pain, or in the leg joints, or on the knee, causing swelling.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When it is laid down for three hours or as long as the humidity of the ailment subsides, that much time has passed since its onset.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Return that item into bath and when the patient'sin body is rubbed down, place it on the ground so that pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	E be aware that you do not cover with cautery these remedies, but rather facilitate the expulsion from the body (the passage or elimination).
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Socrates say that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it affects their blood; and these are its treatments: wool soaked in antidote oil, and placed between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	When you close the dry wound made of goat skin, and press inside what is filled with blood congealed therein, place your hand on top over the material to ensure that it remains compressed within.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return and do not cease applying water until the point of the needle penetrates to the artery, stopping the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of using pointed cautery is called sharp probes or needles in French, which refers here to a specific tool used for medical procedures such as bloodletting (venesection). In English translation: "And this
Capitol .xlii.	It appears that you're referencing Roman numerals with the notation ".xliii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Translated into English, your reference to "cauzeria" related to pain management seems incomplete or slightly unclear
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Translated into English: "Some pains are in the two (hips or lower extremities) due to causes such as cramping or convulsions and also for reasons similar, through absorption of moistened impurities." Here we're interpreting that joint pain might be attributed not only to physical strain but potentially exac回疾患者的血液凝结过多或是由于内分泌失调引起，并且通过接收雨后流动物体表面上形成的水
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Translated into English: "It's not the use of sharp probes, but in this specific type that is used for absorption due to effusion (pooling) of humors." Here we understand it as a treatment method where pointed cautery or needles are applied specifically when there’s an accumulation ('
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Translated into English: "Thus evacuation of the malady is through plugged vessels and resembling them in three lines according to our interpretation, placing fingers or possibly instruments along any one line where necessary based on what you can tolerate from your body." Here we interpret that some form of physical therapy might be used for treating pains as outlined by the specific guidelsofthe text. The treatment involves evacuation through plugged vessels and may include touching or applying instruments along pain lines within a three-line interpretation framework, adjusted based on individual tolerance to body humors (fluids).
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is necessary for a point of pain (cause) infection or inflammation that needs treatment with points made on the surface, using pointed instruments specifically designed for this
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to proceed, use three or four sharp knives (or pointed instruments), following the form described herein for this purpose.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (The roman numeral "XLIII
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From caustication to the treatment of joint swelling/inflammation or arthritis as indicated by 'gilbositat,' which is likely a
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	From caustication to the treatment of joint swelling/inflammation (possibly gout), which is often observed in these children; and for addressing such conditions, you must apply pressure directly on their bodies when they stand up or move during waking hours. The term 'gilbositat' here refers likely to arthritis-like symptoms that are common among bedridden patients (especially as implied by "petits," which means small children in French).
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And overlays on the lower back and neck vertebrae that are beginning to rise above others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you press and attempt to prevent it from spreading further, then apply that pointed cautery which forms a circle according to this shape.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that applies a poultice over the entire vertebral region of the spine manually.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cauterization along the spinal cord using points of cautery for two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are the points made between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for the place inside where it has been healed by water we have mentioned.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May you ensure that the caustic is not applied in a bleak condition but due to nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	The provided Latin text seems to be from an ancient medical document due to its arch
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Regarding the treatment of gout and joint pain, here is a translation:
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	So when gout healing is due to fluid stasis without relief of the pain, then it'dict that applying poultices will not alleviate the discomfort.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you perform this particular type of cautery within the joint connection between foot and leg, it is done to promote proper elimination in that passageway. (Here "cauterizes" refers to using a heated instrument or substance like hot oil or boiling water for medical procedures known as cauterization; "proper elimination
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And with that, it is performed using the method of this tool (implying a specific type or technique of heating and application used for treatment). ("Olivar," in historical medical
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if points need to be made on the foot's surface (presumably for treatment purposes), then do so with a pointed instrument designed for such procedures ("puntz"). This indicates that in cases where joint pain is present and specific areas of discomfort are identified, creating small puncture marks may serve as an intervention
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If pain emerges in the thighs or other joint areas and these motions are felt, then you would perform this type of treatment over any such area with three to four applications throughout its entirety ("tota parte"), referring once again to a systematic approach using cauterization. Here "cauterize" is used as previously explained for medical procedures that involve applying heat or chemicals (as in earlier sentences) and the term “CAUTERI OLIVAR” alludes back to specific tools being employed by doctors of this era, possibly involving oil heated over a flame ("olivar"). This sentence implies comprehensive treatment where multiple instances—three to four—of such intervention
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If the number of necessary treatments with these instruments is met (suggesting that there's a threshold for when treatment should cease), then you would carry out this intervention without pressing your hand into it beforehand; apply only to what has been directed, which in context may refer solely to actions focused on the testicle ("codena"). Here again "CAUTERI OLIVAR" is referring back to those specific cauterization tools and procedures. The reference to not premoting or applying undue pressure with your hand beforehand could suggest a restrained approach, possibly due to medical super
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters into both shoulders (the elbthy and scapula), then apply the aforementioned treatment as prescribed in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is limited to the waist only, and it's called inflammation (suagra), then prick in the circulatory system of these two lines occurs as they turn around themselves.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there are residual pains in the joints, then a point is made on the circumference of each node and upon the pulse spot to address them accordingly.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If pain spreads down the legs or muscles each day, then they perform cautery on all parts of their aids (helpers/assistants).
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if the melancholy is not removed by a good regimen and proper reception of medicine, then through this treatment with these instruments they will be healed, for God helps them.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.: (This line does not contain enough context or
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	The phrase "cauterize wounds" refers to the medical practice of applying a substance that generates extreme heat,
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When wounds occur in the joints and points are made on the surface of the body using a heated tool, doctors say that this is necessary to stop bleeding into cavities (belly or abdomen) where internal organs reside. They command for warm compresses applied directly over these areas which act as mild stimuli intended not only to facilitate blood clotting but also alleviate pain through the soothing effects of heat, possibly preventing further damage and promoting faster healing by drawing out excess fluids from around injuries (bruising or hematoma).
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the thighs between your fingers on their two sides, and command that they hold their tongue inside so as to create an opening or a hernia may appear (or/and form bulging protrusions).
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Return that which is in their joints and tendons, for it attempts to break through the bones of those parts where its likeness resembles the base of a circle atop the divisions of the body (the limbs).
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Returns the lancet of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When there is reason for request and one makes small rings or bands (bracelets).
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from protruding.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient'thy thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another atop their chest; holding your hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And place the cautery on that spot firmly in your hand, and when you have entered where those bones of the pelvis enter into sleep at midnight; repeat if by the end of this initial period entry into the bones has not been achieved with your own hands.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the intestine within the hour of your cautery, to ensure that it does not come out onto the abdomen or cause a greater harmful act.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you realize that when using the cautery, you do not touch the patient's face, nor perform your operation on it.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it is necessary for the children'dict pointed instruments (cauter), according to their greatness and measurement, take care of them gently.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the area of the cauterization within three days, until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that for its care, it is placed among the other ointments until healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joints of the limb are kept warm for forty days while sealed within their place and under guard (presumably by staff or attendants).
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When the nourishment of him/her is pausing according to the length of time necessary for his/her healing and you must forcefully remove it from outside promptly, that means prevention (the intestine) should not escape out again during treatment hastily.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time for removal after forty days, administer the ligature tightly at that moment, and hold that with hands for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	If it is derived from excessive work and replication of food and drinks, as well as vigorous movements, when one uses this entire healing regimen, then the humors become aggrathy and unbalanced leading to disease or discomfort in the body's functions.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And when it is necessary that the initial cut be seared with a triangular lancet according to this form, place so that they are seized.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And when a line of pain is felt above the location where it burst through (implying some form of rupture or breakage), and another line below; place your hand undernegy with an awl, perhaps one that was already used as cautery first for better results.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Regarding cautery for a twisted intestine or hernia: "Concerning
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in the limbs persists due to treatment or continued assault and it does not alleviate with medical care, then a point is made for cautery of points on them as part of healing measures by physicians.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	When treating all parts of the body according to their magnitude and smallness, as well as vitality and developmental stage, we address spinal twisting and pain in general.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it heals with the first cautery, be; but if not, repeat over him those same cautions; as is customary for these pains to pinch a limb towards that body part which they approach in order that continued application of these cautions allows the malady within them (the swelling) to heal.
Capitol .xlvii.	The provided text appears as though it might be from an old medical manuscript with a blend
De cauterizacio de lepra.	In this line, the speaker seems to refer to some form of treatment for leprosy (historically termed
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	This line discusses the use of caustic substances for treating leprosy (historically termed "leprous"). Here, it is suggested that a strong and potent cautery should be used if necessary; however, when dealing with cases where leprosy has occurred due to decay from moisture ("flax" or damp) and melancholy ("blue bile"), only gentle application of the caustic agent (a weakening substance likely meant for medical use in cur
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	The speaker is giving detailed instructions on how to apply caustic treatment for cases of leprosy as described in the prior text. They advise that when cauterizing such a case:
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the final part of your procedure where you insert a small incision with forceps into the bone, which moves the dislocated joints out from their place so that heavy vapors can exit it; and then cauterize according to what has been requested earlier.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and shows symptoms, then cover what you have prepared for these wounds on your head; apply cauterism to the extremities of the nose, two cauters each on both knees joints, two cauters on two lumbar vertebrae, a large one above the waistband region and another over the shoulder blade area. Apply additional cauters on any ankle(s), apply ones for all present ankles; similarly, put them on each of your feet's toes and knuckles (fingers). Cover two per buttock joint, cover both leg muscles, as well as the tendons from where you take off socks. Cauterize this over all articulations in hands and feet, including any heel(s) of your shoes, and on each knee's cartilage (articular surfaces).
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Guard your nerves that are over the ankle, so they do not burn those upon them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some times they are burned with a heated lancet on the bones of the pelvis and another time on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the genitalia (vulva/penis).
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	When scalpels are large or small according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the tools of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the pointed instruments made of lead, and place them within where healing takes place as part of another remedy inside that which is being cured.
Capitol .xlviii.	The given text seems like an extract from an old medical treatise that mixes Old Spanish
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Based on your provided phrases and the context of medieval Latin-influenced language, here's
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or put to sleep as part of medical treatment and it does not heal, then apply the appropriate caustic for the severity of the injury or the smallness (dimension) of that limb/body part in question. Here 'cauterize' refers specifically using a substance meant to burn away damaged tissue—commonly an alloy such as silver nitrate was used historically, which would cause deliberate and controlled chemical burning for healing purposes or removing non-viable parts of the body affected by injury.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When the pointed cautery enters into the narrowness of the neck (the incision site), it means that a surgeon or medical practitioner has made an opening for their surgical instrument at this specific location on the
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of him with oil within which he was cured, implying that after treatment (likely with some form of poultice or salve), continued application or use
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Occasionally the cauterized area (presumably where there was numbness or a kind of paralysis) has been felt in both legs and chest backsides as well as at spinal nerves associated with that limb, indicating inflammation around these regions which may be related to pain sensations. The term "stupor" here likely refers either to numbness or weakened function due to possible injury like a herniated disc affecting the back and possibly signaling sciatica-like symptoms where nerve compression is involved, suggesting that this area might require further attention
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not be poultice on it but rather that individual who is skilled in the dissection of limbs and nerve outflow throughout all mobile parts of the body, highlighting the importance of a medical professional with expertise specifically in neuroanatomy to address such issues. This suggests seeking help from someone knowledgeable about bones (skeleton) structures and nervous system function when dealing
Capitol .xlix.	This directive implies that the treatment should not be merely superf01:26,
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Regarding scab formation during healing (ulceration), indicating perhaps a secondary focus on wound care in addition to the primary treatment of numbness or par
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When scabs are old and do not soothe with the ointments of medicine as before (the healing process may have stalled), then cauterize over that which has already been coated once for improvement in redness and discoloration, suggesting a need to break down necrotic tissue or further control bleeding using heat from an instrument like the previously mentioned pointed tool. The change of color (probably referring to purple hue turning back into normal skin tone) implies that there has been some progress with healing at this specific site on the neck, which may require re-intervention if scabs do not resolve naturally as they used to be managed by medical dressings or interventions. This signifies a shift in treatment strategy possibly due to changes in symptoms and response to previous treatments within that area of
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return care for that with barley flour and lentil seeds mixed in oil and wine vinegar, and cloves or allspice, each one a portion taken together completely mixed, apply it on the linen cloth placed over where rested inside while being healed.
Capitol .l.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from what seems like
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Cauterize the head." - This line indicates that a medical procedure involving heat or chemicals is being used
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer grows and exits the body through urine or feces, it is then cauterized at that circle within the circulation of their elimination." - This translation suggests a historical approach wherein if there was suspicion of internal bleeding due to spreading cancer (metastasis), doctors might have tried local treatment by creating an area of controlled heat or chemical application, possibly with the intention of stopping hemorrhage. However, it
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	They observe that it has already been cauterized at the place of light (heat), and I have not seen anything yet; perhaps because there is an ulceration present." - Herein, a clinician remarks on previously performed treatment with heat intended to stop bleeding. They express concern about potential complications such as an open sore or ulcer which may require further medical attention even though they haven't observed any current issues themselves yet ("they have not seen"). This reflects the kind of hands-on, observational approach that characterized early diagnostic and therapeubic methods.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	They place a pointed instrument that has been used for the treatment in question at or near the site of light (heat) within its circulatory loop." - This suggests an ongoing therapeutic intervention whereby a specific tool, potentially to maintain temperature control after cauterization ("pointed instrument"), is strategically placed with reference back to earlier mentioned symptoms and treatments.
Capitol .li.	Capitol the third." - This line seems like it'
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	This could be referencing a specific treatment or step in an ancient medical procedure related to wounds ("adulteration"). The term
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When anyone is delayed in development, and so it's due to excess flesh or the state of the humors which makes them weakly healthy with few signs, or because of time, you want to hasten their ripening; then cauterize those small points pierced for cautery within this body. And place a leech there on that one who hungers in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	May you also perform the procedure of this instrument for cautioning, and heat that same implement; place it where healing substances can enter through the cinder block: ensure that the cord remains there as needed.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you put the cautery in that place just now, to ensure that the leg becomes healed; take care of it such that it is restored (healthy).
Capitol .lii.	In interpreting this medieval medical text line by line in English while accounting for
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	The term "cauterize" refers to a medical procedure used historically, often with chemicals or heat (comm
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	This line translates to: "The decay is mobile within the limb, which consumes like bread with dry firewood." Here, it metaphorically describes an infection or deterioration (corruption) spreading through a part of the body (limb), likened to how burning wood might consume oxygen and fuel its flame. The
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	This translates to: "Therefore, if that'dictory condition is present where the infection occurs as at a focus like fire consuming dry wood, then you light small cauterizations with thin sticks and large ones when it comes down to what is needed for that location of decay." Here, the text describes an ancient treatment approach using localized heat (cauterization) on thinner twigs or similar implements as required at different stages based upon necessity. The treatments aimed either small interventions with finer tools ("thin sticks") if less invasive was needed and larger applications
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	This line translates as: "Therefore, you apply complete caustic treatment throughout the entire area affected in order to remove all decay and prevent any cause from returning." The medieval text implies a comprehensive approach using cauterization not just for symptomatic relief but also with an intent of curing by completely eradicating pathological conditions ("all decay") while
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	This translates into: "And leave that for three days, resting over the causticized sites until oil has been mixed in and all scars have completely healed out with decay entirely removed." Herein lies a directive suggesting an interval during which treatment is applied (possibly cauterization) followed by observation to ensure complete recovery from both visible marks ("scarring") of previous conditions, alongside the eradication of "decay" or disease. The passage embodies historical medical practices where time and specific care were essential for healing as suggested by waiting three days before
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Return care for that which is in the flesh causing it (the humors), then place your hand over the affected area so as not to allow the intestine from coming out again.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Return care for that which is in the flesh causing harm (the humors), and if after three days there'thy no decay or damage has occurred within what was previously affected, then all is well; but should it be otherwise, continue to apply treatments at those places where corruption persists.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Certain remedies are taken immediately for acute conditions and these act as compresses (treatment areas).
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But in some cases, apply a poultice of clean linen to the area with purulent discharge for health improvement. These sentences combine elements from different Romance languages and attempt at translating them into English
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And therein is the treatment for acute illness in this division; therefore take it when you see its onset. (Note: This translation attempts to maintain as much of the original text's meaning and syntax while translating into English, but due to variability across these languages, some interpretation was necessary.)
Capitol .liii.	Capitol III. - Assuming this refers to a section or chapter number in
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the treatment of nails and other similar structures (Note: This translation assumes 'claus' can be understood as referring to body parts that may require medical attention,
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Gently massage the affected parts of the ill body (the feet), which causes a serious fall or fracture; treat these injuries with compresses on bone and wound cleaning, respectively as second lines of treatment following primary care measures ('clau' refers to 'fractures,' here interpreted in English). This translation is an attempt at converting the original medical instruction into modern language while trying to keep its essence intact. Due to historical context differences between languages like Latin and Italian (or similar regional dialects), some interpretative liberty was taken with terminologies such as "malautia," which could refer more broadly than a current English word for 'illness.'
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the pointed cautery be where sparks are made with it that resembles pain as if by a sword'dictor; this is forged of iron according to the quantity contained in its entire key, and crafted from fine hammering.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let that enter for three days until it begins bleeding blood.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Emplace that wax made from bad saltblown has been boiled and applied thereon for a night; by then it will have rid them of their reasons/causes.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	When care is applied in that area where raw meat generates heat within it for healing purposes,
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If you do not convert it (presumably referring to applying treatment), and continue walking or moving about on the surface of the body, mainly in the thighs and feet, where you apply that which is soothing with those cauterizing tools made from water, iron, or a saw blade – place your hand there; hold just a little amount (the quantity being small), cover it with your own hand tightly, twist continuously this compression of your hand over the whole area until you feel that any obstruction in the canula has been removed. Then wait for only a few minutes after using the needle filled with water or iron from its point to clear out (eliminate) blockages before applying it again; do so repeatedly if necessary, repeating as needed whenever there is an impediment cleared by this action until all obstructions have ceased resistance against being removed.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if it is necessary for them (the patient) inside, then bring the other into their body through all those parts where they currently are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	When those putrid things that cause decay in flesh are removed by the liquids, it heals what caused them inside the body'thy patient.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol .liiii.: This line appears incomplete or unclear as is;
De cauterizacio de tremor.	This interpretation suggests that "Capt." might refer to a medical procedure related to the treatment of convulsions (
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a shaking due to nerve or feverish irritation, it'thy duty then (or yours) becomes that you perform four cauterizations—one on each vertebra in the back and one over patient’s chest as well; with fire also treat their stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the shaking of it subsides and hastens the healing of the sickness's inflammation.
Capitol .lv.	The text provided seems like an attempt at translating medical instructions or observations
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the cauterization of a wound on the body part called 'cor.' In English, this can be translated to: "Con
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there is an opening in the body part called 'cor' (which can refer to any area with a wound or fistula), and these openings are filled with thick, putrefied materials; thus, it must be cleaned out carefully using myrtle wood cautery underfoot, expanding until at its peak on that spot where the abscess is located. Or if found in an area of long-standing erosion or a slowly developing ulceration—these areas are to also receive delicate and gradual treatment with such care.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Sometimes you apply cautery to the patient'thy excretion according to this mannerism; and it is not considered excessive in doing so with these applications, thus healing them from such conditions.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Mayhaps if there is pain that needs expulsion through phlebotomy, here it stands for removal of blood from the body by cutting into veins (phlebotomy).
Capitol lvi.	Capitol VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of bleeding caused by an injury due to a sharp arrow incision for cautery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Tropicalized forces enter from arsenic that must be incised or have inserted limb instruments, then appear to resemble each other; and it is difficult afterwards to restore the original state of things.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Thus when you press on the water within your body (implying some form of internal healing practice), gently apply pressure to your chest with one hand and pause there until either rest or relief enters that area so as not for it to protrude again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And apply pressure with olive-wood lancets gently and generously over those contained within where there are sparks of fire.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Return the blood vessel and its contents from where it has burst open here (the location), applying pressure with this instrument to prevent further bleeding, thus performing internal cauterization on that wound.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you move and extract the cauterys, then take another cauterium immediately used in that area for treatment; thus, do not cease performing this procedure until the sanc's restriction is secured.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And watch that you do not burn the nerves here present and bring them back over the thigh or other misfortune.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	When the artery is blocked and it's not possible to relieve that condition in those regions, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods are available: or using cautery where we need them; if extraction is needed and cannot be extracted, then removing limbs together with combustion will restrict blood flow there too, either by ligature (tying) or bandaging for strong compression. Strongly applied linen in a stiff form on the chest to control circulation:
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer a proper restriction of the patient at their bedside or position due to burns and resembling illnesses not comfort but rather impose discomfort.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it be that when no doctor or medicine is present, attend to the wound as directed herein with whatever means you have at hand (such as water used for washing), and understand where this great constriction lies within the patient's lower body portion (specifically in their thigh area) so that there will be no rupture; moreover upon the artery, it is sprayed with strong flowing fluid causing significant inflammation around where the wound sits, leading to swelling and hardening of the tissue – at which point medical intervention may become necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second division/part of our discussion or text.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncture and blows and of bleeding and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are terms of Albucacius.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Ja have we described all illnesses in which the focus is on cauterization and medical burning, as well as their occasions and causes, and instruments necessary for these forms of cauteration; let us organize the chapters concerning head subincision within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When this process occurs in this chapter for the purpose of drawing out what they seek, according to that which will be asked by them.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you come in with blood, cover it quickly, my son, so that the fear of bleeding which is at the beginning of cauterization does not spread here.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For the sake of caution that is necessary here, during this operation where life itself comes into play through venous bleeding or catharsis (evacuation), removal of maggots or larvae, extraction of stones and incision on wounds—these actions must be performed with great care.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	When all of these accompany fear and trembling in the abdomen of them,
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here is the line-by-line translation into English:
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	From these humors it gives them health and said, "I hope for this well-being," but the illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And only when you consent to this that comes from him whose madness it is; and your caution must be greater than keeping secrets, not assuming any cause for what arrives here without proper scientific certainty which purifies such things as come towards us, following a laudable sequence.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in their healing for all your illnesses, which they have predicted and indicated herein whereby you are cured, thereupon it will assist you with acquiring fame and memory; of praiser and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, God grant you understanding and not bone in your direction and protection, for it is within her (the mother/nurturing entity).
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And order this chapter distinctly according to the sections previously outlined in the chapter on cautery for head treatment within the feet so that you may attend to what is requested of you and what it is necessary from these things.
Capitol primier.	Capital First (This denotes that it is the beginning or primary point
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Regarding the water contained in a child's bladder.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness moves slowly in children and when the newborn first lifts its head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	At times due to ill-advised actions that are not clean or beneficial in nature;
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May you not see this illness in children but among all those who have had their cotyled (hernia) die and for whom I am here to provide care.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu e vist that a child'thy head was of water completed, and his head always remained moist within which he could not stand doctors upon because of the greatness of their heads, and perhaps even more so when humidity increased inside where the fire dies.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is added between the navel and the bone, or it is accumulated on top of the flesh thereof; herein lies their holdings' grasp.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case if moisture is between the chin and bone and the swelling is slight, then cut along where you feel pain on the head under one spot of numbness, and the length of this crack will be two fingers within which the humidity flows, and this is the form of sprain:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if moisture increases and ulceration worsens, here are two cracks according to this methodology.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is moisture on you, it means that your joints have become wet and water gets squeezed out when you press this liquid from its parts and sections; this is why.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you make incisions at the head' end of this manner,
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And restore the insufficiency not to all moisture; and strengthen cracks in clothes and ointments, place water and oil inside at midday, apply liniment and bandages on tendons and joints tightly, strengthen the head evenly; eat dry food with little moisture until the body is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not divide the vein and blood vessel of sanctus (blood) sweet, nor moisture heavy flow within it for the expulsion of fluid secretion.
Capitol .ii.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating from a language with
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	When referring to the arteries which are used for grafting or attachment of fingers (or limbs), they shall be called 'hilus'. This suggests that in medical practice during medieval times, there was terminology specific to surgical procedures involving blood vessels and amputation where a special term like 
Capitol segon.	In the second section of this treatise or manuscript (den
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When encountering swelling or inflammation of the hips or chest area, and these are ancient times when such symptoms do not directly indicate a condition requiring medical treatment; rather, it is there that we start (or begin) with care in those very two arteries. This suggests an early understanding by medieval physicians of targeted intervention at specific sites where they perceived issues to originate or manifest severely – pointing towards limbs and chest which were critical for patient mobility and overall health, indicating a tailored approach even back then.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you intend to insert those humors into the patient's head, and rub vigorously the area covered by the hard cloth for it to appear as if opening arteries, tighten their collar bone with that same harsh fabric; take note of veins in each location where hair is plucked out, which are visible only on bald men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your signet over the anvil and secure each of them on their spine at any joint where pain is entering through into the skull due to its curvature as directed by the head (doctor).
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the splint into the artery and divide it at the points below (the parts mentioned).
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	When the length of the intestine is two hands wide adjusted, when any vein within it suffers from an outflowing pulse, this also jumps frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May if the arrow does not appear at the joint, then measure the length of the auricle (earlobe), and apply pressure with your hand until you enter the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the quantity of bile produced from the spleen is excessive and not allowed to flow out, it can cause imbalance in its amount that appears as a result of liver dysfunction or gallblad0 overflow.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Consider the swelling and therefore if it remains on the bone for any cause of rheumatism, then divide (the affected area) with water to prevent apendicitis abscess formation.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the patient with wool and linen clothes, ensuring that they are wrapped in grease to promote healing.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III.: (This line appears incomplete or out of context
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The provided Latin-like sentence translates to English as: "From the arches which are in the temples." This translation attempts to convey a direct meaning from each word or phrase, assuming it
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient sanctuaries or churches from ages past are affected by moisture agricultural conditions and the quality of materials in these temple structures—old foundations seemingly addressing them—doctors who practice healing medicine find themselves dealing with such ailments, either through extraction from arches within temples (which implies removing stones possibly for drainage or repair) as treatment.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manipulation of the operation and extraction from those humors that are in the chambers; understand when the arcanum is shown on your pulse but hidden if by mere forcefulness,
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you are hidden, then tighten the colon of malaute with one cloth; and apply heat to that place or wet it in water tail's interior until your signs appear clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take hold of this very scalpel,
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And position your finger in the area for easy access as you approach the artery; place shoes on them and extract that from between the thighs into parts above where it enters the artery, discovering what is below there with each extraction throughout the entire division.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is subtle, then encircle that part of the body and insert one portion according to the quantity by which their limbs are elongated and contracted; it will not cause a flow of blood there unless those portions have not been inserted properly.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Return (make return) the intestine out of its sanctum chamber three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then you must place it in two places firmly down to half its length on either side of or near the bones and not bring decay into the region as it consolidates for wound healing; thus preventing a flux (or flow) of pus.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Return (or apply) excess that is between two ligaments, and make it now or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, apply the pointed cautery within the mouth of the cautery point inside where they have been made incisions on him/her, and remain at that spot for which this medical operation is performed.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E è meglio se il male ha febbre o di asciaturo complesso; quelli che curano le umidezioni finali, sono infatti più utili in giornata.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working you encounter an outflow of blood from the artery, then immediately try to constrict that flow, or use a cautery instrument as needed, and strengthen your grip so that the bleeding can be restricted at the wound site.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If there is no immediate cause for that (the joint pain), pause over the location where the flesh has become congealed, and wait until the inflammation subsides within which space it becomes less agitated; then apply firm pressure accordingly to its strength afterward.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When the leggings are put out of place by arcing them with this instrument that has been used for two places (the thighs and chest), where you have previously tried these locations to correct their position, allowing some time after each attempt until they reach the bones, so that it is extended between the extremities of yours hereby not fully consolidated by all from this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the cauterization tool works:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the tightness of both cloaks examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Even if the patient'dict sharpness increases and becomes like two knives piercing any part of the body at once, do not attempt to cut into the flesh hastily.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is any thickening in those places and heat accumulates at the focus of those spots, causing the flesh to detach loosely.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety because I have added lightness (leugieri).
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	When it comes to spaces where between two cushions is the quantity of the body' extraneous mass,
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter (The text is referring to one-four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of sharp and acute joint pains caused by humors in the body.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors accumulate thereon over those veins which are above the head of that person and cause no discomfort or need for medical treatment, their faces often blush as if they were carrying out a bee's gait when walking, and these fluids expand to make them feel like rodents with fur coming loose at once; thus old apothecaries intervened in the healing of such conditions by applying this remedy directly.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	You command the malady winds to remove the hair at which are on their forehead and you shall make three incisions there with an incise instrument according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the fissure extends two lengths: one length is from the jawbone to the nostril at the forehead' extradental area; another as a small portion of movement in the eyes (lacrimal gland), and thirdly, this other part...
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Guard your jaw where the lips meet (in two places), and extend your tongue incessantly between both lower jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If in any joint space there is three times its adjusted size.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have an inflamed wound covered with bandages or dry cloth, then apply the extract from these materials to the wound itself.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And place between the spine of two acute limbs, which is how this body part looks like to him.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That is from the division of spirits entering into the second stage.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Expose all of the neck where it is between two joints on which the head rests (the atlas vertebra), and apply pressure to allow fluid movement from one intervertebral space into the second intervertebral space.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Return the scrap and do not insert it into either of the first two cavities with another tool which you call a cauterizer; use one end for this purpose and keep the other unused.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	When the joint of that gout must be stopped by its attached flesh and should press on his bones where they meet (i.f., at the growth plates), take it all up to there, thus preventing their descent down from head to feet through cracks in them.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May continuous flow of fluid from the kidney be maintained on this humidity (or effluent), and direct it into another opening within itself.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	When I push backward from the sanction amount of urine, expressing the areas of the catheterized bladder stones.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	In the third day, apply great heat from water or oil poultice and massage with honey-soaked bandages inside where mucus is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capital (This) moment or occasion has arrived for action/tre
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	At this time of care for exorcisms and the humors flowing from parts digested,
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the patient comes with catharsis action and continues, and at times humors of the malady expand, causing their palms to ulcerate along with hair loss due to illness from extremities' detrimental parts; afterward, awareness arises regarding these accidents which are not caused by incoming fluids but rather originating in congested veins of body segments.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	When all of the sanction (presumably used for cleansing or purification, as suggested by context) is excreted from under the tongue or between the mouth' extrinsic lips (possibly referring to a fissure within these areas), it has been reabsorbed.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	When above-the-knee pressure is applied on thighs and below elbthy in water, this prevents the development of festering ulcers.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the putrefaction has decreased and pus begins to enter into your bones where it was supposedly born, at that time care must be taken with this regiment of ashes previously made; as if you are taking two parts flour from wheat and four parts honeycomb pieces. Mix these together (flour and honeycombs) and apply them directly to the wounds on your flesh, administering in these plagues according to one's natural period for healing.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI. (The numbering here does not correspond with
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	When translating medieval medical texts, it's essential to understand the context and terminology used at that time which may differ significantly from modern languages like Latin or other contemporary
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause of the pain in the fingers is one out of four species; it may be metallic like iron or silver, similar to those materials when combined with lead and glass (which they believed could affect bones), related to water flowing through pipes causing pressure issues, reminiscent of plant juices such as chickpea sap (similar in consistency but not the same substance) which causes fluid shifts within tissues leading to pain. It may also be due to some animal presence or an intrusion that prompts this ailment.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore when blood flows in the earlobe or appears similar to these causes that do not align with it and stops flowing in the earlobe at sunr extrusion time, if you see the bloody discharge, then administer its removal, and apply treatments for pus formation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not drained (the affected area), then use the gentle instruments of which this is the form for extraction.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is an obstruction in labor (breech birth), be ready to act immediately; otherwise, administer its removal carefully over a few small doses of purgatives or emetics as needed.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if there is an obstruction (foro-getada) by water or phlegm within the body, then place a straw of arsenic and insert its extremity into the thickness of the bronchus where it has come in contact with the obstacle. Insert this same thin end also at the entrance to prevent excess from being retained therein except for that which is inserted via the straw (canula).
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	When you place your hand on the chest where it was tightly fastened together with forceps previously used by us today, those who have been restrained and examined are coming back into view again.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	May not be forked in this mannerism, then take hold of the bone or hard device whereby their joints are pinched tightly together and pause there at the extremity of reach, and wrap carefully around that spot enveloped.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And insert that into the disruption of the liver'gyne vein to ease it, and remove the liver from moistness.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if there are all the causes we have listed beforehand, then promptly apply heat or spasm to that part which is currently experiencing inflammation.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	When the manipulation of such pain is that you sanction in your body'thy veinphasic vessel, and remove it secondarily along with one’s vertue direction, holding hands to turn the auricle into divisions above said location where its essence enters below due to constriction.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when the figure crack reaches the bone, and if the bone is crushed by your tool at that moment, then fix it with appropriate force there in time for healing to occur.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is in the liver and it swells up due to fatty substances that you believe are retained within, then administer treatment and removal of them; if not heeding your advice, apply a gentle touch under this manner.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer that which was caught in his joint (the arthritis), from where it has emerged on the wrist, this is what must be treated:
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you do not apply water when thinking that it has already moistened by the sun' extrusion is prevented from happening in those areas where blood or menstrual flows occur; because we are all aware of how easily they can come out, this prevents their extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May enter the water into which the wound is steeped for healing, and fill up that flask with cold wine, applying it to the spot on which this water resides; if by chance one becomes ill from drinking (indicating possible infection), then bile forms within them. Otherwise, take stones of flint or jasper according to length, place these upon the stone where the liquid is held, and heat that very same stone over a small fire until red hot. Then have the patient insert one such heated stone into their own wound on this particular partioned body area (presumably an arm), jump onto it with his hand for treatment as follows:
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then let your fingers remain in contact with the skin until all the water has been drawn out (or "absorbed").
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And if water has entered the opening where you grasp paper or horn (presumably as a heating device), place one end of it in the bellows and extend the other end into the fire to heat up the moisture within.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Here comes the first source sentence: E prop met i altregonc e fai acqua tante veghe entro che tutta l'acqua sia forò-getada, e stracci quel canula assosio de la pezza extraordinaria.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When an animal is extracted from that hole, if it's a small creature and jumps around as though they have come with us in the division; but when it comes from a large one causing pain in the chest, then apply external extraction by hand and knife while removing its cause will relieve all other causes present there.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When phlegm generated in the armpit occurs during extraction and you do not comfort your treatment as previously mentioned for that which we have discussed about this mucus in the axilla, then watch the armpit towards the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So if there is any cause by worms here, then extract it either with gentle hands or not using a dart thrust below. If no such cause appears, take a thin catheter drawn above and away from you; this will be the form of treatment.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtlety into the artery according to the amount that sufferers may experience; and draw out impurities from there with strong suction, so long as all parasites are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	May you not obey my instruction, then you will become pale and closed in the circuit of the catheter inserted with wax; administer these drips which have already been used in their treatment for parasites, thus removing them through the drainage system.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is your flow, through which you pour the medicines into this instrument of yours today:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E for that one of silver or lead is struck quickly in it where a small splinter lies and placed on the underside.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And when it is necessary in the state of continence that they push, herein lies their need.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the wand and wrap it around their decent limb gently, and place oil or some plant extract therein, or any liquid from these medicines in a syringe—and that is where to apply (the applicator), placing it undernethy joints below so as when this compress with applied liquid ascends into the cavity of those hips, both hip pain will feel anointed.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When something is encapsulated in the artery, it has already been slightly cut at its focus point with a small flame (possibly referring to applying heat or using cautery).
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Guard your health for which you will extract the cause in the earlobe; it is not too harsh therein, and such remedies of the earlobe do not suffer from excessive friction.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The seventh chapter of "Capitul
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	From care for tendons. ("Curación del tejido óseo" could be the intended translation, as 'opulaci
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some digestions in children's bellies are not perforated by tendons; and this matter is felt internally within the body of those individuals who have experienced it – specifically residing somewhere near or inside (in terms like 'dentro,' which would be translated as 'inside') such an area, often referred to with medical terminology linked with gout. It's possible that these experiences might manifest in various parts away from where initially felt ('diferentes partes lejos de donde se siente'), potentially including the tendon itself if it lacks proper covering or padding – a scenario possibly leading to discomfort and necessitating medical attention, aligning with medieval notions of disease symptoms related to internal body structures like bones (opulaci) as interpreted from your translation attempt.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when you experience pain in the lower part of him/her (the patient), which does not understand clothing or apparel, it is among the major difficulties for difficult recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you pause the tail of the malady on the brow and observe therein,
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obvious swelling, press on that subtle part from which it appears:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the limb in which he is small and one part of it sharp while the other is not, and his sinews are made up of two parts each like lion'thyrses to prevent harming the head.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	So if the obstruction is due to raw flesh in the armpit or thigh/leg area, then cut it off gently and make an aggressive incision within where the flesh can be entirely removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If there is an abscess in the area of the earlobe, then apply gentle heat with this small flame and insert that into the flesh of the earlobe; also place it inside to prevent the pus from spreading further.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if there is an accumulation of water that weakens the spleen due to cold dampness invasion (ausir), then this constriction makes it easier for you, but be careful not to harm the nerves of the backbone.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you cool down the flow of phlegm and place moist cloth or wet sheet on the forehead, while using another remedy that restricts the flow of phlegm; this treatment is mentioned in the text about distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII. (The Roman numeral "VIII" refers to
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Regarding the care required when something occurs with one'thy eyelids, here is an English translation:
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When some of these excesses enter into the patient'se feet, sometimes they are dry periods (or droughts).
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So that you hold those hands tightly and separate them from their joints, placing your pause over the places where they have been divided three times already.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	May it be that if there is pain from a flow of blood returning (referred to as "sangu flu," possibly meaning reflux or abnormal circulation), then you should cauterize those delicate points undernethy, with these caustic needles.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And the best caustic treatment is that soft and guided parts return when there remains any cause of their diseases; and once they are cauterized at the focus, those causes do not come back.
Capitol .ix.	The provided text is from an old medical treatise combining elements of Latin
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	When treating the great eyes (which could refer to severe eye conditions), which come into play within the patient's eyelids, doctors would proceed with specific remedies or treat
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 When wandering motions occur within the patient's eyelids (which might suggest an erratic or involuntary movement of the eyes), caused by whatever reasons that have led to their enhancement in size and tension, such condition is called "grandeyssa" due to its grandeur. Whenever this situation arises—referring perhaps to a serious eye disorder causing excessive lid protrusion or spasms—it necessitates an
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 Addition of heavy moisture into the patient's upper and lower eyelids is observed, which may indicate a condition where excessive tearing or fluid accumulation occurs in these parts of the eye structure due to various causes
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Therefore, it is considered that the cause may be moisture appearing from within the patient' extricable (the eye), and this condition appears everywhere without exception—suggesting an overflow or excess of tears due to a blockage in their production system; such as with "leugiera," which could mean congestion, obstruction leading to watery eyes. In essence, if the large tearing issue is found within (in) one's eyelid and spread across all locations uniformly possibly indicating an underlying imbalance or blockage
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Then you act upon that very fault line within the palpebrae (eyelids), extracting whatever is present throughout in its entirety to alleviate it and suspending what comes out, while separating any remaining fragments—a treatment process aimed at addressing a tearing issue by removing all associated materials from inside the eyelid for relief. This methodology seems focused on physically intervening within the affected area of concern (the eyes), with careful removal to promote healing or provide symptomatic release, possibly in an era where
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not equipped with the instrument for examination and do not insert it into the eye between two eyelids at most, then you will notice nothing in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; take care that it heals properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little (of something), you will not come ill from that which remains there for the longing of it to restore and nourish what' extrinsic condition has caused its diminishment or deficiency.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the great size is declining at the extremities of the eyelid lids, then open the eye lid and suspend the great size for an hour or so; another that you choose to start treatment with, apply it all over until there's no sign in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Apply an incision, wash it with salted water; and attend to the place where the healing fluid resides within that is being cured.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.: (This line appears incomplete or out of
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The provided text seems to be in a language that borrows elements from Latin, Italian ("la"), Spanish ("del" and "desus") as well as possibly Arabic (
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The provided text seems to combine elements from several languages, including potentially Latin ("axcirnath," "engendrat," "catartz"), Italian ("la palpebra desus" meaning the underside of the eyelid), Spanish (such as “desus” for beneath and “aquellos,” a plural form often used in this context referring to those things or people mentioned earlier), Arabic influence, possibly medical terminology. Here is an attempt at translation into modern English:
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	When you press those sounds on the cheeks all night long, and on their foreheads when they sleep (which are already inflamed), with moistened eyebrows covered in a rash that is about to burst out into pustules; whenever you perceive such locations as swelling spots upon them touching lightly, tenfold acne enters those areas.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the area where you cut through the navel (entering), there come into operation arthritic joints according to the form of white bubbles.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those clothes which you have wrapped around the body' extruded between the right and left sides, ensuring they are spread evenly throughout where it is painful for healing to occur.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you ensure that it does not reach the hip and scapula joints, thus preventing your fingers from falling into those areas:
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May it not appear in your abdomen during the incision of the fissure, may you insert a small cushion within that process so as to help the intestine move; and extract that which has come out there (the obstruction), placing clean cloths over them while immersed in water and resting.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	When bile and urine flow through that opening in the cavity, it is to remove what remains of that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which has been healed inside him/it.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May you apply a cauterizing instrument here; and as long as that piece of metal begins to wither within the wound, take care until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (The exact meaning of "Capit
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	It appears that you've provided a phrase in what seems like an archaic or perhaps pseudo-medical context, possibly
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When, in the lids of our eyes soaks naturally and artificially fine hairs quickly make us aware that there's a cause within which we seek help from those who have knowledge (medical practitioners), they address it with four approaches: or through cauterization using heat; as indicated for acute cases in the chapter on urgent treatments, referred to here simply as "cauterism"; by extracting them manually and mending eyelids internally whereby a cause of eye damage is removed (as can be done when touching our eyes); or through bandaging.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	So that you stop the flow of bile in the throat; take hold of your left eye's eyelid with your right hand (if possible), and if it turns out to be feasible: insert a needle into this spot, where there is already fidelity from being touched by the patient's penis touch. Insert the needle here below the place in which hair grows – specifically at the margin of the eyelash area on your left eye; and draw back the thread attached to it towards above the respective parts (eye areas) as you hold, thus converting that spot into a point by pulling out or drawing forth.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Here is the line-byse translation:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Even if the figure according to the quantity of eye opening is observed, even then among men their conditions differ greatly; these are those who have inserted a significant amount into the eyelid for its softening as required by the extent of eye opening.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Return (or place) firmly on the shoulder blade over the lines you have drawn, starting from the greater lacrimal and moving towards the lesser lacrimal within the tear ducts.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair split is like the thickness of a king'thy body,
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return (or apply) the stitches on the wound within three to four days, and take care of it properly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish to stitch the wound, treat that which drains and contracts, for when it is drawn out must be removed from its incision by the girl'dictum of the young one (a term possibly referring to a healer or nurse), then suture may be better. Therefore, attend diligently to these old practices.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	May it exert pressure on the thighs, and it is good work without fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another malady appears in the face region, and it is that their eyelids are raised with three prongs separately gathered and arranged following this manner.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it'thy not possible for water (fluids) to be retained within the body, then take an iron filament in which has been dipped and insert that into the figure with warmth; also place another needle above the larger tear duct prominently, as well as a second over the smaller one recedingly. Adjust them evenly among these fields (body regions) to elevate your hand's position upwards in order to lift both knees at once with which you sit together for recovery restoration, just like how we have previously advised and demonstrated hereinabove.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	With waxes for the lips of the patient'dicted by surgery applied and cured that which is inside healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May you if have an abscess or a crack in your mind or body, clean that abscess with wool and likewise appearance, and apply ointment to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxiny is second in this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And when you change the eye lid and divide the figure as I have described, apply heated cannulae or fine needles under them according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their chin corresponding to the width of the pubis bone.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the limbs of some parts broken down, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	When any additional subtlety underneath is added to what superfluously flows from the patient's eye, and you tighten the cannulas of some split parts rigidly, let them rest for a few days until the belly becomes constrained due to strictures that are denied and will then be drawn back in while being cared by yourself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then strike them with force and take care that there are no small wounds inside where they can heal naturally.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Thus when secured, the eyelid is lifted up and the hair does not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you perform these operations with cuisants (fistulas or open sores), according to this method.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e has quantity of length neither more nor less than that which is measured by months and days.
Capitol .xii.	In this translation of an old medical treatise from medieval times into modern English line
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hairy part (of a wound) is inflamed and painful, it signifies an infection or severe irritation that requires medical attention. Here's how we could translate this line by considering its context within
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and sharp (likely referring to some foreign objects or abnormal growth), surgery is needed in this delicate part of care; you should perform a gentle incision under precise control with slight movements as if handling something soft, ens06712345. In English:
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When it is about the length of a hand'dictum in medical measurements used within this text refers to an approximate distance equivalent to that spanned by one's pal
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Adjust the second thinner part of this practice in brief measures, and hold those extremities if you wish to do so.  
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And place your hand under the malady'se head on their chest, and it is placed in such a way that your work may be declared complete; for this is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Return the fur inside them and insert that into their lungs; let there be two or three furs at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	In this translation, I've attempted to maintain as much of the original flavor and structure while rendering it understandable in modern English:
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	May it be that you will return the ligaments to their respective parts where they have been placed by your work on those areas using glue which was applied there; as long as these are not attached to the penis, pull them back into position so that they do not rise up again.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	When you have that vision of the humerus (shoulder), whereby your arm and faithful instrument grind whatsothy are experiencing in their shoulder, ease it for two or three days until the pus adheres to its place and rises above on healthy flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If it is short the fur (referring to hair), then adjust a long one from natural furs, and raise that above such spaces; lift up as much of this length within those areas allowed by law.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (The text provided does not contain enough context
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	From the removal of what is found under the upper lid:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye is irritated and it contracts with contraction of the eyelid (when one contracts their eyelids), due to poor consolidation of sand or pieces/cruciates, or cautery instruments are used—this condition calls for a leech. This issue arises naturally or accidentally, and it is caused by solidification of sand or fragments/cauterization processes, or because they resemble their own diseases.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the reason for operating on him be that you cut through his consolidation and separate his lips, pausing in between where there is a cloth of lint, and bind those together while they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	When using the treatment of your patient for these causes that expel humors, compress and bind tightly; even if there is any putrid matter present at this moment, it will not remain here forever.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Use that which moistens with fenugreek and immerses in the water where their knees and thighs are located or anointed with honeydew oil; it is dissolved among his bones by doctors, then submerged into this vessel for healing.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And your treasure of care is that you pierce all in the way not solidified as intended according to common understanding.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not any correction of the humoral imbalance afterward which restores the shape of the affected area following exposure to cold.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii.: (The reference appears incomplete as there is no text
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Regarding the treatment of this eye condition which occurs in the corner of the eye, here's a translation:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This arises from the eye lid that is called a prolapse (or possibly hernia), and it can be either of its own nature or an accident caused by external factors.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May pain occur accidentally due to maggots or cracks, or from cautery or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The way of the operation is to take a needle in which you make it double-threaded and keep that within the flesh; making it pass from the left tear duct into the right, until the thread reaches the extremities of the body'dicts what appears to be an instruction for suturing or stitching during surgery.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Expose the flesh to the parts above and below it along with that which is in between those areas under pressure; delve into the broad thighs (and also apply this method on their abdomen).
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the shape of the eyelid returns as before, be; otherwise take a sharp tool and pause on that part where it is broken, then convert that area back to its normal form and sew up those eye sockets quickly.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is written in Greek letters: gout.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	When you apply pressure on that part of the body as much as its size requires it when they open their eyelids, which is what one does by applying force with fingers or similar tools like tweezers used here. (Here 'osta' refers to a method where direct manual application occurs while considering patient’ extraneous fluids and state; this aligns closely with the
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Adjust the separated parts and bring them together with wool thread, taking care of those areas as directed by soothing remedies and poultices within which they are to be healed. (Here 'ajusta' means adjust; this line instructs on repositioning body segments back in place using bandages or similar medical aids; it also emphasizes the application of specific treatments for restoration.)
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If there is a tear or need for stitches (or surgical intervention), then cut where the crack appears on the eyelid skin, following whatever has been done previously in that regard. (This line provides guidance on addressing specific types of damage like tears; it advises to proceed with precision as per prior steps taken.)
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Separate the wound dressings between her lips, following what has been instructed hereinabove (meaning according to previous guidance). This line suggests continuity in treatment by carefully removing and replacing bandages or similar materials
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech concerning wound care when it is removed or lifted away, let that operate in patient form; and this takes shape as various types (referring to differing forms/styles of bandages used). Here 'corra' suggests allowing healing processes through practical application – akin to letting something flow into action. The sentence emphasizes the transition from theoretical knowledge ('sermo') about wound treatment, involving techniques for applying and removing dressings or casts (alxacrati), highlighting their preparation is key in various forms that suit different needs of patients' care procedures
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	Here the artisan prepares for any necessary action in each chamber where it is possible to return the figure back to its natural form or even more, according to what he has planned from his operation and instruments at hand.
Capitol .xv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript that mixes Latin with
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the eyelid (palpebra) down to the conjunctiva or up to the cornea, indicating a range of anatomical areas within the eye that may be relevant for medical treatment or exam
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation is done for men over fifty who suffer from drooping of the lower lid below their chest (herniated fat pad), and movement restriction as well as interference with natural functions are desired; then, intervene outside its margin to lift it up or stretch that part. Thus you obstruct involuntary blinking motions by extending beyond the margins of the eyelid skin—lifting ("erect") them from beneath (below).
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And if it is your turn, then withdraw that attachment back into its natural shape and heal the entire attachment completely.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Return your tool into the saltwater bath, or draw from it steam distilled with water and salt solution in which you wash.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Return the separation between the eye and the brain of them who are ill-nourished (calguada), placing it over the swolthy lymph in an albumen medium, using this treatment for three days until recovery is consolidated:
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (This line does not contain enough context or
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The phrase "Insight into the unguis and prominence of cheek skin" in English could be interpreted as gaining understanding about the nail (unglus) structure, possibly its shape or health
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	The line translates into English as: "Know that the nail (ungla) is like a subtle cipher when tense or nervous—it appears hard and slippery; but if it's not, resembling white congealed moisture which, once touched with force, tears away immediately leaving nothing behind.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter except through the greater tear duct where they gradually cover the sight and prevent light from entering and moving freely.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the action in her chest be that the humors stagnate at her head and rise to her face, where you hold up their hand with one glove doubled over twice its size, applying pressure there as well on each of those parts below it.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	When you lift that leg inside (the bed), it is time for action/intervention now.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when some of the bone has become softened by the sun or fire, as we have said before, it is because this is its form made up of marrow.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	E ensure that you do not touch the corneal layer of the eye and allow it time for healing if there is a breakage; also make sure the iris (pupil) remains intact.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the lancet is not sharp and you cannot insert it or leave it there for an hour, these types of lancets are cured by medicine (medicines), and they heal as long as you keep them in place within a day.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that one, then work the thigh of the malady and place a soft pillow under the firm fleece as shown herein this manner.
am subtilitat.	am delicacy.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that which has become rarefied and entrapped in there enters into its course, take it from your hour for sinister or celest extrication; infuse the herb of this night at dawn within the fayt cough's heel day, absorbing it throughout the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if it is necessary for you to operate within that which has entered there from your body at large, then perform the operation quickly so as not to allow further entry of fluid into the cavity; once done thusly, attend to healing what was operated upon.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Return your operation over that which is within reason for healing to be completed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The seminal fluid of the tear gland, if present in large amounts at childbirth and not fully extracted from that portion, do not continue to extract it further lest there be a flow of humors involved.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And draw out essence in the teary eye and medicine within while it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	The text provided is written in an archaic form of Romance languages influenced by Latin
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	When translated into English, the line from this medieval medical treatise could mean:
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some time ago in the heat of youth emerged red meat that is over-puffed, or approached with newborns and pressed their eyelids together at the parts divided by lashes; this constitutes the comb for fringework on balusters.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	When the operation is in place and you attend to those things of that which has been cut away for it; take all this flesh appropriately attached at its joints with whatever tool available from there, whether a knife or an instrument like forceps; tie up the meat together until everything inside is completely finished off by your work.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your mind is complete and the entire body has been cleansed, then spread salt over that part of the flesh where it will drip or distill healing potions and medicinal ashes into it within an album bound by leather to secure with apostem cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If any cause of inflammation and fever occurs, apply heat cauterization immediately, fearing an abscess that yields to treatment when it submits its pus (which will come out with the operation), repeat this application within the context where healing is occurrthy achieved. It seems as though in the body's adjusted flesh there appears inflammation caused by this particular essence/spice, and during or after applying heat cauterization herein described it resolves (heals).
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even though you remove the entire healing for the limp by force and do not place your hand in any of these operations, as long as that member is suffering from it,
Capitol .xviii.	Capture (Capitol). This line refers to an annotation or note made in volume
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	From tongue to body." In English, this translates to the movement or transfer of taste from the tongue during eating and
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The taste buds (tongue) are the vessels that go into contact with food and prevent operation in the belly area; they develop over days." This line from a medieval medical treatise describes how, according to ancient beliefs or theories of medicine at the time, taste sensations arise when molecules stimulate these structures. The 'belly' refers historically to where digestion occurs within what modern anatomy would be termed as the
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary for dining that you take into account if the belly (where digestion occurs) in which there are taste buds is strong and not suffering from another illness than those on the tongue." This line emphasizes considering both strength of appetite/digestive power, as well as overall health beyond just oral symptoms. It suggests that for effective dining—and possibly by extension medical treatment according to their dietary approach—a holistic view is needed where
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	It is that you command the intestine to stop its secretion in the throat, and suspend those veins for one or two seconds according to your judgment; and this interval of subtle duality following their guidance." Here, a practitioner instructs the patient's body (via some form of control over 'the malaute,' likely referring metaphorically to internal bodily functions) with specific timing—one or two second suspensions that are adjusted based on prudence. The use of "subtle duality" could indicate a dual approach, possibly balancing opposing forces within the body according to ancient
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	So that they may gradually cut in a way according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And tighten those veins with threads or subtlety, and wash them off hour by hour until they are no longer swolthy from cold humors in the bloodstream and have stopped being agitated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed the procedure, then pour wine or something to cleanse it so that bad moisture is removed from within.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of this at once, and if you must apply the fluid that comes out with the pain to your wound, let them flow into an open area so they can be absorbed over the next few days until the pain subsides and ensuring proper healing through dressing.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	When treatment is applied again after the mattress master has entered and healing begins, 
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how these instruments are used:
Capitol .xix.	The given text appears to be from an old medical manuscript or treatise discussing
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	In translating this line related to the reduction of arising, it seems you're referring to some form of treatment
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arising that is accompanied by acute combustion and does not heal spontaneously, it's no longer in the body but has manifested as an ulceration; extract all the moistness wherein this wound resides, until its bones are uncovered when put back into place.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover that bone and sometimes in the body is decayed or damage, then it takes a form of this structure.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is made of hard iron, its head being forged with iron and its tail returning to the form by means of fine needles or sandblasting.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When pressure is applied above the spot where bone damage has occurred, and you move it between the joints gradually with your hand to ensure that this damage becomes smoothed out.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When there are some wastes present, and return the location as it pertains to causes that dry out or cause painful pressure points.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So that the location is consolidated and good flesh has sprouted there from illness and disease for forty days without renewal or puncturing and without accidents happening in it, at that point you know they are healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then it is in no way an intervention within the body but a reduction of the crack to its shape as per this methodology: and you must recognize either two fine iron or quick-acting medicinal items at hand. If found among these tools (iron or medicine), take according to their form accordingly:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Such is the state of the patient' extramattered iron bar, and its shaft has become exhausted within their extremity so often like this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Return the cushion to his/her bones and position it such that your hand is above the cheekbone; extend a portion of your arm along the hip, with another part beneath their chest where they feel pressure from below due to being swolthy or bloated.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then return (the) location at once with dry, purgative remedies as soon as you wish to use them.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and location have become hardened, then I place it back into the body of the patient, thus placing my attention on the abdomen (malady).
Capitol .xx.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating or paraphr
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	From reduction of greatness." The phrase "de reduccio di grandezza," when translated into English, suggests a process aimed
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hump is at its entirety and does not worsen in adornments nor diminish; as such it follows that one should loosen up the bile, which then ensures good healing afterward—and apply rest over the hump where cuts have been made with surgical intervention for beneficial effect. Further application of compression on top is advisable using liniment composed of acacia and aloe extracts mixed together; additionally, applying strength through an emplastrum topped with fine powder (often pounded semolina) over the hump that has been lifted by manipulation.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The translation of the source sentence line by line into English is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Return these breaks according to the amount that they need for healing.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Return strength to those who are drapped, worn and have tight sinews; apply the cupping devices for suction as you scrape them out; return these tools along with the hand that strokes away stiffness during day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If while being in the ligature it is softened, then there will be a movement causing discomfort.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	When they tighten or shorten the ligament as before and during daylight hours, just like what we have mentioned earlier.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already been reduced, then that is good; otherwise, continue applying plaster on the pillows and tightness to ensure its healing.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol XXI. (The text appears to be sectional with Roman
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the depth of the superior layer of the vasc01: From within the deeper aspect of the upper coat or protective outer membrane, known as Tunica Vera (or Uve
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When disruption occurs in the Tunica Vera (the superior layer of the vascular membrane), and it emerges with a rasping sensation, as though water is flowing through there; this situation requires immediate action from you to intervene by inserting an instrument into the affected area's part above or below. Place one end of your tool in that position while simultaneously ensuring another double-edged portion rests along the lacrimal region (near tears). This implement should then penetrate and proceed according to its design; furthermore, fix this other segment firmly at the point where it intersects with the second side of the instrument. Hold tight hereinforth until you have completely extracted a section or part from within undernethy' s guidance – as if holding water that has been drawn out by your tooling action - and continue to maintain pressure steadily throughout this process, ensuring proper removal according to instructional protocols for such medical intervention.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	When you apply pressure and rest above the poultice made of cloth soaked in wine and leaves, let it be inserted that they may feel relief through its properties.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	When care is given for the wound with that water which comforts it within, wherein the patient'thy flesh may heal and recover its health.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And some measures gather all parts within the circle of cloth inside the adjusted cushion highness, and pierce through the subtle sponge under the backrest where it drains away bone marrow fluid (and descends) into the hollow.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength within that it has been healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii. (This line does not contain enough context or
De curacio de alconati.	The phrase "de curacio de alconati" appears Latinate in structure, suggesting
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	The sentence translates into English as: "This illness that is called 'alconation' (or gout) is not merely the sick appearance similar to water overflow, and it is indeed something else." This translation suggests a medieval understanding of what might be referred to by this term—possibly an old or colloquial description for joint pain related conditions like arthritis.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	May the reason for this action be that you should press your thighs down on the strapped and cushioned seat, lift up your head with both hands of yours (the two mentioned before), dry it to prevent moisture from entering where sickness is coming in through quickly moving parts today, ensure it remains arid without descending further into dampness, and keep therein all that should come forth.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not fall into place (meaning if a treatment or remedy doesn'thy work), then you know that water is involved.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	May it not be prepared to enter the sanitizing water, which we have mentioned before, then let the ulcer appear between your legs and apply a subtle sponge undernethy that touches upon their panniculus skin (the outermost layer of the body within the area covered by clothes), until they are cured.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when you are about to use it (presumably referring to the cautery or treatment mentioned earlier), distill in the hollow of the water jar where you have already mixed honey and ground fennel seeds (fenugreek).
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	When it is necessary for healing of its own accord concerning other causes within that which has been cured,
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol XXII. (The Roman numeral "XXII" represents
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	From water cures derived from the humors of bile:
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Ja have we brought the waters of life into division and arranged them according to health status; accordingly this second stage is conducted in speech declaration.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	When you make a seat for yourself and place your scrotum over it (likely referring to an adjustable device or support), they tighten their belly skin thereupon.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If your left eye is wet with tears (indicating sadness or grief), touch it gently on the side of its cheek; if you feel dry in that part, then do so at the center of the face.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take your right hand if his humor is in the left side, or else take your left hand if his humor is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Return the limb' extrémity above the crown due to the heavy head of Apollo in the upper chest area of Part Thyroid (from "mendrail" which could mean thymus or thyroid), and place your hand over it with moisture from breath, thereby holding onto that part.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from protruding further into the abdomen (E propenter in le album del huel et sentas ci magnatta es perveneguda a causa vueda).
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	When the mass of the cam (belly) has reached the height of the navel, and it is within that space which enters through the umbilical ring at nightfall into darkness, this represents the crown of the belly; where you see its pupil in the vision by daylight.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Return rest for one who is weary; therefore if water descends, grant them that other repose before they become exhausted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is secured and does not descend, then extract the easy part of digestion with this action, twist that portion to two parts each time, dissolve a small clear salt crystal in water for that purpose; additionally apply pressure outside the protruding matter using rosemary oil soaked wool or flax infused linen dipped in water and hold it there.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Might we from our time rest upon that which was consumed on this sheet of ivory?
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your doctor'dict commands within the confines of the bed due to his firmness—it is among men whose joints are hard that this bone, which he names spinalis, takes its form.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	So by piercing that joint, and not extending your hand to the area beyond its subtle place below, you will prevent further harm.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And return (or restore) back into its cavity the intestine or hernia that we have mentioned earlier on, and place your hand over it so as
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And praise the work of your bedroom chamber arrangement, which provides a resting place for you on top where there are darkness and shade, preventing any movements. (This sentence is challenging to translate due to its archaic language structure; here's an attempt at modernizing it:)  
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And when there is water in his nature that heals him and does not weaken the head towards the fourth or left side of his entire body.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	When it is placed according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which is there in the dark and sinister darkness to light again, examine its causes briefly, then return it within on day VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Whenever you make water in the hour of healings or afterwards, then take it for an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	When you push away water from there, it pours down heavily and forcefully due to strong observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May you apply a poultice if there is an ulcer today and correct that which gives way to the ulcer in the water (i.dict), then do so promptly after discovering it this day.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you remove the sight of him and place your hand over his face (oral), so that it guides his skin for several days to come, as they exist in this dark time.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return its gait from that manner of humors greatly and discuss about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	When you know that a student may require some guidance during the operation, and when you are skilled at it,
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from those of them who said, "There is blood in the artery at that place where they pierced their eye.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Even though we have not seen such water in our land before, nor has it entered among the free of ancient times, and it is possible that this water may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of medicinal herbs used on that which he does not know about those things.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These pains are of bone or iron specifically, and they lie outside their subtle triangle formation, like that shape acutely.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.: This line appears incomplete or out of context as
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From meat consumption nothing enters the nose." - Translated into English, this could mean that according to a certain perspective (
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When nasal growths variously form from the consumption of meat – where no cause is to be found that leads backward as far as scorpion's sting, or polyps in peyes; this malady is called polypus because it resembles those peys depicted. 
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	From him/her it is red and black meat (cancerous flesh), and from him/her it is not the brownish kind of flesh.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So then in this that is not fraudulent nor cancerous (implying a natural condition), where you make the massage circulate between your thighs and under them, stroke their nipples gently inside those areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May you hold the lance or incident of penetration firmly gripped; otherwise, if it is one of malignant ulcers, then grasp and cauterize that which has detached itself from flesh and all cavities are exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Return its head (or rather termed as 'getatz' in this context, possibly referring to an organ or body part) into the cavity of its neck and mouth/throat where it meets air and water; thus establishing proper breathing
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Return its head (or rather termed as 'getatz') into the cavity of its neck where it meets air and water; thus establishing proper breathing: You have already opened up to allow humidity inside through the mouth/throat, suggesting that healing has begun.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not enter further after that point (likely referring to continued treatment), you understand that flesh has ceased in the sores and bones have returned inside those where they had previously been lost, indicating recovery of tissues or healing progress. This implies a medical approach focused on restoring humidity for health benefits when it is insu0: Return its head (or rather termed as 'getatz') into the cavity of its neck where air and water meet; thus establishing proper breathing—You have already opened up to allow moisture inside through the
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Thus I attend to any foreign matter within it (referring back to the body part previously mentioned), where now there is motion of flesh, and pause between each use or application; measure out how much oil (or another substance) in your handful: You tend carefully to remove any debris from inside this organ/part with precise amounts as needed. Further, place a limb's extremity into its opening—where it meets the tongue of flesh at which point other reasons may bring them here; indicating that they could be linked or related in symptoms and necessary treatment: Return an appendage (like fingers) to their cavity inside where body part connects with another, possibly for diagnostic purposes. This suggests a hands-on approach from this historical medical perspective—using physical objects like extremities as tools within the practice of medicine at that time period.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Put that pungent odor herein so the it may travel through the nasal canals and sit upon its gouty joint, for those who are frequently subjected to this smell at school make them prone to falling ill with such ailment; thus causing harm.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Return the two outer parts of the foot (one that appears on the nose and another protruding into/onto the navel), administer a knife for cutting flesh, which is present in these areas of the foot, allowing you to know when the flesh has already entered.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Extract the bone, and pause at the nose with the abstraction of a sanitized cloth cup, allowing it for up to three days or as long as necessary until all that is extracted from the veins has rotted away.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	When infection enters through the nose at night for days until it is healed, insert a metal tube into the nostril during those times.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be that healing occurs when using such means; use those for cure.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how the tool used by the phlebotomist (the person who draws blood) for this purpose has been refined, where various extracts and medicines are prepared in honey.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which is like a small cautery), held with such care and manner as if with a tiny flame lighting candle, the body appears in its essence.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make use of a sealed cane inserted with the carrier and its flat surface revealed; hold it in your hand at the back where these thumb pads are located when draining fluids or causes related to their secretion from within them as desired by you.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxv.	The provided text appears as though it is written in Old Spanish or early Italian influenced
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	It seems you've encountered a line of speech that doesn't quite make sense, possibly due to spelling errors or anachronisms since
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The sentence you've provided appears to be a blend of archaic language mixed with incorrect spelling and possibly nonsensical phrasing, which may stem from an attempt at Old Spanish or early Italian influenced by medieval medical texts as mentioned before:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which water you have introduced it into his body for its appearance and absorbed everything of that essence.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand or caustic (or medicine that burns) over the location, where it was previously in place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	May it be late for your insight to enter, consider if you have lapsed, hardened, dark in color and with little feeling; do not touch that iron which has been affixed upon the skulls of those who inscribe this enchantment about them continually. Whoever does so out of great malice towards what they once had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is of yellow color and not black (indicating that it might be a liver issue rather than pus from infection), when you see an opening possible everywhere, expel the bile and inspect where there may still linger fear; treat those areas with water to dry out what has leaked out and ensure nothing remains inside so that healing can occur.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi. (The given text does not contain enough information
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	When the introitus or lips and nose (where continuity is lost by an object, such as fingers) are involved:
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You understand that when you break continuity in one of these joints, it is only with the help of skilled men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So that when any cause of these comes about (referring to the previously mentioned gout), if you consider it moisture or foulness in your patient'se body fluids, then adjust their lips with sutures and take care to ensure whatever is inside becomes healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of speech connection are already separated and there is one who suffers healthily from it, then you should gently scrape any divided portion that seems to be within its border so as not to injure sanctity (health).
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the thread of suture be that you add continuity threads or needles alongside what we have sewn in the stomach'dictum, or perhaps join them with fingers and can tell.
Capitol .xxvii.	The given line "Capitol .xxvii." appears to be a reference or
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	When translating this phrase into English, it seems like the text is discussing an extractive process related to causes that come from within one's mouth during duels or combat scenarios:
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Movements frequently observed in the hardened teeth of their lips' appendages resemble grains of error, and some are moles while others are larger ones.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So that you convert the lips and fendas of each hardness throughout the body into heat absorption areas, apply pressure there to prevent further bleeding within where the sore is constricted, and wash and treat this spot with water as needed until healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific chapter or
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Given the text is in a language with roots similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French—all of which utilize Romance languages' structures and vocabuls—it
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	The provided translation seems to be an attempt at interpreting the medieval medical text using a Romance language framework:  
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place your hand over the sore spot that has been rubbed or treated with powders and medicinal applications, if necessary.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then immediately incise it and cauterize it; thus the cautery will not return there.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (This line appears nonsensical as
De razo de dentz am ferr.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating medieval Latin, which often had a similar feel to the languages
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the surfaces of teeth in parts and at the foramen are aligned with sharp edges, you cut them (likely referring to some form of extraction or examination), sometimes black wards accompanied by citrine hues within which enter into decay as moisture corrupts. Here "corruption" could refer to disease such as caries leading to a need for dental intervention—possibly an ancient understanding that excessive moisture leads to the deterioration of teeth, with black and citrine wards being described possibly as types or colors indicative of certain treatments.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So that you separate the patient's buttocks and pause their head at the chin level on their back, gently biting those teeth where appear these sharp edges and causes similar to sand inside them which are formed from blackness (negrot) and citrinity (citrinitas), among others.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if there is none in those for the commensal of reason, be; and otherwise, iterate the reasoning upon them on that other day until it returns to where you wish when you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Beware that teeth have required various kinds of retractors and tools according to how you prepare for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Through which razors (or surgical instruments) you will perform the part that has already been prepared elsewhere for such forms of rasoring and these tools must be ready whenever they are needed nowhere else.
Capitol .xxx.	The provided text appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical language
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth." This phrase likely refers to the complete removal or destruction of one's teeth
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 "Curing the tooth'dictor of its pain throughout day and night until total eradication; there is no reason that substance should supplement her period when she has been cured, as it resides within which serves for justification in the process of complete removal." This translation suggests a holistic approach where some form of internal remedy or medicine (possibly an elixir) used during and after treatment helps maintain well-being. It implies that once this substance is ingested by someone who has been treated, it supports their health continuously even beyond the point when physical symptoms have subsided following a dental extraction procedure in medieval times. The focus here seems to be not just on immediate relief but also long-term maintenance
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the humors are settled and that tooth which was causing pain has been extracted; you must certify what is actually sick (not just dental issues but potentially other ailments too), for it's necessary not only to cease suffering caused by illness in teeth, now witnesses have seen through our barber surgeons." This translation implies that after the extraction of an obviously painful and problematic tooth – often associated with imbalanced humors or 'black bile,' according to medieval medical beliefs—it is essential for a qualified individual (possibly including those who practiced both minor surgery, like dentistry ('barbies'), and barbering) to confirm the source of pain. Once this diagnosis has been made beyond just the immediate issue with teeth due to excessive black bile or other humoral imbalances causing discomfort elsewhere in the body (evidenced by 'motas veguadas'—recurrent ailments), effective treatments can be administered, thereby ensuring not
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So when you need to confirm the source of the pain and understand its nature, immediately lance into the circuit where the tooth meets the jawbone (where any motion can provoke it), ensuring that whatever is within the tooth' extrinsic part has dissolved completely, then apply cold compresses or very fine liniments gradually inside until what caused the issue dissipates.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if there is no exit (for hole), take one of those instruments immediately and insert it at once from wherever possible, for the purpose of removing what has been inserted already to facilitate its extraction during mealtime.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is dislocated or broken, then bind it tightly with cloth around that part until such time as you have a holding band in place for when your contraction occurs thereon.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	When you work exceptionally and perform a scarification across the entire mouth area to maintain your strength so that it does not break this part of him, returning over his thighs by virtue of which greater than the first pain he experiences comes into being.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Guard your self that you do not apply what barbers perform in their lancets and audacity towards the eradication of ours, since they neglect those who suffer from great illnesses which are hard to cure like fistulae (abscess or infected tract), whose entire wounds/raised areas have been inflamed by recent attacks.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And wash away his illness with water or vinegar poured into it (mouth).
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a flow of blood from time todictions, do so regularlyly; if not, administer some drops and fogs upon the patient'se bedding, and if you don’t relieve that bleeding with these measures, then cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers are those by which the tooth is not torn during operations on both length and shortness of hand or arm bones, for that purpose they should be delicate when using them in such procedures.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When it is time for a large manual labor task and when entering that these are not doubled or stretched out beyond measure.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .xxxi.",
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The text you've provided suggests a medieval medical context, and the phrase appears to be about treating broken teeth or cleaning out fractured jawbones in Latin-like syntax with elements of Italian, Spanish, French influences:
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the removal of the tooth that is causing pain requires stopping over its location at the jaw'dictor border for a day or two until the site becomes soothing; and when you apply anesthesia or external compresses from which are assembled into the beak of a crow or glove, shaping these as forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The provided Latin-influenced text seems like an attempt at blending classical and medieval medical terminology with elements of the mentioned languages (Latin, Italian, Spanish, French). Here is a line by line translation into English:
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey me in using these forceps or tenalas, then immediately thrust down on the bone and remove all flesh, inserting the tool used for this purpose into it; its shape is as follows: (Here, I would expect a description of the instrument'dict form to follow)
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is a short but heavy limb that does not begin (start) falling apart,
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the razor is set for cutting (for dissection or treatment), then be; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes include at least one thick part in a three-sided shape designed outside of meat.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it'supremely fine and refined at its ends.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will help with this tool which has two levers as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments that we have prepared for incising the teeth; it is well-made of this tool which was assembled last year.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the twisted or shortened limb's extreme part, which is any swelling and not because it would break:
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you realize that these tools of teeth movement resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisan of medicine understand what means to him in terms of operations and various illnesses; these are diseases that neither ancient practitioners addressed nor paused with their appropriate instruments due to different forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth break, or if you have bruised them, then treat that part on which it is convenient using the instruments and forceps we used for extracting teeth. Here this becomes our method of treatment:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And whether it is small clots that gradually appear, or if they are strangled inside the mouth so that no bone exits from its cavity; restore the location with appropriate medicine for this issue.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a fracture in the bone, then treat that part of the fracture and its blackness (implying blood), and cure it so that it becomes healed inside.
Capitol .xxxii.	From the provided text snippets in this medieval medical treatise with language nuances
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	The treatment of teeth issues is above all for other concerns.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude naturally in their courses and mostly in the hips/hips area, it suggests that one tooth may be missing or absented; hence we deduce this factually if there'thy any other absent tooth as well, then mark such a defect with the form of an instrument—sharp-edged metal from India. It is like cutting pork and sharp iron tools are used for it.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incisor is where you place that for up to three days due to the hardness of teeth and it should not be used elsewhere on the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an emergence of blood from the wound, then apply that same Indian steel sword to stop it.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And all of this is iron from India and Mexico that are brought here; they have sharp points like needles made of these metals, on which a tooth has been cut thinly over several days until ease arrives so no other dent can be ground down or suffer.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines above into the belly (or abdomen), and apply pressure there with fingers of clean hands.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is a part that has been dislocated and the tongue protrudes, then you must quickly limit what enters it to prevent its sharpness from causing harm or distortion of speech:
Capitol .xxxiii.	Since there is no provided text for translation except "Capitol .xxxiii
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	From the restoration of decayed teeth, be it by gold or silver fillings:
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you painfully press on the teeth before contraction and withdrawal through percussion or extraction, and the malady cannot bear weight upon it (which is indicative of dental issues), your medical interventider has treated that with stoppers, but no cure was found for this; hence they will not fall into those which are made from gold teeth/jewelry as silver can be bent and shaped to fit within a few days at most (whereas gold does not change over time).
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And according to its subtlety and groove as much as it can enter between teeth; the form of recovery is that you hold the flesh, press twice into healthy teeth on each side (of a wound), and expand towards the twisted part of the flesh found among rotting or multiple parts.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Return and apply the poultice inside the area where you started, tightening your hand to ensure it is easy and does not leak.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And it is at which point your strength must hold back the teeth of those bones that you do not want to escape from.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	When that urine is brought out with Roman ease.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loosened or untucked, hold on firmly in such a manner throughout all of its time therein.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and straightness of healthy as well as diseased teeth are linked together at times like these:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns the tooth or applies pressure with any of them in various locations, and they expand as we have recommended, so that it reduces pain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled craftsmen and wise ones can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv. (The text provided does not contain enough context
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	From the ligament by which you are in your tongue and forbiddies speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	Whenever this ligament from which the tongue naturally comes up has been strengthened or injured by a worm that is already solidified within it:
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation in him is to gargle the malady'thy mouth; his tongue lies within his chest, raise it and inscribe that particular nerve according as your conscience dictates when you lift up one’s own tongue.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	May it be that there is hardness or swelling in this area, and it stands due to consolidation of pus within the limits you have divided whereby you split open (or cut) said lump and its associated discharge.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure there is not a crack in the skin of the flesh here, and split asphalt and urine flow forth from it.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Return the skin of incision or any bleeding, and pause briefly with a tongue lick; this is where the blood lingers for some time to prevent it from being reabsorbed during another visit.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May you cool down the inflammation that has been bubbling in the glassware window; may it be if sweat enters and cools there, then purge with a heating needle to remove pus which is directed towards this place where they are gathered.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that healer for other causes within which it is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	The text provided seems incomplete for translation without additional context or clarification of abbrevi
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	It appears you've provided a Latin phrase that translates to "From the removal (extraction) of the frog tongue." However
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	The provided Latin text translates to: "Some aftereffects of tongue adhesion developed by wound are prevented from affecting the small patient's language, and thus they become magnified inside where speech occurs." This suggests that certain conditions or treatments following a dental procedure (like an extraction) can lead to postoperative complications involving excessive saliva production. The text advises careful management of these symptoms within the mouth during healing time for proper recovery and communication through speaking, which is facil
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The continuation of your Latin text translates to: "In the patient's mouth after such procedure, chewing and tongue adhesion are considered." This implies that when a dental operation is performed (possibly related to removal or treatment affecting speech), it’s important for healthcare providers to
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	The continuing Latin text translates as: "If you see it black or dark in color, hard without pain for which the patient does not feel discomfort when touched there gently—do not touch that area on the skull." This sentence serves as a caution to medical practitioners regarding specific areas of concern during examination. Even if an abnormality is noticeable and appears non-painful, it
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	The provided continuation of your Latin text translates to: "If it turns white and moist in the place where you apply a pinch; gently enclose that area with cotton wool—and delicately incise throughout, indicating small sponges undernethy. If wind comes during your operation time, pause three times saying 'vinegar,' so as to limit bleeding within there until it stops." This guidance appears related to an emergency dental procedure or direct trauma treatment where moisture (possibly blood) is present and controlled manually by the practitioner. Here they advise a methodical approach, using cotton wool for absorption ('vinegar' may be indicating as both a pause in action due to wind disrupting visibility/communication or literally applying vinegar topically), delicately making cuts where needed and restraining any further bleeding until it ceases. It’s important when translating medical texts, especially from historical periods with different
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have brought him as a gift (a remedy), until he is washed clean and salted, and attend to that other cure inside so it can also be healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided in its entirety with
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the detachment of golden nails and that which nothing remains at the groin, as well as from those other extractions.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gout attacks occur in the groin and are associated with yellowish teeth that have been discolored by acid, which do not heal when submerged in water as per division instructions, consider whether there is a hard chalk-like apostemy of dark color without much sensation; avoid touching it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is desired for the color and size of the humors to be large, do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; leave it inside so that it can mature therein, or if you must move it, then cut through itself (perhaps accidentally).
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or yellow color, then its humor is subtle; therefore, they believe that the person should be inscribed with it.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation in him is considered while performing the operation; if already repose has been completed or diminished for any reason during it, then lift up the malady with care and ensure that his head remains on his chest. The servant takes hold between their hands firmly placing a cushion under them, another attendant at their legs, holding tight to their mouths, using noble instruments designed specifically for this purpose:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And whether it is made of silver or gold, finely wrought with a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you realize that it is the tongue and show them their ulceration/lesion (apostema), place your thumb over it for one or ten times until it settles in the mouth, then pull it out as much as possible where you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another time when you draw any cause from the tunics (the patient'dict clothing), apply it to that very tool with which this is done.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and when the external parts are clamped by forceps, but their limbs become painful sharply in another's throat (possibly referring to a patient), which is caused by iron inserted into one of those areas and causes acute discomfort; this metal could be introduced through surgical instruments.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	Might it be that if this instrument is not with you now, then cut into the one thigh where that bone lies: and whether it has its form in one piece or split between two parts, so make an incision there.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And you have placed an incision here according to this method of incising described by the medical practice, and secure the wound with gauze moistened with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is flow of blood coming from within and causing these sharp causes inside where the flow of blood has been restricted, then take care that which enters into it to restore health as needed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And some measures now enter into play elsewhere on those teeth that are already yellowed and they incisor so as stated within the mouth of decaying teeth.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And there was so much ulceration that it had spread into halves within which they passed through two disrurancies.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you have cupped and rested for one of their pulses at once, extracted that pulse, and pulled out the large segment therein understood from another trauma identified by me; then oblige him to open his mouth, clamp down on his tongue, and maintain respiration in that area affected by affliction.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	When you have made an amputation of great part from it (the body), and only a little blood flows forth therefrom,
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus it is the gout of that woman, and immediately drink water, and apply food to her wound so she will not cease grieving for those humors gone awry through long time in that place where insight has entered while suffering from this condition.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So then apply pressure and cauterize the ulcer of him/her there, thus addressing its function; and take you will to walk around it with caution not that I am at fault for this action according to God'dictions herein.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.: (The translation may be context-dependent as there
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the insight of humors when they infiltrate:
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the chest coughs and it becomes prolonged, then it is not vertical (perpendicular); if in the thickness of the body' extruding portion appears round and bulging, then it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When healed, take the water that we have discussed in division and do not hinder your treatment; continue to apply caution with care, and when you insert a cauterizing tool into it (which is round), after inserting it for some time if long or red-brownish like bile of dark color which isn'thy own dimension, take the one that fits in its measurement. For this item fears nothing above where inserted; within there lies no terror over liver area.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you turn that second sign mentioned by the patient's white and long sickness as directed, whereby you separate the humors (implying an attempt to balance them) within their body using a tool from which they describe how it fits into their nostrthy/belly, pulling one of these instruments inward along with your hand that holds such tools for inspection:
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When you do not insert that but the one adjusted to his natural position, if at all it may be inserted into him, then let your speech follow accordingly.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Return the inflammation (referring to "inscizio" which likely means swelling or inflammation), using the water we have prepared within its cavity in two thighs, and take care of that part until it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient's abdomen is terrified by their ignorance of cauterization and the use of caustic in cauterization is merely water, then you stop bleeding from the navel downwards, place your finger on his tongue with the tool we have mentioned earlier, take also a bit of this water for which we spoke at the site of cauterization, hold it alive and carefully fill that hollow part without making it thick or shallow.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, prick the skin and cover it with medicine, immerse your finger in that same medicinal substance until enough has been absorbed to match what would be used for draping (a technique similar to lancing), then place the ray on top of a tube whereby the flesh adheres through capillary action. Afterward, apply salve as needed if it desiccates and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you have indigestion and travel through the medicine pathway, repeat that process; apply cauterization within the honey wound border starting from there to begin healing in this water-cleansed area with a poultice of medicinal herbs, and treat it at home using embrocation until recovery.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This remedy is placed with care because of fear and has been applied for a long time.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some days she is cured by the water that has been applied gently with caustic and incision tools, according to this remedy: rosemary, thyme, sage, rue, Arabian wormwood, chamomile, fennel seeds, mint, and licorice. All these causes or some of them are gathered in a pot and submerged into water; there is poured onto the lid of this vessel an iron ring according to this method: when it's time for treatment, the instrument made from Arabic silver (meaning tongs) rests on top of the said ring. The remedy can consist of either argent or bronze material.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And when it is necessary for the limb to enter into the mouth of the malady and whereby the vapour rises above the pharynx causing the palate (uvula) to be obscured, then so happens this entry.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here you go with the translation line by line:
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be that you do not have this instrument at hand? Then take a can and make in the outer part of him an enclosure with hay, so that the mouth of the malady is warmed, for the hollow of the hay prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii.: (The translation may be context-dependent as this
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Extraction of thorns and the humoral substances that are stuck in the joint, along with other causes: (This translation attempts to convey a description or directive for removing foreign objects such as thorns or pus from areas like the foot ("golayro" seems analogous
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Persistent matter clings to the joint or nail, along with any other cause: (This translation suggests that whatever has been causing discomfort in a patient's foot—like ingrown toenails ("spina de peys") and potentially additional factors) continues to do so
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Thus remove any visible humoral substances that are present on the surface above which your tongue indicates there is fluid accumulation (pus) within it: The instruction here seems to advise meticulously cleaning out pus or other discharge from a wound, using one's own saliva as an indicator of where such materials can be seen. It suggests that by observing the reaction on their tongue when touching different areas over which there is fluid accumulation (pus), they will find evidence to confirm what needs cleaning in those particular spots ("la guola" may refer here metapthy
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if there is no appearance and it remains hidden within the joint (presumably referring to pus or another fluid), then take up a mouthful of bile from where food may be fermenting in your stomach; this could indicate what else contributes secretion into that wound. Additionally, bring forth either:
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	May take a snake and bind it with faithful rope, or may place on the table/bed pillows to extract them; alternatively, taking a pot (pottery item) can be used for extraction as well.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If not through examination of these causes that have been mentioned, then use a tool made of lead as follows:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if a large one enters and within its cavity you insert it with ease to enter the patient'dictum:
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head upwards on their shoulders as to ensure that the touch of one' extricating hands or even those belonging to a physician are directed towards and above both the skull and the neck vertebrae, where they can relieve these areas from pressure or discomfort.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even if the patient'thy humors have entered there (the area of inflammation), due to his knowledge of its cause and location being signaled by pain, he extracts it using tools as prepared within him up until that point in time according to need.
Capitol .xxxix.	The provided text appears to be instructions or observations from an old medical practice possibly related
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Based on the fragments of language you've shared, which seemingly mix elements from Latin and Italian ("extraccio" means "extraction," in Latin; "sanguisuga
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When medicine is administered for the worms present in water that we have discussed earlier as part of medical care and are not to be endured, consider then when you desire relief from these pains, apply it directly at the lower abdomen where the illness resides within one's bowels. Ensure that you possess a tool with which this has been prepared for use—typically referred to as an extractor in medical texts or instructions (such as "Capitol" might refer here).
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you feel a small or subtle discharge, extract it carefully and with attention.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract from there, then take a concave canula and insert that into the region of the malady, placing a heated iron pin within the concavity of the canula; apply such heat (as long as the patient's humors are dead and held back in the area), preventing them all day from being washed away by water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the translation:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not for the vapor that we have prepared with this tool used in steaming, then proceed to fumigate the throat or apply alcohol (assafide), using the same instrument designed for steam preparation during fumigation of the mouth area.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When it is necessary (E si es necessitat), points must be made on the surface of the foot (lahoras f
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	When it is necessary (E si es necessitat) to operate in the steam room for that condition (especially gout), you must grasp an element of fire with which carries combustible materials and cover this hot chamber using a lid, placing the extremity of your instrument within; remove from below subfumigation; pause until moisture enters through the mouthpiece at the end of the catheter (canula), indicating that steam fumigation has reached its intended target organ or area.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not cured, then repeat the subfumigation movements, and prevent the humid from drinking, eat salted and fresh foods, avoid wine consumption, if necessary it is that this regimen must be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool by which one extracts stones from the gallbladthy when seen; and it appears like forceps at times, but with no curve herein.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The given medieval medical text translates to English line by line as follows:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line does not contain enough context
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	The phrase you've provided appears to be in a mix of Latin, Italian and possibly some other language influenced by these tongues due to the archaic forms used (e.g., "apercio" instead of modern Spanish or Portuguese).
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The sentence translates to English as: The petals are special flowers and memories of them can be found in this book (note that the phrase "segnon ke veme resmejjo" is not standard Latin or directly translatable, so I have interpreted it contextually). Here's a line-bymediate translation taking into account some archaic forms:
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	The translated sentence in English is: Here they are diverse through their piercing and arrangement themselves (petals), one of which belongs to the specialty of flowers itself, and therefore we extract moisture from them; thus explaining that these plants or organisms require humidity for survival. This translation attempts to convey what seems a contemplative note on plant life—possibly relating their structure ("piercing" could refer to thorns) with the essential need of water (humidity). Please provide more context if necessary, as there are still
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The sentence translates to English as: The second characteristic is the places in which they are acidified within cosmos (the universe or space), where an unintentional wound on the head differs from one that happens at a joint; and also, with respect to purposeful manipulation by operation. This complex passage likely refers to some aspect of botanical physiology—perhaps discussing how certain plants might react differently when damaged in different parts (head vs culmination or juncture) due possibly to their unique anatomical structures designed for specific functions, which can involve operational processes within the plant. The use of "accideys del cos" suggests some interaction with a broader environmental context that could be relevant biologically—potentially involving photosynthesis (if related metap
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	When some points, which are not pierced but due to the disease in those or adjacent areas of them, come up,
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other apastes that are dislocated when they're crossed and not mature according to their complements, similar to those naturally found at joints, become prolonged within the belly where it circulates; consequently, rotting ruptures corrupt its ligaments or nerves of that joint. If intervention in such a dislocation occurs beyond its ripened state towards the primary member (the torso), then perforation takes place into which has not matured yet—intervene there promptly to prevent progression within this main body part; and if it concerns the buttocks, pierce where it is immature. This action prevents fecal matter from leaking out and elongates its parts towards the genital segments (anus/vulva), resulting in an abscess or infected swelling that does not heal within this area of origin.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know when the time for the puncture of the abscess is and so it will be ripe (ready).
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You understand that it matures when the pain yields and fever subsides; reduce the speechlessness and heartbeat, strengthen the head of abscessation, and other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know where the incision for drainage is located deep in the ulcer and coming from the healing of an abscess,
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in the fleshly part of it, then we must introduce a needle into where such digestion has already advanced two times more (meaning after proper gastric processing), and once done thus; but if you puncture that place now, both extend the wound on the leg and harden and deepen the mouth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May an aperture be made according to the condition of the flesh or bone where it is necessary, as dictated by which part of the body desires entry (i.dictates). Here's my translation line-by-line:
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When administering a small puncture, and large or wide incisions as dictated by the size of the apasts (referring to surgical instruments), then:
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other things come when the cecum is conquered and cut into, where bread comes down as if it were gritty stones or boils (hydromycosis).
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those whom are seated in a section have three angles; and from them is where they sit with the shape of a yew branch, like the pincers of an angle saw.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From them in which it is administered—a round and a crescent shape; they seem similar.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May that person who cannot bear the surface appendages (like splinters or thorns) not be able to endure them if you pierce through such an object at most shallowly.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, do not attempt to extract all of it at once; take out some from that place today, and treat the rest tomorrow with larger portions as necessary, following a gradual process until completely removed (drained).
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly if the malady is due to cold humor or phlegm in excess (from a sick woman, young girl, child, or old decrepit person), as their spirit moves towards expulsion of illness, and they soon depart with the disease, then you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	1. Guard thy great care, and place your incisions where you pierce these thorns; be wary that no plagues arise therein, and consider whether the pus of the thorn is scanty or a flat slice, then attend to it with whatsothy may have had before thee; if indeed the thorn great, and its fissures motesome, cover thou thy meatus in every disruption that comes between us.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess it has detached a part of the colon or you have hollowed that out within the circuit, then cover it with cloth soaked in wine vinegar as soon as you carry pans or small containers holding them; and tighten this up every third day due to its moisture content. And thus apply treatment for what has come from inside these bandages while they are healing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you encounter bleeding during your operation, then administer cold water and compresses in the places where blood flows more abundantly; place one of these compresses over the area of flowing blood to control it.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May if the flow of blood continues, then take care with your regimen and treatment; use what I recommend here in these pages for maintenance and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter time and the place of ulceration is where nerves are located, then cover them with crumbs or oil poured on a healing tool (cautery) and rest those upon the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the locations are fleshy, then when you rest pills at the beginning of the day in water and oil, as we have mentioned beforehand, this will enter into your body until the freshest part of the day; moreover, when you cut away the aposteme (infection) and cleanse it out with what is necessary for its treatment inside that patient.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xli.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .xli.",
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From the section where pain enters into the base of the skull,
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In their neck'donkey's tail appendages (which may refer to the cervix or perhaps some body part with similar attributes), and from these nodes contain tunics that they have made; those are what move them around.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	From them come drops, and from those that contain moisture like lemonade.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	From those bodies that contain moisture like the palms and their assemblies; and from those which are made of stones, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In all of them, and during their removal there is no fear; as for the execution of these things, it does not provoke a joint lock from the cautery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here comes the line to translate: E la operaio in questi è quello che osserverai quell'strumento della quale vuoi usare lo strumento all'interno di esso, finché saprai che contiene.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If you count moisture, then divide that part according to the length of each surface segment following this manner.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Here begins in the section of line B and moves into line G; thus when moisture is expelled, you scrape off that which contains it, without leaving any trace of its cause behind—if there are traces remaining from a particular source, they return with those causes.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If there is a ganglion composed of fatty tissue present, then proceed with this form as follows:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	am section has the shape of a crescent, and cuts are made between its lips (the section), following that which is taken out from this whole body/section, do so with your intention to remove it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May it be that if your cautery makes an opposite effect, then you must tell me the first thing at once.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: As for limb weakness and care as you have mentioned before; upon such a limp they place it lightly, because there is little strength and only a small amount of moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May occur in other body openings besides the head herein as well, such as those found on children'thy fingers and nails; these may also be its entire surface layer.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	When they puncture those from the lower parts of them, it is to allow the sick body' extraneous matter (likely referring to what was causing illness) to be drawn out into the lower regions.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Return care for those affected by water that come here needing healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii. (This appears to be an index or reference line
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the section where they have softened in the colon.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moving pains regularly enter the chest and hips, and sometimes they worsen in other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here come the ones who are suffering in their neck and these maladies that arise among them; all of this constitutes the patient' extrinsic scrofulosis, which is also present along with nodules and apatematous lesions on the head. Here translates to: And those who suffer from pain in their neck, as well as illnesses arising between them (likely referring to lymph nodes or glands), all together form what we call extrinsic scrofulosis of one's own making—a condition that is also present with nodules and apatematous lesions on the head. Here translates into English, focusing line by line:
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	E these spices are movements, some of which are stone-like, and others that contain moisture, and those harmful ones for which care has not been taken.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that good disposition of the treatment you are performing, whereby the color present is naturally like the navel'dictone and all over it looks swollen without touching the nerve of the colon, nor veins, nor arteries (thus not compressed), which one should insert therewithin with a cushion from above to below along that line drawn between G. and B., and observe where in its entirety; then pinch lightly or heavily on either side outside the navel button if necessary for those, as we have described at the corners of our mouths (teeth).
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it may be necessary not for a vein or nerve to become entangled.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If the spine does not ache, adjust your hand inside yourself as necessary; if it disturbs the humors, then pause in the muddy glass or other powders that flow from sickness stones and wait for their effects. Then rest until the state of decay has been alleviated by these substances' action on the affected area, allowing its softening and preparation to enter pus (fluid).
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanctum has detached or separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return your operation within which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	When inquiry is needed about what else may be causing the small bumps mentioned herein, then investigate those areas and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the state of severe scrofa (a large lump or swelling), then do not insert that scrofa into its natural place within you.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Based on my understanding of Latin, Italian, Spanish and French influences in the text provided, here's a line-by extralanguage interpretation:
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	When you complete filling the small wound which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, take care of it properly.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert the entirety of that hump (scrofulum), then adjust your fingers and hands to place them such that not even one excess is necessary.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May you find that there has been an overflow beyond the grandeur of the scrofulus (a form of tuberculosis), and understand its reason, then apply a proper bandage as instructed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And when the scrofulous that contain moisture within them are pierced here at your place of healing, and a perforation is made above where it has been inserted below the chest area with what you have given us, then this allows for drainage.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Return treatment by applying needles, poultices made of oil and herbs to those areas, so that the rot which is breaking through can be stopped from spreading further in decay (corruption).
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you cleanse and wash them again, take care of that fleshly bandage inside so it can heal properly.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (The original text does not provide further context for
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	La frase in questione sembra essere in un idiomaticamente medievista o regionale versità, che potrebbe incorporare elementi di latim vulgare (popolare
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	La traduzione lineare del testo fornito è la seguente:
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the writing of that speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May some men have indisposition, fearing that removal of the humidity may not be beneficial for them overall; this concerns all their veins and major arteries in the body.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	May those who have had caustic objects inserted into the mouth or tongue (or two forceps), when the illness is not in the throat, urgently seek help from a physician to flee the loss that occurs due to sharp punishment causing such pain.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we wish to take out (extract) fluid, that is by introducing the curette in quick succession of three or four small sections within each loop of the loop, so long as this section remains bony and not cartilaginous, it belongs to a hollow space where flesh does not exist, which location is suitable for dissection.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is fearful, then extend one end of the gout cane for only an inch and open the stone'thy channel until it reaches the passageway; this may prevent blockages from those that have come down to cause them if any such reason exists.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Apply cold compress as recommended; it signifies on the section of the channel for which fluids are from there and through absorption by the vagina, respectively.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Lay sie down for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour arrives in which I pierce the tongue, add a mouthful of goat'dictum to that solely and it will affect only the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Returning medicine that make flesh inside it sick heal,
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	For water commands that the entrapped evil within be consumed, and it remains there for three days; therefore, we command this to happen so that the trapped evil may heal inside while being washed away by water.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when you have seen what I saw for him, a servant holds the cradle and mattress in his chest area, calling to aid (for help), grasping with it one part of the lung'sin membrane; thus he has called attention to him/her seeking care, holding their breath like they do when suffocating from drowning, uncovered what was inside them—the infant who was enclosed within that.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore they have confessed that she had not inserted a vein or artery, and the breath of the soil entered her body, and treated her until the focus was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not occur on the bed of restoration, then return to medicinal care for your health conditions today.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now it is said that there should be no fear in the section of the aesculapium (referring possibly to an herb, remedy or medical practice related to Hippocrates
Capitol .xliv.	It appears you're referring to a specific chapter number within Acts from the
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	In this section of Apostle Paul’s letter in Romans (chapter xliii), he addresses what is commonly referred to as "the condemnation" or the judgment that seems irreversible until God's righteousness can be revealed, often associated with divine grace. In addressing these sufferings
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This notable chasm of condemnation or "the fall" is a profound sin that significantly impacts the body's condition and occurs primarily in women according to this passage from Romans (chapter xliii). Paul explains here how certain deep sins can affect one’s physical health, suggesting an intrinsic connection between moral behavior and
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	This is indeed a profound truth: the sin in question either results from two specific failings or occurs naturally/accidentally without such intentional cause (Romans xliii
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And as for those that occur naturally, there is not a means of healing them; they just happen spontaneously and
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	Regarding natural occurrences where there is no treatment: one appears like the growth of roots from a seed or branch (Romans xliii): here lies fear because it seems as though something will spontaneously grow within our bodies, potentially causing harm without any human intervention. The other type resembles blood clotting through arterial vessels; again, this induces anxiety due to the unexpected and possibly serious health implications (Romans xliii). These passages highlight Paul's understanding of how sin can manifest physically in various forms that are often beyond one’s control or capacity for self-he
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	Not when you assume that it is with iron alone in him unless he himself is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.: (Note: Since there is no accompany
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	It seems like you've provided a phrase that could be related to spices or herbs, possibly in
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From the parts of them and saying they have divided all their spices into sections:  
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	When you recommend such a difference between birth (exitus) and passing water (fossa), it refers to distinguishing when labor is underway versus the occurrence of diarrhea or other conditions related to bodily fluid release. Here, 'node'
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	You say that fever and severe pains come with passing (febrile exanthema) when there's an overflow of humors in the body, which is then followed by a decrease or stop of these symptoms; this includes relief from pain, heat, and sweating. Here 'exitura' refers to labor ('birth'), while fever corresponds with high temperature ("caliditat"), severe pains indicate intense discomfort/pain within the period when excess humors are being expelled or "ebullios" as it is described in old medical terminology, and cessation of these sympt
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	It's not about fever or severe pain; rather it speaks to the lion-like strength within one’s own body that holds firmly in place what should be expelled from oneself ("al su cusc"). Here 'node' refers again to an internal aspect of health, possibly referring back to a
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	According to the color of one's body and its essence is like a seed; it can be consumed with water in greater or lesser amounts—two kinds (four if including variations), fats, containing moisture as clouds according to your dietary intake. Here 'comensament de lu,' meaning the substance of one's food and drink ('lu'), is likened metaphorically with seeds that absorb water ("vace"), suggesting how different types (fat/oil or other fats) contribute to body humidity, which can be reflected in bodily fluids. Here 'color del cors,' likely refers to the overall complexion of one's body and its relation to dietary intake ('comensament').
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you reach the stage of healing this node that is being expelled and inquire about what it implores for strength during its return to form as indicated here, insert yourself accordingly according to where it will appear at the head which I have noted down above.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of moisture, regardless of its color, at this surface level as mentioned in the other applications, then:
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no movement of moisture from its trace, then you know it contains fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it is dry upon him has a shape of a sickle according as this form hereby depicted,
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, and lift up that one offcut at hand, clean the crotch area completely in all parts for ease of use; if possible, cover it with pants or sac to remove any remaining illness from the nerve.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If in the operation it is not possible to remove that healthy one, and moves are continually made with care so as not for any reason from there outside may enter again: extract them between the sutures while inside where they will not be affected by anything else.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from there any cause arises, little or great, then return according to its measure.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If at any point from the patient you find a small part and open it up with some sharp corrosive powders, then apply pressure on that which has already become inflamed by caustic application, and treat this as well while healing the other injuries within until recovery.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great (the pain), then apply cold water to your patient' extraneous lips and heal that which contains the body fluid.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May your pulse be to the contrary, or not-pulsing, then you will place cupping and hitting with hemp on the location where effusion is present, letting it flow out for two days or three within which time flies while insects feed thereon, and afterwards return to separate what has been broken off from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the necessary instruments for sectioning and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From those ways of insertion and from three species, one great, which they migrate to, and the smaller ones that come out of them:
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of insertion is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of introduction is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of introduction is thus:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are iron points from hammers and swords, properly descended into the limbs, to feed the interior through the apodes (stirrups).
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experience and they are called learned ones; one among them is called a master.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	When three spices are used from them, it is great for digestion and little in quantity.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience is thus formed here in this place.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experiencing movement, as it is with him/her:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of experience is so limited, it's like this (or similar):
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	With those spouts and exits, and ulcers and abscesses between them; that is to say, among the spaces of these bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	So se formatez grandes, leones, y con agujas anchas hechas de hierro, ó acero, ó plata, tales son las uvas (granos/cámaras), Y los gusanos cuando están presentes.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	These are the black experiences of these people who admit that through them there are openings (fistulas) in their cavities where they rise up and mirror those above them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And from these three kinds—quills of their long bones, and other things (presumably metals or substances), according to the quantity of the opening'dicted by its dilatation and stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The shape of patient'dict pilgrimage journey with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small bronze expert'dictor:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of arrows are from precious things, some simple as they come, and these have only one curve, and their types include large, small, and pebbles.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	From those of them, three kinds are present.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those points has arisen a curve, from three kinds of things.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From what I understand of this text based on a mix of Latin-influenced language structures and medical terminology likely used during medieval times, here is an attempt at translating each line:
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Everything necessary for its location is here. (This translation maintains a general sense of what could be expected in such texts; specific medical
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	La palabra "unica" en su forma base es femenina y aguda, lo que significa que terminará en
Forma de unci simple migier:	En español moderno para darle una tercera persona singular masculina a la palabra "única",
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Para usar el adjetivo "pocos" en su forma base y concordar con ella como sustantivo femenino (
Forma de unci orp gran:	La palabra “órgano” ya está en la tercera persona singular del masculino, que es
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	En español moderno para usar "órgano" con adjetivo alteración femenina y concordar como sustantivo en el caso
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Para usarlo con la palabra “pocos” que es masculino pero se refiere a una cualidad del género femenino (un
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	La forma base y simple de "grande" en tercera persona singular, concordando con sustantivos que tienen acusativo directo
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	En español moderno para expresar esto se diría “grande” ya siendo una forma masculina y aún manteniendo la tercera persona singular.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Para concordar con "pocos" en femenino mientras describe sustantivos que pueden tener acusativo directo, se añade
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	En español moderno para esto y manteniendo la tercera persona singular masculina sería "grande" ya siendo su forma base. No neces
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Para expresar esta idea se diría “grande” en femenino y concordando con sustantivos que tienen acusativo directo
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an egg has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the knives for cutting and removing nodes and attachments, and they come in three kinds: one made of iron, another from mercury (or quicksilver), and a third type not specified herein.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the scalpel few:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The external parts of those in which it is acute and the others not sharp, nor stopped there as usual but for that to be healed well through excision of nodes fearing injury to veins or nerves; by them their malady (joint pain) and soft tissue tranquility are restored slightly due to the hardening caused by excision.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of poultices, and they come in three kinds: large (gran), small (migier), and few or lesser (pauc), as when you gather them together.
La forma de magda gran:	La Forma della Grande Magna:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of maiden migration:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of maid is lean:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are pains of bone and flesh from where they come, these poisons that cause them painfully.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When there is an incision in the skin of the sole and located on that side where parts are divided into pieces and fragments when you want to move them along with breathing.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of stones, which are sought between the thighs and not observed by apendicitis cuts through appendix punctures and come in three kinds: large, small, and few.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those things.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of pneumes are what has caused the flow to be absent from the sancus (spleen), and they come in three kinds: large, wandering, and little. The forms of breath:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are acidic pains, round in some length and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these herbs for vinegar must be large and numerous, to ensure that the ascent of phlegm reaches its necessity before your first remedy, then:
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those tools to separate entirely throughout the body; only in meaty areas such as the flesh of couches and thighs, and also in chest, breasts, belly, and navels—and similar ones with their own moisture.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Here are the translations line by line:
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some pains are round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The provided text does not contain enough context for
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	From the care of the breasts in women who are assembled together.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of sleepy men become swolthy upon waking up and being fed by their womenfolk; when they are thus engorged, full-grown breasts for females have come into existence close together on them.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who drinks this water, cover it with that part of their umbilicus according to this manner, from line B to line G, and then scrape off the growth entirely, apply unguents made of animal flesh therewith, adjust the lips of the medicine-bearer on both sides of clothing, and heal whatever is inside that has been cured.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May if the breastbone bends towards parts and is softened by its own movement with each breath, then it will be divided into two loops that resemble crescent moons; within which one contains the other's seed (i.dictate), as long as the larger line encompasses the smaller following this shape of their respective lines B and G. Then cleanse the linea alba (the midline) between both lips formed by labor, and hold back any discharge (leaking fluid from an abscess or infection). Administer what has been prescribed for suturing/stitching as well as other powders required for healing within which it becomes healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the inspection of the fluid that overflows to cope due to malaute's restlessness and flow of bile, then fill the hollow with corrosive oil and cover it so that the impure liquid within does not further damage what is already rotten inside; take care that this part gets healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	The provided medieval medical text seems to be composed using elements common in Romance languages such as
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When the apices are pierced by insects that come and touch them, it refers to a situation where ants or other small arthropods bite into plant tissues (
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When the apices are pierced by insects that come and touch them, it's related to pests like ants or other small arthropods biting into spices with a hard shell, which contain grain (or seeds). Here "grain" likely refers not only to edible kernels but also possibly the concept of plant structures used
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	From those that contain moisture; and from others with seeds embedded within their structure according to this diagram: from line G down to line B. If the disease is fully extracted, you complete it by covering lightly and insert back into another day (or time frame). Here "line" likely refers to a reference point or measurement on an accompanyin diagrams commonly used in medical texts of that era for visual guidance—perhaps indicating stages or therapeutic interventions. The phrase suggests precise timing is crucial, possibly relating to when certain elements can be removed and reintroduced safely (which could pertain to the management of a wound treatment).
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And apply wax or suitable treatment where needed on it until healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the purulent abscess of the glands and sores is present, then divide it over that which we have mentioned earlier in this section regarding the sores.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the child is stretched out so far that it burns upon touching, then apply treatment as soon as possible.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlix. (Assuming "." is decimal notation for Roman
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	The text you've provided appears to be in a mix of Latin and possibly regional Italian, as it contains words not standardized in classical Latin but used historically or regionally (e.g., 
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the splinter is broken (or lodged), and the tendon above it becomes tightened thereupon—when an abscess or inflammation occurs at those joints through artery or vein injury: when such a wound in the limb causes pain, you will feel discomfort on account of its swelling.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that which is in the vein appears as a sign of illness from the body,
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Over that which is of them for inflammation of the sinews (arthritis), divide it along the shank; and cut their tendon with an incision or cutting instrument, exposing what lies within so that it may be seen.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place metal on that needle and make it pierce into another lancet, — which causes you both to extract from those temple lancing instruments.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Return the place where it is between two ligaments and within which there was fire for all that he is in him, and break his apatite away from here.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And apply the healing care in which it has been generated, and administer that same treatment to what enters within as well when they are cured.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess in the vein section, then take what you have applied already as far as your ability allows for the abscess at the navel, and insert the needle there; make that one enter while extracting another from below (the area where you've inserted before), holding tightly with a thread made of grapevine twigs taken from both sides of this double-threaded section.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May you fear that we extract the thread (referring to cautery tool), and if so, insert it quickly into one of the holes provided by the first incision made today for suturing purposes, firmly holding your fingers in four places simultaneously.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Then dry up the ulcer in its place where it is within you when that which enters into you flows out of you; then incise away what excess there may be from the navel, and apply such as has flowed out from inside.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the pressure over him where you have immersed in wine and oil, and apply the treatment that is causing healing to his joints and inflamed parts within which they are being cured.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital of apendicitis where you suffer from twisting nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	And when an abscess occurs in the armpit and vein, seemingly as well from excessively striking or inflammation upon touching them during examination, here comes it seems like there's also nerve pain occurring through pressure or percussion:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is felt in the locations of the assistants or the ankle, or where the joints are most swolthy.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess in the belly of the body and immediately on it are bones pushed backward without going beyond this region nor ahead into other parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Then this metal (likely mercury or another heavy element used in medical practices of the time) from those who are at joints not covered by bandage will be expelled with great effort.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is in the head or forehead behind the neck have a stone placed on the spine.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If there is a small abscess present, take that one and apply it here on your face, cutting away the surrounding area of skin (razor).
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, then suspend him on the pillow, and rub that spot, and apply therewith such dressing as one may find for closure wound care; take proper measures to heal what'thy inside until healthy again.
Capitol .li.	Capital .li. (This line is not clear due to potential
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The excerpt provided appears in a Medieval Latin-influenced text, which incorporates elements of languages such as Old Italian and Early Modern Spanish due to the time period it was written (the Middle Ages). Here
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	This excerpt translates as follows:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eren dos thialles les quals eran mai a funger semblants, e non era differens entre aqueles blancs, de menuda razitz.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned outwards and separated, with moisture running throughout that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I have incised them in one foot step seventeen, and the other sixteen steps of an inch.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you find the patient fearful and anxious (and may even be ill), guard yourself with iron willpower; but if necessary, a fresh piece of lead can also help, as is our practice here described; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another source sentence to translate: "Apply adjustment in the narrowness of the iron rod; therefore, cease hammering the large nail into a piece until it is detached and stops working by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If his loins are large in size, there may be no cause for fear and distress within him, mostly when it is inside the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you divide the mass (the patient' extraneous substance), and properly apply cautery to it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return that which is within needs healing (or take) care of it.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And should you not think it necessary to insert a piece of blackness, few in feeling, and related by legs, for that is cancerous growth.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When time for memory returns again from above.
Capitol .lii.	The provided line appears incomplete or possibly corrupted due to text encoding issues typically found
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Based on your request and considering the context of medieval medical texts, which often blend Latin with regional vernac0rlex
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is painful due to movements causing fractures in which part; or because of tears where blood vessels or ligaments are torn as a result from other ruptures - either through direct damage here described, or caused by constriction leading into these areas. This indicates that joint and organ injuries can lead to referred pains at the navel area due to disrugy in internal structures such as vasculature (blood vessels) or connective tissues like ligaments during stressful movements causing tears ("ruptures").
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If there is a tear in the cistern and of the fabric (possibly referring to issues within body fluids or structures), then the appearance of inflammation seems similar to that of the limb; it hurts like a lion, which appears differently depending on various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the discharge of the hernia (budel), then after recalling what we have noted about that which has come out, with great intensity difference, and once you understand this aspect, return; immediately so he will be well again, and his health greatly improved by strong baths and vigorous exercise.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then you are like a lion and will not be hidden when I place my hand on your body; nor constrained, nor compressed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is sickness (presumably of some nature), then at these times you will see ulcers appearing on the blackened areas.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May it be for flesh nothing grave, hard and long lasting; then he is bound after a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to wind movement, then touching him with your hand becomes a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And when the operation on him is considered if his navel'se eminentence (believed to be a spine or vein) is due to worms, breeching, it becomes clear that those things which are forbidden in healing should concern you. Here one learns from teaching at the head where I have previously mentioned methods of treatment using arsenic and venesection (bloodletting).
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the navel is due to the intestine or fabric, then order the bowels so that they retain its place and remain extended; similarly command throughout all parts around the belly button where you have placed a cushion, placing yourself between your thighs above it. Also circle the space within which the protrusion occurs in the circuit of the navel to ensure proper positioning for those areas – enclosing large hernias with fabric or strong thread (or line). And raise the tentacle of the apendicectomy and place yourself between your thighs above it, ensuring control over the appendix by means of a firm rope.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the fabric (the skin), then take that one with your fingers; and cut off its excesses from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, surround that area, and return to your work at once; take two needles and insert them into those fields strong enough so as you have opened the circulation around this spot where healing has taken place through lancet entry – penetrations made with these instruments which pierce downwards into their respective spaces - hold firmly on that wound in four parts along the length of the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them into where it pierces and extends the flesh; when they are subtly inserted and penetrated by themselves, take care of that which comes out from within the wax (which is used for enwrapping), as this will be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the swelling of the navel is due to meat nothing or moisture in it, then you must cover it with bread and water as provided herein, which removes humidity from within, thus curing the ulceration (swelling), and taking care that what covers and consolidates this place.
Capitol .liii.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately recognizable as part of
De curacio de cranc.	It appears you have provided a phrase in Latin, which translates roughly to "About the
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	The phrase you've provided translates to English as follows: "We have spoken, in the division of crust and about how medicine approaches this specialty—and that it is a divergence from using iron for treatment so that there are no ulcers; we speak hereinabout cranc generated by the region treated with medical care.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and grave (seriously ill), do not attempt to treat them here with you because they will not be cured by this treatment nor have I seen any other come forward for help.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is performed as we have discussed, you proceed and unbind (or release) the bowels if constipated with black clay, and treat it accordingly if there' extrusion of intestine manifests itself.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here comes the line for translation: Now prepare the patient'sin which is prepared in this place of operation, and brace around those cuts that are directed towards it; make them curved throughout all parts at the good section below where no cause arises from within him.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Here it goes: "Lay the sanction down smoothly and do not withdraw that treatment; express those locations, and cleanse the area completely with what is available to you as tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May if you find contraction of the thickened vein or artery within that there be wound healing and proper care for it afterward has been applied; cauterize what is inside where blood flow ceases, then take care for its other treatment while it' extruded.
Capitol .liv.	The given line "Capitol .liv." appears to be an
De curacio de ydropici.	Translating this phrase into English, it seems like a poetic or archaic
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have prepared remedies in the division of aquatic spices and the essences from each herb for water medicine.  
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E that which is cured by iron alone is only the essence of temperance itself, and not approached with tin or bell metal nor mercury, for it is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herb of sound ear cleaning medicine and it does not cause discomfort in your medication, consider that if the ailment at the belly or abdomen has been resolved, then look for other illnesses elsewhere on their body, as concern is over whether to treat them further.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If at any time the thigh overgrows with vitality and this is not another illness but simply excessive humidity, it'n neither infants nor old people for whom such intervention of yours is that you raise your leg between your own extremities, placing a servant on top to express the abdomen in its position by pouring water at the juncture with urination immediately after taking off the diaper, and applying plaster ashes according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of watery humors is due to illness in the foot, then your team shall be on the left side of the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of it is due to bile, then your section should be in place.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And if your hand is on the ribcage where you want to speak about arthritis, so that excess fluids do not flow there quickly.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here is the line-byse translation of this medieval medical text:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Return through which I shall pierce the bladder until it reaches the place where water dwells. The location of this is underwater.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that part outwardly, and insert an instrument of which this is its form.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it seems like a silver thin needle; made of either silver or ivory, to which I have attached the smallest knot at its base on you (the patient), and there are three knots in each part of your body – one from this set and two from another set. The tip is as sharp as a quill pen'dictor: every time it touches skin like when writing with feathered pens,
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	In the external cavity he places his silver instrument, and when it is immersed in water, that part immediately goes into the instrument, so much water evacuates at once; but if all of this water does not leave within an hour, then due to the resolution of its spirit animal, or you may decapitate five heads which are appropriate for death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May the excretion leave from that amount according to what means it signifies for you in terms of the positioning and disposition of the patient' extraneous matter (which could refer to waste or pus) within their pulmonary state and overall health condition.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here the instrument is to be rubbed with water if the humidity tolerates it occasionally, and a small amount of water must be used for rinsing each day out of fear or concern that too much liquid will overflow; thus keep your error within what little there actually is.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear about the abdomen (or belly), and pour a large quantity of water upon it, letting them be buried in sand to cure it internally and massaging with warmth while waiting for long periods; this will heal that which is treated by dry medicines within.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	When the wound is on the stomach, and the spoon (possibly for applying medication or suction) lifts out moisture from it as has been previously mentioned in water.
Capitol .lv.	Given that "Capitol" does not appear to be Latin
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	When it comes to children whose bladder is intact and has not been perforated, the care would involve:  
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some days, some children are sick in their mother'thy womb and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it has been torn apart or isn’t where it should be).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So then a hole is made in the patient's skull as subtly as possible using this method just now.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place a subtle chisel undernethy're and manipulate that joint with it for three days or four-and-three-quarters (period).
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When one needs to void or pass urine, return that as well.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not stop the flow of blood (the urine), it may wet this place, and will not dry out with this treatment.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that which causes him distress be treated with iron as we have said, for up to several days until it is intensified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Mays those in which it is not located (the trauma), they are led outwards; this causes them to be far from these parts, the one that was born and has always been there—this originates at the top of the urethra so as not to allow urination into lower body parts. It's not due to their generation, because semen cannot overcome its way back to the womb through this blockage; rather, it is a severe illness causing discharge from these areas below (the bladder and genitalia).
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When using fluid in your operation (of bloodletting), you may encounter pain; pause and address the liquid that separates from the vein while caring for those healed inside, guard yourself against it too.
Capitol .lvi.	In this given text from what appears to be an ancient medical treatise with lingu
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The sentence you've provided appears to be related to medical terminology, likely from an older form of the language such as Latin or medieval vernacs like Old French (which might have been influenced by these languages). The context suggests it is describing a condition affecting male genitalia—possibly referring to issues with semen consistency and release due to inflammation ("prepucii") in areas typically associated with pain, such as the pen
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	The sentence seems to describe a chronic or recurring condition affecting semen (presumably "albater" is an archaic term for sperm) within the urethra ("vergua") and possibly relates to issues with abnormally thickened
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	The sentence touches upon a condition that could be either benign or malignant regarding the context of semen within the urethra: "And from this one, some are harmful
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	The sentence you've provided is rich in metapsychological terminology and seems to convey an ancient medical approach: "And from this one, some are not harmful; cover them with a subtle layer (potentially referring to gauze or cloth) that removes the problematic substance entirely within its confines. Then place it over there where it can be kept moistened by Egyptian wax oil and heal inside.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the gallbladder is black and of dark hue, it is necessary that you apply caustic substances to its interior and exterior.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May the foreskin be on the head of the penis and one part is cut off while another remains intact until it heals within where you keep it; after which, take care of that remaining uncut portion as well once the initial circumcision wound has been properly cared for. The moment your treatment ensures proper recovery from this incision on the penis skin, there is no concern about further tearing occurring at the site.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And examine the genitals and foreskin blackness and hardening; therefore cover all that has already been darkened and is about to corrupt or rot, placing linen dipped in crushed raspberry and huckleberry juice mixed with egg white on it, which causes irritation.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that healing with care for it is within reach while still being sickly. (This line means "Take special care of this cure so that the patient remains ill and can benefit from its effects.")
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a flow of bile (which in medieval medicine was believed to be related with digestion and liver function), then apply the luna-shaped caustics following this method. ("This suggests that if it's time for passing gallblad0
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	There are two places where the youth caustic is applied: when there's flow of bile and during fecal matter obstruction (implying constipation). ("This implies that treatment with luna-shaped cauteries should be used in cases involving both an excess or imbalance of bile as well as issues related to bowel
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed in an instant, insert a bronze tube into the penile shaft to allow for drainage through that channel (indicating immediate intervention with tubing inserted). ("This instructs doctors on how to manage acute cases where there might be damage or blockage of urine flow.")
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the penis (and this adherence is not due to decay but where it attaches, and over here there's no need for circumcision; when you scrape off adhesions dissolved by spongy stones that have detached from underneath or caused inflammation) cover with a blunt stone so the head of urethra can be removed in its entirety. ("This line guides practitioners on how to remove an obstruction, which may involve scraping off obstructions made by hardened stones and then using tools like spongy or rounded instruments for removal.)
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to remove those exquisitely, then cover your hand with sponge and search for any cause of the head of the vertebra or prepuce, so that when you carefully penetrate them through their delicacy, they are pierced by gentle force.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And separate between the foreskin and the head of hair on top (of their genitals), which is already present in the body humors, preventing other purulent diseases from attaching there as well.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And he returns his care at home where it is ensured that he has recovered fully.
Capitol .lvii.	Certainly! Here is my attempt at translating each line of this medieval medical treat
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The refinement and care for the young ones who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity with other illnesses: however, when it comes from our operation and intention, and concerning those issues specifically in children, we must assign them to the better treatment course using milder means of healing.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So it is said that ancient people did not perform circumcision around the time of freedom, and they do not use them in their laws, only having acquired this practice through experimentation. This causes much suffering among craftsmen and barbers who now resort to using thread made from silk or wool as new razors (clippers) and scissors for shaving; employing leather thongs and sharp nails held by the claw of a bird, which inflicts great pain.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already tried all these methods and found no better improvement than with the knife or thread in waxing within unguentum (ointment), where motions escape from below, flee downward through the penis sheath when it is covered by two tunics, rise again temporarily as a distended tumor above them both, and thus you are forced to seek another understanding and pain relief.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	E arises the purification of which it is felt due to alchemical actions and from the digit, by means of these instruments used by physicians; however, this does not securely protect the extremity of the male member as long as it remains within its breech (the anal region).
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In surgery with a knife, if you are not careful and cause damage to your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The tongue of a child is naturally short and tends to protrude often in such manner that there is no need for cleaning it out, which has been observed by him (the doctor).
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the world-making that is done with nails and threads be of good quality as I have experienced them; for when these materials are proportionate like their sharpness today, thus also will you match two degrees of hardness in my hand, examining each according to a comparison at one time. And so it becomes clear correction or shaping the shape of the nail on its own form contains all fingers without error—the whole length of which I have measured with these instruments myself.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first reason for surgery is that you should make the child majorly if they are of those who understand a little and do not perform anything else but place your faith in their cravow just enough, allowing them to return tomorrow.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Return that joy throughout all of your intelligence, which is within your reach for comprehension and acceptance.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Return your hand to the patient's waist and blow into their neck; draw in that which is sick at the top of the wrist, and purify what from dirt has accumulated therein.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Return the marked spot on the foot' extrinsic tendon, and place your thumb under that small piece of said second sinew; press down with your fingers upon this area between two sinews (ligaments).
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the translation:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of scissors is this way - it shapes as follows [this line suggests that there should be an explanation or depiction following on how these instruments (scissors) are shaped
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 Those are unshaped stones and the others are shaped tools such that they neither break off a part of the handle nor exceed halfway down from elbow to fingerts, with their lengths equal to those of two clubs held in one' extramundane hand (interpreting 'clau' as an extension or grip rather than literally).
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	May errors in understanding are few and easily evaded within the interior of oneself; otherwise, you must seek insightful knowledge.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Thus, when you spread that of your hour upon the wound and insert it according to its own equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract that one and incise that which is inside of it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days and the poultice applied to the puncture wound swells up quickly, apply water immediately so that the inflammation can subside due to drainage, and then treat with what you have prepared for this purpose.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	When it's your turn at the head of the bed, you will not disturb him/her anymore.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, take care of that water which the clay has solidified within the channels through which we have recommended it to pass.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it has entered through the navel in measured amounts and follows below (the abdomen), you will not notice its arrival there.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he cure that which we have spoken about inside is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol .lviii. (The ".lviii." indicates a specific
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	From the treatment of retained urine in the bladder, translated line by line into English:  
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retain urine in the bladder is considered a sign of excess humors caused by phlegm or putrefied blood, or stones or meat residue; it seems to them as those mentioned for cure practices during division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and remains for a while in the place where it already is, which is at the base of the bladder, then gout can ascend into their lower abdomen.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And align the patient's legs on their own two and stretch out their abdomen as much as is possible under them with strangulation of the belly.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then from the bladder neck is expulsion upwards into the parts behind it so that urine can be completely discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If there is no dissolution of the fluid we have mentioned before, then it becomes a powerful cause over the flank area, and for its removal you must use an instrument similar to this: It may be made of silver or subtle lion conquered in such finesse that resembles the length of a pen nib and slender as if under a needle'se thread. The tip is delicate like the head of a mace (mallet).
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	When the urine's elimination is what holds tightly to your belt and lies beyond its fabric for good measure; insert the extra straps into the parts near where the catheter enters, cutting with scissors any excess unnecessary causes of wool, perhaps inserting them directly through the tube forcefully.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When you press the hernia onto the foot and bind it with bandages made of oil and herbs,
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	When you extend the iron gently over the wool little by little, whereby the urine dissolves the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Return that area treated with urine and the urethra using a catheter until the bladder and obstructed passages are relieved.
Capitol .lix.	The provided text seems like it could be from an early form of Latin combined with
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	When translating this sentence, we should consider the historical context and linguistic influences mentioned (Latin-like language with Italian, Spanish, and French characteristics). Here's an attempt to translate it line by line:
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you have an ulcer or abscess in that area, or if it is constricted by pressure sore, then into that place will flow waters and medicines; herein lies the use of the tool with which you apply force, this is how.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sino cuando fuera extraña (when it is outside), then it becomes silent and closed off.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that situation, three troubles occur twice or more often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the communion is a place where it is gathered and its second quantity that rises from there; when any cause draws this away, then it's drawn back here too, and when expelled far, as long as until clamping occurs at which point naphtha appears in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of clacking into the moisture, and draw it out towards that water which pushes against the parts below, where the moisture is drawn upwards into the cavity of the clacker.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the exterior of the thigh within the groin according to what we have recommended in the urinary bladder; and propel the moisture you are propelling, which will ascend into the upper part of the bladder, where it belongs.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of which bladder is constricted, and this is its shape.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	When it is of silver or alloyed material (such as small feather-like appearance), and then insert the thread into his limb(s).
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Return the bladder to its motion, and pause there where moisture wants to crystallize in the bladder; place it between two well-tied bands of flesh, so that this moisture may be scalded over the focus.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return (or adjust) the limb of the patient into its cavity, and place your hand on it so that the limb does not protrude outwardly in agony or sw
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand on the bladder due to the moisture that has entered through the hernia within this waist area where such moisture is now present in distress or swelling of the urinary bladder. (This translation attempts to convey a medieval medical context, suggesting an intervention for suspected involvement between a protruding organ and excessive humidity leading to discomfort.)
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If there is no bladder present, then take a pillow made of peacock feathers and pierce the entire circumference; insert it firmly into those disrusetup structures so that they are disturbed in their position; place your hand above these areas whereupon you wish to move them. Also bring another cushion or water as if attending directly to moisture, resting there until such fluid is expelled (this translation suggests a treatment method for dealing with protrusions and associated fluids without direct reference to the bladder).
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Here comes the line to translate: Return your tool there and make it touch that which you have touched in the bladder area, expressing with your hand where moisture is expected to reach the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	The provided text appears to be written in an archaic form of Romance
De extraccio de peyra.	From stone." This line suggests that something (potentially a procedure or tool) is being extracted
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 "We have already divided the stones and cured them in our medicine practices, and discussed the properties of that." This translation indicates a discussion or observation about categorizing different types of kidney (vesicular) stones versus ureteral stones within their medical treatment contexts; it implies an understanding of these conditions' characteristics for proper management.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 "We have discussed the stone in which this operation is performed and sectioned." Here again we find a reflection on medical intervention – likely nephrolithotomy (kidney stone removal surgery) or similar procedure
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 "The kidney-derived stone is precisely that which resides in the bladder." This clarifies a medical understanding relevant to treatment: The origin and current location of certain stones – specifically, those formed within the kidneys (vesicular) are noted as being
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 "They recount that which is shown here in detail." This line suggests a report or account of medical findings, possibly from an examination or study session; it implies comprehensive and concise
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 "Therefore say that kidney stones mainly affect children; and the excretions of urine from it resemble water in their subtlety, appear therein (likely within a metaphorical or poetic context), where mucus flows like veils around them. They are then dressed at these forums with beads made from those very stones." This passage appears to blend medical descriptions of kidney stones – particularly in children and their excretions, which the author likens subtly resembling water ("in its delicacy") within some setting or forum (perhaps a healing environment). The subsequent actions involving "mucus veils" suggest an almost ritualistic preparation for these urinary byproducts using stones transformed into jewelry, possibly symbolizing purification through their crafting.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is when cleanlinthy care of children within that age, having reached twelve years old, becomes difficult in the limbs.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May in young people move through those waters that flow between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that from which the stone is larger and poultice applied lighter; if it's scarce, contrary to it.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when approaching the treatment of that, cover with a cloth from above where it exits through the hole which is entirely within their bands; this very same hole for some time has prohibited the infusion of venom into its depths, awaiting further inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Return that which you have prepared among yourselves, and the things of yours are now done in turns, so that the bladder as a whole is reduced towards the divisions quickly.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Return that which has been taken out of there (the body), all of it back into place.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel pain in the area, then gently place your hand over it there.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you have not yet touched the entire body according to what is indicated for the left side when there is a malady in the belly (indicating pregnancy), or as per the directive if one has completed puberty, then touch that which is directed and place it inside the patient'dict lower region.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through a finger inserted that is inside already there sits the urine.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that little one goes into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	When you press upon that limb which they give herein, and remove it from the parts beyond this place where their section is located.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return it back into its place, as this is how they enter:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide the water between the knee and thighs without going into the belly of the left thigh; place a section over that stone in the groin (the abdomen), where this same section is across, so that it becomes wide and spread out according to how much there is on that stone, but not more than what can fit between the body part underne énce and the belly. And since a hole may be present at times in those places (in which case they refer specifically to potential hernias), this means you cannot forcefully remove it with whatever tool is currently inside that area of discomfort, where there might already be an issue like protruding tissue or swelling contained within.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	Be aware that there is some stone within which the joints and edges are located, making it difficult to clean them with water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid it appears like a lion and is round, made of urine used for medicine preparation.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that which has been angled or stretched outwards, adjust within the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not a catheter inserted (foregoing "foro-getada"), then you must care for that area or the one where pressure has been applied, and do so with a limestone tool on the bone where compression occurs; do not avoid doing this at once. Or insert immediately an instrument of subtle curvature undernethy's extremity (hand).
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	May you not be able to hold onto that, then increase the wound a little bit, and if you see outflow of pus, remove it carefully with sulphuric acid that has been previously concentrated (vitriol).
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the patient has only one kidney remaining, then draw it into the bladder mouth and place your hand over this area; also carry another small amount to this point; apparently these are drops of bile from disease.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the patient has much pain, it is ignorance on your part to insert that large section deep within them, for one of two causes: either they are already dwelling there due to continuous urine distillation, and thus the location cannot be fully secured.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	When treatment of the patient is inside out or during a bone fracture where tools (forceps) are used within to extract that which has come out, it means:
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with Aloe and dragon'sup sap, and tightly bind it up.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And when poultice is applied over that cloth steeped in oil and wine (or vinegar mixed with water), to ensure the application bites into place firmly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the bladder above the spine and do not release the ligament inside until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that breeze enters, apply water and oil to the spot where it is applied with liniment or unguent until healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	May you apply poultice if the wound is inflamed and decayed, similar to when your bladder is frozen within it, for then urine is prohibited (and this exacerbates as long as the body expels its contents), thus interpose a cloth in the child and extract that very same one, provided doing so provokes further deterioration of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here applies water and salt, against all kinds of special substances that are needed for healing within which the patient has been cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	In the hours of total care where you have both thighs and adjust the medicines that are paused over the place,
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder, and it remains therein, then urination of this kind (stone passage) should be prohibited; hence those who come to a section due to excessive water intake are often accused of passing stones; you have already drained the fluid, now grasp for an iron implement with which this is done:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From outside the cavity, gout is lodged in a pipe.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	When one is in bed, and it's time for that particular leg or foot bladder to be emptied into the urinary vessel such that it does not return there again.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Return the iron into the wound with ease while ensuring that the puncture tool enters the depth of the hole created by it.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Revolve the cautery in your hand slowly within that small stone, and insert it until one from the other reaches to perforate; thereafter the urine is expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Here is the line by line translation:
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not for you due to any reason that prevents it from being used by you now, then apply a poultice quickly on the skin, and another poultice below the skin.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Translation of each line into English:
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that which has been taken out (or extracted).
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	In restoring ligaments and sanctioning hardened joints (which is done in the open air).
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to use hemp rope here immediately after removal of the belt from the waist, but rather for prevention that it returns to its place; another bandage above when removing the hemp, then once removed this will return to its original position and catches whatever remains.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary for you to lift the leg under (which likely refers to lifting or supporting an injured limb), then raise your belt above those parts below, and take back what belongs to each of them as they have said when we talked about this together.
Capitol .lxi.	The provided text appears as if it mixes elements of different historical languages such as
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	It seems like you've presented a line in Latin or another ancient language that relates to the extraction process from women, potentially within
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	The text snippet provided appears to be Latin and translates roughly as: "From few stones (or perhaps 'peyra' here refers metaphorically or histor
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	The translation of the Latin text snippet is: "If any stone (or perhaps 'peyra' here refers metaphorically or historically to a medical issue) from them arises, it is difficult to cure and its removal by hands is prohibited." This suggests that in this historical context, self-removal of what may have been perceived as an internal growth (symbolized by
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The translated line from the medieval Latin medical treatise reads: "One among them is considered very large for a woman." This indicates that, historically, certain physical standards were expected
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The translation of the Latin text fragment is: "Another one does not find a woman who can extract herself if she goes to the doctor when it appears or belongs to women with child." This implies that there was historically some expectation for self-removal under specific circumstances, and professional medical help might be sought only upon certain conditions being met. The mention of extraction in relation to "femnas haventz maritz
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The translated Latin sentence is: "A third one does not handle women who know this art, primarily the operation." This indicates that there was a recognition of specific skills or knowledge required for handling such cases ("this art") and suggests surgery might often be involved in these procedures during medieval times
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The translation of the Latin text is: "A fourth one states that the location of the stone in a woman'thy body exceeds its own place; hence an urgent operation must come first." This line suggests there was concern and recognition for immediate medical action, likely surgical intervention ("urgent operation"), to address such conditions. The implication is clear that these situations were taken seriously enough by those with the knowledge or authority at the time (as indicated by "preonda").
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary for you to cause expulsion towards the water (likely referring here as some form of treatment or medication), then take hold of a female midwife'softhe knowledgeable one and do so gently without much effort.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you lack it, seek out a skilled midwife or woman trained in the care of women' extradition:
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So take that present now, and command the patient to bind all of what you are giving them, from inquisition about the stone up until feeding; this causes concern if the woman is virginal or desires her dress at the entrance of her body - where she intends for it.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if it hurts that part, press firmly on it quickly and command them (the patient) to lie down on that spot.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If there is no vein visible, then the matron commands that her servant insert it into the cavity of the malady and place it on the bladder; thus preventing their left hand from resting upon the urinary bladder, while they acquire a good cautery.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if it causes agony, then the one who is gradually worsening that which torments in the bladder to the parts of his body within as quickly as possible must arrive at the hollowness of the hip joints where such pain originates from so they can begin treatment.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And place it submerged in that position on the bed where any swelling of the groin may occur when standing and center the penis there; this should not be displaced from its location by quick movements.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	E the section is small for consumption; and place your hand over that portion of it according to the quantity by which you know the flesh has been pierced therefrom.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	Be aware that the stones of pepper are grains: some few and large, like lion or sharp asspire, elongated and round, with rims (probably referring to their shape).
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Thus you know how many spices are needed for what I indicate, which will come forth.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see flux of phlegm present, adjust it in the glass vessel that has been thrice boiled and place your hand therein for an hour until the phlegm is discharged, then return to your operation within which time the pus should be expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: 
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see a flow of phlegm and know that the expulsion of phlegm is from uncured inflammation, then place powder over the location and apply this to relieve coughing and tightness without further intervention; do not remove what has come out, for it may lead to recovery.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Return care for the child (or patient). Here "aprop" is likely an arch
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of pain decreases day by day, it moves (the patient'thy condition), and thus you should return to your work within such time that flesh is healed. Here "aprop cura" suggests returning care or attention ("retorna a la operacio") as soon as there has been an improvement in the sharpness of pain indicating possible wound cleaning, dressing changes required for proper healing (whenever the skin overlying the affected area needs to be redressed), hence "la peyra sia fora-getada.
Capitol lxii.	In Chapter LXII: Here we continue with a translation into English, although
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Regarding the section on hernias (or protrusions): In this chapter, there is likely
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is not simply an accumulation of moisture in the bladder (where urine resides), which causes a pulling on the intestines containing fluid within them; hence they are named 'bladders.' Here, "ayguoza" likely refers to something having come or entered into ("nos manteca"), possibly indicating an abnormal accumulation of moisture in this context. The term for bladder here is rendered as a Latin-influenced equivalent
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	There are some signs within the peritoneum (the serous membrane lining of the abdominal cavity), where nature takes its course with urine in preparation for elimination; and this is between the bladder, which has already been mentioned ('a lu preparec natura'), as well as other fluid contents within. Here 'tart' refers to something that retains or holds firmly ("no es aquo" implying not being water), possibly indicating a non-liquid residue in addition to the urine (fluid) already present between these structures, perhaps suggesting old blood clots after hemorrhage which have set and are no longer liquid. The term '
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is through purge which occurs in the kidnelauses, so that these materials come out from them, and some are expelled by striking points on the kidney area itself:
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English: And for these sinews with which this addition of water is associated herein: if it in the white cistern that we have mentioned beforehand, then healing occurs gradually over a long bath taking shape like hair, and appears the genitalia; as humidity accounts throughout all.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the fluid is in the patient's pancreas, then an abscess forms there and as soon as it comes out, he considers that another organ has ruptured.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If there is moisture between the navel and the white line of the belly button (the umbilicus), then apply pressure to that area immediately.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to ascertain the color of humidity, look for its presence in the swelling where it preceded; and if it appears on the limb'supremacy thereof, then examine what has entered into that body which was already disturbed by this condition.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the care of him who is ill with it (the metal humors), if you can command the humor that has become fluidic in his body, then perform an enema on him at your discretion.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Return its position on top of any cause or two causes at once and pause occasionally with the changing sheets immediately afterward.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Put it on the left side of him/her and command the servant to follow his/her right side; he will stretch out their arm up two hands from under the neck down to the waist, where they divide into legs and abdomen parts.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Return the pillow or splint back into its cavity, and place it inside along the length of the bed to which you have locked your patient's neck (or spine).
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And if it is the second section retracted by hand away from the line where one'thy knee should be, then arrives at the spot understood by those who are adept in this art with knowledge of bones and joints (the chest area).
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and observe it carefully so you do not reinsert it; your excision is what allows this part to remain suspended above the belly at times and subtly inspects according to what can be observed in the excision itself.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	When puncturing the bladder of water with an enlarged hole (large forearm incision), remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Return the separation between the labia of one section and not touching the cautery on the areas below; do not handle the instruments in that manner which is within your capability.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here enters within it all or in pads, and mostly its subtle part; if you do not examine meticulously the inner workings of him/her, there is no guarantee that water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If during that part of your operation concerning the area above her navel, you have completed the section involving the cleft (nipple), then return it to its place and adjust the lips of the navel of a newborn with sutures therein; take care for them as if they were other creatures.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have corrupted the humors through another illness, then it is necessary that you remove them using the vessels they are drawn into and extract the humor, taking care of what we previously mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May if water is added to any parts of the body, you will understand that these are hernias; therefore, incise in that part which has already been cut elsewhere on your abdomen; and if it's an operation for you, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Return the intestine to its cavity, and place your hand over it in cloth soaked with oil or ointment; apply another piece of this wet linen that you have submerged in wine and oil, expanding it between two knees under the belly; pause thereover drenched sheets folded into pills, binding these together as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And lay two pressed sheets and woolen rolls according to this likeness; they are bandages for the extremities that you must bind or wet with moisture, and arranged in pleats on the apron of their petticoats, one thigh binding at the waist, another leg tuck into the parting of the gown, two more around each hip joints, and all bandaging is adjusted to fit within the petticoat.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some treatments this hernia is artificially reduced at the site of excision with a fine cautery that you hold undernethy's urethra (the penile tube), and when it has been found that there is a white bladder containing water inside, then take up these same thin cauteries as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is brought together in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When it is necessary to make holes in that area of the spleen, and then everything inside there will be expelled outwardly.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Return the sinew that is cut, and burn it with fine flame; inspect as soon as you can what remains of your patient within reach so that everything may be eradicated from him; keep watch lest the fire touch his mouth.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Be aware that this operation is safe and prevents excess fluid flow in the veins, which is better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May it happen that in the time of dressing or during treatment, if you encounter an abscess requiring drainage (cauterization), which discomfort is related to what I'm treating for, then attend immediately as directed hereafter.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the abdomen is painful and there'sin hope for a second operation due to its horror, administer an incision as you are directed; when it has been certified that this (the presence of) a hernia is evident from what we have said about its signs, then do so accordingly.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you make an incision in the spleen above any raised joint area (implying a humoral imbalance), pierce through the apendicitis at its lower part near the spine, and stop the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	When I have opened wide for the flow of water throughout it all.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return your pause over the place where it touches and hold that one there while holding another for him to prevent his body from getting wet by water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which is within so as it may be healed by care.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	May it happen that opposition occurs to the water element at that time when you pierce through this: and then it is not pain but clear watery fluid in its womb, causing contrary action which prevents medical treatment of the water from being administered, whereupon what has been extracted by means thereof (likely pus or some other material), such as precedes that form; at this juncture adjust a small item within it.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxiii.	Since there is no text provided for translation beyond "Capitol .lxiii.,
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	From section concerning the fleshy protrusion and its treatment:
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You understand that fear of loss is present over this hernia, so it'dicted the discharge and thus saved by virtue of her superiority in such matters; as seen to me now its release and my salvation through her merit.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	You already remember the operation in that place with those tools of insertion.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So say that the inflammation occurs in the joints where muscles are attached and become swolthy due to various causes: either from acute excess, which bursts into these areas of muscle attachment, or through impact/strike.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	It is according to the body'se colour that a fracture occurs and does not aggravate pain therein; it is severe.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When it is blackened like lead without center in sight,
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes pain is caused by the knotting of tendons and inflammation of those joints where it has already been noticed, or due to swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May it be known that when there is an inflammation of the joints, this condition can come about due to arthritis upon discontinuing treatment, and one must not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is pain due to an inflammation of the vein not be dispersed by this pressure, and should it require compression on those points (presumably where they have applied for relief).
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	Here comes the first source sentence: And it is possible that this special effect occurs over these bones; and you insert your finger into the urethra, placing them below the divisions above, extracting what' extricates from the white cyst of course partitions, disrupting suspenders for veins, binding together those threads whereupon extraction is made.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if it's already there in those meats, then take out what is within and insert that back again.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an attachment within any cause of the chest or between the breasts (which are referred to as "bayssels" in medieval terminology), then you must release all that attachment and clean it out using round instruments.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the natural meat in the place behind (possibly referring to a specific body part being examined or treated), and if so you insert all of what is there from your hands, and extract them together with us as we have done.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, fill it with rosemary oil and vinegar; care for that which has been healed by another remedy within.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.: This line appears to be referencing Roman numerals
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	From cure for the womb that it is desired: Here, "curación del útero" likely refers to treatment or care related to
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Of applying poultice by any wrapping resembling a sprout that softens the testicles, and it is difficult to exercise or walk on the womb: In this line from the medieval medical treatise, treatment for conditions related to the male reproductive organs—specifically possibly an issue with the scrotum (testicles) —is described. The poultice made of materials resembling a sprout is applied in order to alleviate discomfort or pain associated with these areas and facilitate movement,
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And regarding the treatment of this ailment, it is done out of fear for which we are preceding: Here, there seems to be an indication that part of managing or curing hernias (the malady mentioned) involves not only direct intervention but also addressing
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But there is a fear that overseeing the second as precedes those first: This line suggests an awareness of potential complications or more severe conditions following initial symptoms, and it implies prudence in monitoring subsequent changes after diagnosing
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And that which you fixate upon the womb with an awl on elevated scrap (possibly as part of surgical intervention); and adjust the suspenders attached to the testicles at their joints; and bring into place those other ministerial items, your gloves—extend them vigorously: This line from the medieval medical treatise appears to describe a procedure or treatment involving direct manipulation with precision (using an awl), possibly for surgical purposes like setting up hernia repairs. The mention of "suspenders attached to testicles" could refer to ligaments, and their adjustment might be part of the correction process. Additionally, gloves are mentioned as items that should also be extended vigorously—perhaps indicating caution or thorough handling during a procedure: In summary, this passage outlines specific actions taken with medical instruments (like an awl) for correcting issues related to hernias and testicles in the medieval context.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Return and insert an iron spear through one section across the middle of your body, where the vessels have been discovered within that space.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	When it is necessary to remove everything extracted during surgery from the areas where we have operated, use an emetic for the entire body portion removed at that time in those places of extraction.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Return those within the heat location by section of four parts according to length, and extract what has been gathered from fresh and decayed feces.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And for care of the swelling due to other diseases caused by which drops that should normally be drained only fall into one or two glands and are not bad, so take proper care.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If you injure all the vessels in one's body, it is when their testicles are outside or if they come out into the veins, depriving them of nourishment for the entire body and making them exhausted so that no good can be done to those.
Capitol .lxv.	CXLV. (The Roman numeral "CXLV" represents the
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	In this line, it seems like we are dealing with instructions or notes regarding the treatment of an intestinal prolapse
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that extends outwards from the belly caused by weaknesses in the intestinal walls ("angunars del mirac"), leading to protrusions or bulges near those areas where ruptures have occurred. In simpler terms, it describes how an internal organs (possibly parts of the bowel) pushed through a defective area within the abdominal wall can result in what is described as herniation—a medical condition that requires attention and treatment to prevent further complications or damage.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture can be of the abdominal wall or from excretion (perhaps referring to a blockage), and these organs are subjected by various reasons: trauma ("traumat" meaning injury which could imply physical violence, impacts that may cause internal damage such as hernias); pressing; coughing forces; lifting heavy objects causing strain or pressure – all of which can lead to the weakening and potential tearing (rupture) of abdominal wall structures. This explanation further clarifies how lifestyle factors, certain activities, even stress ("clamor" also means noise here but could imply general discomfort), along with predisposing conditions like
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The belch (likely referring to vomit in this context) when it comes from the abdominal wall due to strain does not cause immediate discomfort, but rather a gradual weakening and potential formation of hernias inside; over time these internal problems may manifest as bulges or protrusions through defects (holes or tears) in the walls surrounding organs within this cavity. This line suggests that certain symptoms like belching could be indicative of an underlying issue related to abdominal wall integrity and might lead, over time without proper care ("pauc a pauc"), eventually causing problems with hernias due to pressure or other factors
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the patient' extricates from their seat or chair (seccio del ciphac), suddenly intense pain occurs; various symptoms appear on the seemingly healthy side of the hip joint, and it is due to discharge from the entrails/gut (budel) that affects different parts farthest in the body.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some measures have been taken with regard to the intestine (the protrusion), which is being called this intestinal hernia here.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some days there is pain due to wind evaporation, and some days it moves in the forked intestine that has been opened up herein; this accumulation of excessive malauny fluid causes severe and increasing pain when pressed upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these spices for this illness there is fear that they might be avoided during its administration herein described.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence, translated line by line into English:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is within your ability from that which has come out, take its quantity as much as you can.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Return that scraping causes those things which are in their cavities (the cure for the symptoms), while it is discovered that there' extruded a white hard chytrid from any division of them, indicating testicular issues or blockages possibly related to stones.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the tube into this fluid that surrounds his testicles, which are between white circles (indicating lymph nodes), and located behind the scrotum, it absolves the adhesion present in the area behind the body.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the testicles' lower belly area back into its cavity, and extend your fingers down there in their left side, lifting up the penis at the part of the section; commanding the servant that extends it outwards herein.  
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When it concerns the tight bands that have not any cause within the white membrane,
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause within yourself here, then bring it forth into your abdomen quickly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here the text is translated into English line by line as follows:
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Pause another cordage after the second foray from here along; and attach these two cords to the ligament which by turns swells the scrotum'dictating its size, tracing out all round it in a circular manner, then hold this back.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Here's the line by line translation of your medieval medical treatise:
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	May it be that if the bathing is delayed, pour water on his tail and pause over there where he falls as soon as we have spoken.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Return care for it with the other remedy of pains within that has been healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	The given text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical document translated into English with
De hernia ventosa.	Based on your input, it appears you've provided Latin phrases that
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this case of the hydrocele (hydrocelea is a term used for fluid accumulation, often related to swelling), it has not been observed how much can be removed by force alone from underneius's care or treatment.  
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Here come the first source sentence to translate:
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when it is necessary for the treatment as we have discussed that heals be done.
Capitol .lxvii.	The text provided appears to be from an old medical manuscript or treatise written in a language that incorpor
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	When joint pain occurs in the knees, it is referred to as arthritis (from Latin "arthro-" meaning joint and "-itis" indicating inflammation
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some days the pain in the knees breaks up suddenly like rain on a windowpane and we notice it immediately upon standing or moving around. This suggests that their symptoms may worsen with movement or activity after resting for some time which is common among those suffering from conditions such as osteoarthrit
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	There is not a single hereditary cause of the stones in their own lineage; and if there were some present within it, they are few as butterfs upon water—and these can return throughout all hours or periods without any specific triggering events known to them at this time. This indicates an understanding that while genetics may play a role, its impact is minimal in the occurrence of their condition and stones could be more sporadic rather than being continu
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time for excretion of stones is prolonged within their bladder (the cystic space), it necessitates that we address any fissures present inside this area and pass a stone therein; furthermore, acidity from extended holding in these urinary deposits worsens the condition by extending the scope where they are held. This is likely referring to kidney stones or bladder stones causing blockages (extendments) within their cystic system—the space usually used for storage of fluid and waste products filtered out by the body's organs, hereby necessitating medical attention not only for pain relief but also intervention strategies. Here they describe a situation where if left untreated or withholding treatment (not passing stones), it can further irritate and exacerbate their condition within these storage areas while emphasizing the need to address both symptoms—pain, likely from stone presence causing obstruction in urine flow/storage.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of him is with caution applied where it was previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in some cases it is cured by iron on its own according to this methodology: and when the womb rests between your two, dry up the location of the rupture at the site of attachment for three days as per quantity.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	When strength is given to the white thread that has been discovered within the cushion, it becomes firm and steady therein (implying that when proper care or treatment like applying pressure with a strong string/thread on certain body parts identified inside something protective—like
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Grant it presence over the prominent area of the white thread therein (referring to placing focus or treatment on an important spot where a previously identified string/thread is located within), and press upon that which resides in the abdomen beneath. This instruction from the medieval medical text suggests applying focused attention, possibly through direct touching with some
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Grant it between the two prominent spots upon the thread's extremity (indicating that one should adjust or apply some form of treatment—possibly with tools like cushions, servants mentioned in earlier lines) on both ends; this could imply securing a wound or perhaps addressing certain body parts. The context implies medical attention to specific areas possibly involved in an injury or condition related within
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Extract the thread's end (potentially removing a medical device or foreign object from an area), ensuring it is not inside the cushion of the string therein, nor stretched beyond its natural length; this action forms part of treating hernia pertaining to intestines. The instruction highlights careful manipulation necessary during treatment procedures for conditions like inguinal or incisional hernias where thread (possibly a surgical suture) is involved and should not be tampered with unnecessarily as it could affect
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Care for that which relates to healing diseases (implying the need for ongoing treatment and monitoring), especially when you examine the fields, purify it thereof and restore what has been solidified within; herewith should not be contracted nor adjusted is where rupture begins. This line advises attentive care during recovery from illness or post-surgery to ensure healing of tissues that have become firmly affected (potentially scarred) while avoiding actions at the site marked by a potential for tearing, which could suggest an area requiring careful attention due to vulnerability. The overall context suggests medical guidance on how best to tend after
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And in this place, they are better placed for health. (Or more literally: And herein is best used such instrument/cauterism; it'sin the context of prior lines about treating joint pain and
Capitol .lxviii.	It seems you might be referencing a specific number or designation, perhaps from an edition (LXV
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	The process of softening the scrotum is being discussed here. In historical medical texts where Latin-influenced languages were used to describe such
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The scrotum in men is softened through various means when it comes to its cords (testicles), as the flesh between these structures also gets this treatment; and accordingly are taken precautions with regard to that matter, following an old medical practice described herein from a medieval text. This line reflects traditional approaches where manual massage or other forms of gentle stimulation were believed to promote health within men's reproductive system by targeting the scrotum specifically—an example being how care was taken over these
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore they are brought near that which is required for the care of this person who massages his scrotum, and in doing so encapsulate entirely within it—the part softened as mentioned previously; with two lips properly adjusted to aid in its treatment. Here we see a meticulous approach where specific body parts like labia are carefully manipulated (potentially through self-manipulation or by another person) alongside the massage of the scrotum, indicating an attention to detail and possibly therapeutic intent within historical medical praxis for addressing issues related to male reproductive health. The text suggests a practice that combines physical engagement with specific body parts while aiming at healing or maintaining
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish to discuss it further in the meal (which might be a euphemism for sexual intercourse), then there are three or four cookings of this scrotum-softened area involved, and with strong stitches made; indicating that not only is their therapeutic intent but also perhaps an understanding within these ancient texts about the potential effects (both positive in terms
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return and secure between the stitches, with care for the healing of other afflictions inside where it should be cured and fields become white cleaned off.
Capitol .lxix.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating or transcribing from a medieval medical
De castracio.	It appears that you have presented Latin phrases related to medicine
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Translation: You know that castration is forbidden by our law; however, I remember this in the current text and there's no need to dwell on it further unless for two reasons related to medical practice as understood today—the first being when we discuss these matters with a healer during treatment. The second reason prompting us here might be due to necessity regarding castrations of other animals, much like horses or dogs if needed, and porkers (young male pigs) for consumption purposes; just as it is done today concerning movement restraints using leashes on these creatures, even including the use of muzzles.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	So it is said that gonorrhea occurs in two ways: either through withdrawal or due to the rupture of a segment.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the situation where it is caused by suction, the method of operation we make with a fishhook in water so that their throat muscles become softened and elongated until they hang downward as guided by our genii (spirits or guardian angels).
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return those who are within your grasp that they may be resolved and not appear suddenly during handling.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May there be pain in the scrotum due to a crack or tear, which you hold and press on the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Return the hoisting mechanism and inspect above each part within which two limbs proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those putrid humors that you have caused within; they are what needs attention now.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Ne do not place upon those under the scabbard any cause, but rather address the subtle essence that resides within them where the fluids are held.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E questa maniera di cautela è meglio quella nella quale il liquido si riversa, poichthy avendo una forte azione dislente le ossa del testicolo che la bestia desidera zoppicare.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	When care is provided for what has been healed inside,
Capitol .lxx.	Capitol .lxx.: This line appears incomplete or out of context as
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	From the treatment of leprosy (or Hansen's disease). The phrase suggests a discussion in medieval times
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Leprosy in men is said to have two types according to the symptoms: one where it appears as water that fills up space within the scrotum, and another manifestation between the testicles featuring a hair resembling female bodyhair. Here medieval practitioners are describing different presentations of leprosy based on its physical signs—a reflection of medical observations from their time with terminology tied to both physiological structures (testes) and gender-specific features like pubic or facial/body hair, which were believed linked to health conditions.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	There are also warnings from that urine contained within the scrotum. This line could indicate a traditional belief in medieval medicine regarding diagnostic symptoms or prognostics, suggesting an observation linking body waste products (urine) to diseases
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is special: for this reason, the condyle of the female pelvis can be placed between two male scrotums with little effort and on top of that menstrual flow from a woman may occur together like urine from males along with semen during intercourse. This line indicates an understanding—or perhaps speculation within medieval medical thought—of reproductive health, highlighting how body fluids are compared across genders (menstruation likened to the ejaculate of men), and potentially implying a belief in shared physiological processes or even bodily influences between sexes. This reflects an aspect of gender perception within medical practice during that era—
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment involves three species, two from men and one specific to women. This line suggests a multifaceted approach in medieval medicine that acknowledges the importance of understanding gender-specific treatments—indicating knowledge about different remedies or inter
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And that you insert those bones adjusted into where it escapes from there, and treat other illnesses as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men where semen is produced in the area below the testicles, there is neither cure nor opposition within them.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi. (This line does not provide any text for
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The slowing down or manifestation of flesh, particularly in women. This sentence seems to suggest that there is a noticeable delay or change occurrs specifically concerning the physical body (flesh
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The lentigo is adjusted due to natural causes within which it becomes inflamed, and certain measures are magnified in some women as far inside them as men, spread throughout sexual intercourse: Here the text describes how a type of skin pigmentation (lentigo) might be influenced by internal physiological processes that become exacerbated during periods of inflammation. It also suggests gender-specific implications and involvement in these conditions through activities such as sex, which could potentially spread or worsen the lentigo among women more than men due to their role within it (as per traditional views on female sexuality).
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Now cover what you have removed from your back or buttocks, either with a pad on top of it (your hand) or between them and the cushions placed undernethy:
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Not until inside, mostly in the head'thy region where reason resides, lest a flow of blood ensue.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Return that which is necessary for curing those illnesses within it so as they may be healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Maybirth is flesh that appears in the womb until it fills this place; thus we also suffer at parts as if bitten by a scorpion (and for which I name firstly "malady of the tail"), so let us take care to remove and heal what'dict inside, whereby our cure comes about.
Capitol .lxxii.	Since there is no text provided for translation besides the given excerpt in Latin-like
De curacio de alratica.	The phrase "Curación del artricie" appears to refer to a treatment
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 The term "alratica," which may be related to the Latin root 'articulus,' referring to joints or articulation in this context likely means dealing with arthritis of some sort where concern is that a woman's knee (f
E es o natural o accidental.	 The phrase "Es obviamente natural" suggests an assessment by the medical practition
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 The phrase implies that if arthritis (or another condition) has previously occurred and is now presenting symptoms such as pain or inflammation, it may be due to improper dietary habits ("malautia") like excessive consumption of meat ("carn nada ajustada"), overindulgence in rich foods ("ciphac subtil o espes"), which
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 This part of the text appears to advise that if joint pain or arthritis symptoms are due to dietary indiscretion like excessive meat intake ("carn nada ajustada") and rich foods, then it is important not only to avoid these but also certain practices such as overeating (implied by "enfantament" which might refer to feasting or indulgence) and possibly other unspecified actions. The text likely advises against excessive consumption ("prohibeys de cuoyt") associated with eating beyond one's means, leading back in the body like indigestion (implied by "sobra" meaning leftover), suggesting a holistic approach to
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 The text here discusses the diagnosis of a condition ("cognicio") in terms of dietary habits and possibly related health issues like excessive eating or feasting, as suggested by "oppilacio." If such symptoms are apparent (visible), then prevention through careful monitoring is recommended. However, if these signs are not obvious to the untrained eye ("no es evident"), a closer examination of tendons and ligaments may be necessary for diagnosis or guidance on treatment options — possibly referring back again to "les tieus ditz" (perhaps meaning
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If it is through subtle pressure or by pressing on the lips, then with your finger and without breaking that which you have touched apply gentle force here.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied on the lips' sensitive areas and pause rests between their most acute points of pain, it means that there are specific spots where relief can be found or managed.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Here the woman is positioned on her backs, with extended thighs, and their lips forced open so that this delicate instrument can be inserted and the pillage (probably referring to an invasive procedure) is prevented from occurrthy.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Apply wool and flax in oil on that location, and grease it well at home to prevent the site from being dislocated again.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	May it be that if the sciatica is large and thickened (the sciatic nerve), then insert either a hickory stick or an ivy branch into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If it is for fleshiness (indicating fatty tissue), lift that one up and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When these are the medicines that make the flow of pus stop, as they take it in together with absorption, and bile from dragon, ants, adjusted amount of blood serum.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And apply an expansive iron tool in such a way that the earth does not harden around it.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Whenever it'thy tongue is moist for long days and administers salve on him,
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	When it is healed by other convalescences within which it becomes cured,
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	When some of these pains occur in the uterus during birth, it is necessary to follow this methodology.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for apoplexy (stroke) of the skull, which in turn does not affect any limb due to iron deficiency anemia, do nothing further with regard to that aspect.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The provided text appears as if it is attempting transliteration from an ancient language influenced by
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	From the treatment of hemorrhoids and piles (constipation) that you experience in your vagina, here is a line-bysline translation:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: From these openings of veins, blood flows out continually; and when hemorrhoids are present, they cause painful thrombophlebitis.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in this division of those things and their spirits, I have directed these that receive care and healing as well as those which do not receive such treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it is said that hemorrhoids and thrombosis appear in the womb of the mother and do not show symptoms at all; there is no treatment for them with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those on which her touch is felt are those that will be healed by the mother'thy intervention over them.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in moist clothing and extend her legs outwardly or with an abrasive cloth, and mark those areas,
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	When powder is applied to those areas of flow from one of the inscribed morsifications, also with ashenness and resemblance for these ones,
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into stockings for an hour, and place them in cool water afterwards.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then let it be collected in a pot and boiled with honeydew stones, gold dust, and wax pieces; these will hold their hands (likely referring to medicinal remedies or poultices).
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Return bread of barley and honey, mixing it with water, then apply this paste on the two of them (referring to both sides).
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction is loose, be; otherwise, make it stick with two breaths at the chest and breasts, its scarring process.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return wool and immerse that part of it in honey or pomace wine, which has been boiled down until thickened; apply care within so that healing may occur therein.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request what is needed for stern attention, so that you can see the second one I have mentioned here in speech.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Care for that which is healed within it.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	It seems that the line you've quoted is in Italian and relates to puncture wounds of appendicitis (appendicitis) occurring in a woman (
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The Italian line describes various complications associated with appendicitis in women, including abscesses and perforations (ruptures), ulcers/lesions of erosive nature ("ulceracios"), fistulas from leaking or infected areas within the abdomen ("emorroyas e raguarrias" meaning bleeding into surrounding tissues due to a ruptured appendix, which could lead to infection spreading). It also mentions "thyl," which is likely referring to thrombosis (blood clots), and other possible complications like the formation of abscesses or fistulas ("ap
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	The Italian text here refers to the diagnosis of these various conditions and complications (like abscesses, perforations, ulcers) that women with appendicitis might experience ("these maladies" referring back to those mentioned earlier). It also touches on treatments for both their symptoms and specific lesions/wounds related to the condition. The text emphasizes considering these aspects in medical
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	This Italian line discusses the context within which appendicitis wounds should be cauterized (coagulated), hinting at a therapeutic procedure for such conditions in women ("in this tractate of apendicular lesions"). It then inquires about whether one wants to know how these procedures are performed using iron-based tools, suggesting that specific medical methods or instruments were used historically.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And when you consider that the pain from penetration in their abdomen is sharp and stabbing, accompanied by fever and inflammation, touch them gently if they are conscious about it; but do not press down on such a patient lest there be perforation. Treat this with whatever helps until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you make circles on the woman' extrices (someone who practices medicine), place her on a couch that she provides; adjust their shoulders to the back part of the stomach just slightly away from it, spread out their hips, and pause briefly between each breath they take with inhalation. Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And place the matron over straight and direct manner using the tool with which she opened (the patient), as this form will bring about what needs to be done.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you are about to administer this tool on the lady'thy breast and ensure that nothing from the tool enters her uterus except for its tip, touching it lightly against her chest.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the patient's marrow, then you must pause on its texture with your fingers so that no part of it enters into the bone of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you pause the current that flows through the tool under your left hand, and hold with a glove what is in charge of this instrument; turn around within which it has overflowed into its moisture (the patient'dict).
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and it touches the hand and foot, causing them swelling like a lioness with moisture in its paw (the heel), cover that area immediately with your palm under the arch of the foot to prevent excessive inflammation.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the illness is expelled, then you should pause in mud or oil immersed wherein there be any spotting; and apply it to the portion before Mother'thy daybreak.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause firmly on the mother and over the woollen petticoat immersed in water where they have been boiled:
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it is cured with oil that will enter within two days, which allows for healing as necessary.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the patient is bled in their womb-enlarged state, then you must forbid them from receiving healing as they have received here (in this division).
Capitol .lxxv.	The provided text appears to be instructions or descriptions of medical practices from medieval times written in
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	In the context provided, it seems that there may have been a typographical error or an attempt to use archaic language mixing different linguistic influences (Latinate with elements of Italian/Spanish). Assuming these terms were meant for teaching midwives how births are perceived when they occur in non-natural settings:
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary is that the matron caresses her child'thy figure at meals and when she expresses desire to smell air around her, it leads away moisture from above her head where there is humidity present; be mindful that this part is a second natural figure, its purification occurs on one's own head while the secondary female (possibly referring to another woman or servant) hangs suspended at the belly button.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you lift those legs, make sure the patient's stomach is compressed so that their unborn child won't move whenever they lie on their head; at this time, give them a second pillow and remove any excess by using proper purification methods for cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is not natural and untreatable occur when you are ill at ease upon your feet and the head of yourself comes forward along with its own weight down to your pelvis or chest; there, pressing on one's backbone until it becomes like one’thy body. Such figures look foreign and incomprehensible within oneself.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary, it is for the midwife who must be wise and subtle in all these matters, and guard against errors and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When you show them their entire figure in those things, and with that intention they are represented therein for the doctors' understanding to be clear on what is shown upon it over water.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the joint is hurting on top of their head naturally and it' extricably affects the female part as well, sometimes that very woman also feels weakened and drained due to black pepper poultice and other herbs they possess.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the metronome between your fingers and in that place it enters where moisture is present due to its wetness, or take hold of one for itself so that this fluid remains within it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Precede gently pressing the woman'dict belly so that childbirth can occur.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not done otherwise, then cover the woman with mucciale of silk and fennel (muccella di mais), which will be bandaged on her chest.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the command to him/her (or "to you"), take control of his chest and apply that soothing massage he'thy needs; put your mouth on his nose and lips for an hour until it feels as if they have gone through a thorough examination there.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the greater parts of the belly are opened during consumption (possibly referring to eating or digestion), then you must gently reduce those swolthy areas, little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the patient does not obey internally (likely referring to following medical advice or treatment), then:
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the masses are not turned inwards and fall down, then you must inspect those areas and remove them from undernethy drape or clothing equally distributed among all parts of their body; this is necessary to address it.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of childbirth upon her feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly is above the feet, it follows that you push those upwards and make them small, and warm their stomachs with your hands, gently squeezing each one of them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he is inside the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make that rupture as if God will.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is not enough water that we have given to treat the patient, then return the small fetus gradually within while keeping pace with its second figure of nature; this will help restore balance (or "leugier"), which in turn benefits healing ("eyssiment").
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is forbidden to have all the fluid that we recommend, then take muscle of high and softened gum dissolved in water, beat them thoroughly in the mortar for good percussion, apply lines of this liquid woman (fluid), which comes from below her belly, and pus coming from inside her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Return that part of it into water immersion, so as to obtain relief for the epicondyles (epiphyses).
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts previously detached come together and are subjected to the steam of mint and applied pressure over that area for them:
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you submerge the patient in a bath of cold treatment for an hour, then make them sit on a cushion, and raise their sternum extension while pressing down below it with pressure from there—as soon as they enter that position, if done correctly, they feel relief.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Evaluation of the patient over his/her limbs and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you engage them piece by piece; and have the woman stand on her knees, with their feet resting upon it, and those pieces are held above it; thus complete your task.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here it is translated line by line:
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the belly is not outgrown (i.dict "fet non est foregett"), then take your feet and lift them up vigorously, and press upon their lower abdomen gradually until the belly settles into its proper place.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Return and insert their hands into it little by little, commanding the woman to express herself through that hole which has been created/formed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eye examination is regularly performed with one of its fingers.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When she is reduced in her size, if you cannot perform that reduction yourself, then lift the woman and carry her to where it can be done.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it cannot be moved, place the leg on the bed and forcefully compress the thighs until there is strong convulsion, then administer the ligaments that you have previously recommended using pus (or liniments).
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has occurred, then apply that which soothes the cervix on it and study its reduction of pain; shape the fetus into its second natural figure and make the woman cough to encourage her entrance through the birth canal where she needs to come out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Eye examination of the belly expanded its masses and facies, located on either side of one'dict mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the matron holds the hand of the pregnant woman and slowly turns it over little by little, this makes things easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is time for them to urinate, and they pause on the bladder we have prepared with oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit from fetus prepared over the side (likely referring to a procedure where one prepares for childbirth by positioning themselves on the side)
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When childbirth becomes painful according to this menstruation cycle, then you should insert your finger into the vaginal opening so that it can be expelled of moisture (likely referring to a traditional practice where one might use their fingers inserted in the birth canal during labor).
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is hanging on the face and chest of him/her (patient), then you should incise that part of embryonic material to prevent it from being retained or delayed in motion.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here the treatment instructs to forcefully thrust the fetus into its parts within which pauses have been made, and commands the woman to take some measures on her own, as well as for those who are outside (likely midwives or attendants) assist with delivery if God will.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit from twins or fetuses of many.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twins are rubbed daily, and sometimes three or four times a day, it may be strange and bitter taste occurs inside; perhaps due to natural causes which cannot be cured by life itself.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Given the blend of linguistic elements from Latin and Romance languages such as Italian or French within this medieval medical text, here's an attempt to translate it into English:
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult for them to endure their childbearing and they come upon us with complaints about natural figures that are not of nature (referring possibly to excessive or painful labor), then attend to these pains as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is subtle and softens liquids that make things easy and gentle, as well as delaying time, then her skill in all aspects aligns with what has been prepared for healing by this ingenious engineer.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what formed within the womb and was aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the womb one to three or four times, and I must verify whether a woman has had five abortions, another ten formations, which causes pain due to the measurement of distinguished skilled ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxxvi.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context similar to medical terminology in
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	The phrase "[de extraccio del fet quand il est mort]" translates from Latin-influenced
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead infant and rehydrate with water as we have discussed in medical treatment, but ensure it is not beyond repair due to previously existing accidents which cause loss of function—consider this if the woman'thy health (body) has recovered from these incidents.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When a woman is lying on the bed with her head inclined and legs raised up, it means that she has been positioned in this way for care or treatment purposes.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister takes hold of that limb or the one bound by rope, so that its body does not extend beyond and must be removed (presumably referring to a surgical procedure).
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Return your own moisture (your saliva) into the mouth of the patient who is dry and lacking in mucus, using aloe vera juice, honey, and lentils to provide this moisture.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Here the midwife places her hand on these oils and mucilages, and positions herself with ease in the place where the cuts will remain fixed on the belly.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And where convenient in water (water is conducive): therefore you must consider if your head has been prepared for it, and that you keep your hair tied up here, or on top of your head, or under your chin, or between your lips, or inside your palate, or at the locations proper to the backbones' costal areas, or near their hypochondrium (the area below the ribs), as appropriate.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If it is about the feet of your patient, then either in their knees or between the ribs and backbone they feel pain.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When the tongue is in the middle of its fourth place and bends at that spot where it lies between those on the right side of the body, insert the mouth easily into these places so that they can stay within them until healing occurs (the source).
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place another cushion on him/her if necessary to hold the tongue down and not extend it beyond its natural position just by itself.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	When all is prepared for him, the purgation of his illness shall be as swift as when he feels pain in his teeth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the patient' extrusion has occurred from where it was placed (presumably an implant or some form of medical device inserted into the body), then tighten those sutures there, and thus ensure that the entire fractured part remains outside (or retained in place).
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	May it be an infection from the other side and not possible to reduce that by drawing the patient' extruded bowel inside; therefore place this cauterized matter within where all has come out, either at the site of protrusion or between the thighs.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	When covering is done in both hips and feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or if it's incontinent with water and urine flows between the hard spines and fissure at the top of its body, causing moisture to enter through there, which one uses an instrument called "alundat", whose form will come from those shapes of other instruments used here.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Here is the translation line by line for each source sentence:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is seized and compressed by the shoulder blade (furcula), then it'supremess in moisture that which is within the breastbone shall be expelled/emanated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If there is no complication and you do not vomit during the treatment, then cut through the head as far as your skill allows.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there is a hole in the stomach or if it drops downwards (possibly referring to an intestinal issue), then you must pierce that which contains the moisture within it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If your foot is on the ground (grounded), then this action of yours makes it easier for you to direct yourself towards the mouth of the woman, gently and smoothly.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If you have to squeeze the belly and chest, then take out that drape which covers your hand, so it can enter inside where the fluid flows in those places.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other parts of the body are strained and turn backward, then when it comes to these matters, if the woman's mouth is open (possibly indicating a medical condition related to childbirth), insert her hand into the lower part of her abdomen; secure that area with this or those lancets/needles (two being mentioned here for clarity). Then thrust them through and back in until they are within the woman's mouth, at which point place a unction on it.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted by scab that causes pain in it, then do not tighten further over it; before doing so, administer treatment for its moist fatty cause(s).
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow the patient in waters that moisten and soften.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on her chest, then if possible, make incisions with a sharp instrument: and apply the medicine that we have mentioned for her pregnant belly.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then be cast into pills and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When no cause of secondary origin is found.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all of your treatment, then administer what we discussed for the medication injections applied to joints that swell from the mother'thy condition.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have an outflow of bile that enters into sharp waters and administer another treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And there was seen in the belly of which she had died, and on that point another wound grazed upon, and this is where the other child lay dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Occurred an abscess on my limb for too long time; and there is swelling inside it that pushes out the joints.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And he has been called for treatment and cared for him long ago, but his child is not yet matured or fully formed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And so you press upon it with some heavy compresses applied tightly for several days on and off the bone, applying ointment to one day, another to the next day; too much has astonished when there is not a trace of bone left inside.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider they are of bone from the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So then you clothe the patient with linen and extract their small bones located in the pelvic region, which have been jerking for a long time; this corrects them through such treatment.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you do not force them to be strange, but when they come into water it is through knowledge and help that the doctor provides for their cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of movement by which it is lifted upward:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how they strain the free limbs into which two virtues are in their upper and lower extremities of both feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Indeed this virtue may be subtle as chains or bands, and either fleshly (soft) or made of wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: "It is the length of each staff that ranges two digits and one digit wide at both ends, with a total span of three palms and nine finger-widths; in the place where these staves are already fixed firmly together, their combined lengths amount to three palms and nine fingers.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that they can be used when you turn over these prescribed actions.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other appearances similar to that subtle and delicate one:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is a pain caused by iron or lead according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	When in the limb two additional measures are added twice and these extensions total a hand'se length, and their extent is four fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish to open these jars for the mother, then make her stand on tiptoe over the hanging feet so that water comes between the thighs of him/her.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method by which they directed before:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of pressure by which it pushes the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The given line from the medieval medical treatise in a language that blends Latin with elements of Italian, Spanish and French can be translated into English as follows:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E it is assembled with forceps on the extremity, sometimes taking several times and some interventions may last for as long as using these forceps again at which point they have been inserted and controlled.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of massage few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an arrow has a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of one'thy bone has nails:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps by which his head is held securely in place:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a splint has two ends at which the head detaches:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two shields (This line is not in Latin but seems like a description or title referring possibly to medical instruments
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	When those instruments are exercised and when the spices of that mixture are prepared by the craftsmen, how many laypeople I place on their platform and how many men for quantity?
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	When it is necessary for those instruments not to be used by you, as that necessity cannot be avoided.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the removal of the second one (assuming this refers to a previous reference or step in context). The translation for
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained by you as an infant, then order the sick person who retains it to remove their saliva or phlegm, and apply that cathartic forcefully with your hand on its mouth and nose, and if so done effectively, they will recover.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a fever and pierce through the cover with disruption (implying intervention for abdominal issues), pause in that burning herb which cools the mother's mouth, accompanied by calamint leaves, rue roots, cinnamon bark, and St. John’s Wort. This suggests a traditional remedy to alleviate symptoms when other methods fail (likely referring to soothing an upset stomach or fever).
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave, and pause it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Return breath through the mouth of the woman using a catheter inserted into her mouth and insert that inside where there is congestion in the uterus (note: this sentence seems to mix some modern medical terminology with medieval practices). Here's an attempted translation line by line, taking into account possible language blending as well as historical context for translating such a text:
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	When that particular swelling is brought about as we have described before (and the second one appears suddenly), and its movement occurs quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if Roman approves of this treatment and there'thy is not recovery, then you command the maid to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or millet gruel; also have that immersed enter into his/her belly whereby she holds on it tight with one who was found as a second time. If joined together within the womb of mother (meaning, pregnant woman), then insert therein first wife's hand and hold firmly onto what is held; when that happens, extract said small object piece by piece until removal to prevent strong contractions which could cause labor or childbirth.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Between the right and left sides of the body are made easy by this procedure.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Translation line by line into English:
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother'se mouth is constricted, we have already recommended cupping therapy and medicine derived from water, waves, plants.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not all causes recommended have been addressed, be wary of acting on that in repetition and cycles, but if what is ingested from the mouth enters the hip joint of the woman, anoint it with ointment and take fourfold doses; this will purify those days when they are cleansed and dissipate away any remaining impurity.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	May when the evil humors ascend to the head and stomach, they are led away by fumes under their influence; hence what is administered should be done through vaporous means that suit them.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May those of Antiques be brought under smoke treatment from nuts and dried fruits.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of this tool by which a woman is retained from menstruation and the second childbirth, should be as follows:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Suffering is of bone or clay.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When subtlety is stopped below the chest and expansiveness above the focus (presumably referring to organs), and superficial congestion is halted in the abdomen' extraneous limbs, holding their hands tightly together.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And there enters that tongue inside which has been consumed by underground hummus and repeats itself again.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of caring for an infant' extruded bowel not perforated (meaning that there is a non-ruptured, open section of int
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Regarding the child's anus (bottom), it is not pierced or ruptured; there are subtle and diligent measures in place to care for this condition:
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Now cover the wound that she has made in his side with a linen dressing; and if not, pierce it with an iron pin (or splinter), ensuring that it does not touch her skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place it over that wool and oil, and take care of what is inside so that nothing comes out.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is limp (possibly due to weakness or fatigue), then pause in the treatment room for a few days and observe when the child will want to move again.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And you have constricted the pupil of the patient'thy for suppuration or apendicitis; therefore when that constriction has been secured, and its cure is provided by what we said about healing and lead (a term used to refer to mercury in medieval medicine).
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of healing for those ulcers that come about occasionally.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	When ulcers occur in the lower region of connectivity and larger muscles, which happen from behind or within one body division:
E es una fistula o motas.	It is either an ulcer or discharges (perhaps referring to a draining sinus).
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that old clogging (possibly referring to the accumulated fluid or effusion) is connected and flowing from this inflammation-related fistula, some wounds are formed through these openings of the fistula.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those penetrating objects are so feared because they cause exits and breathlessness; some even employ the diuretic for these matters, and others suffer from them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	From those fistulas occasionally wandering within the space and entering into the bladder, and from those that enter at the junction of the coccyx and the tailbone; these come from there:
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And when the catheter you place in her rectum goes down into a penetrating and non-penetrating part of the fistula, it means that your finger is inside the rectum (and beneath) where not yet touched by either soft or hard instruments within the fistula.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that situation the humors enter under a subtle attempt of lead or horsehair within which you feel the attempted entrance or presence, it indicates an imbalance and potential invasion of these harmful substances into your body. In this context, "turtuositat" refers to some sort of blockage or impediment that is allowing for such a situation where humors can infiltrate more easily due to the lack of normal bodily function.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that thing in total nor proceed with any cause of indigestion or vermes (worms) and windiness, as we have said before, then know it is non-penetrating, and thus guide your treatment accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the urethra, it signifies that its purpose is to extract and remove urine from there so as to ensure that this location becomes part of medicine'dictions.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If there is penetration into the joint space of the thigh or within the bone and causes pain in circulation, then his name here refers that he tries to enter further if not obstruction occurs inside the bone causing more pain; it should be quickly treated with hot poultices; such treatment has no value here, nor is this sealed by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those penetrating wounds there is not a cure at hand, and the work of these physicians on what has been tightened requires labor and fatigue.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May heal as hoped for according to your recommendation, and whatever has already been done will be furthered by iron (likely referring to the use of an iron-based treatment or procedure).
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that person feels heat entering through their colon, immediately insert your tongue into the colon for relief.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a thrust in the belly that has been discovered by self-examination, and if there is also sensation between the belly and either this bladder or flesh, then surely understand that it penetrates; therefore do not attempt to touch where she (the womb) resides.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May God send health into those who are sick in body or soul.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If it enters internally and does not penetrate the area below where you are currently pressing (likely referring to a specific part of the body being examined or treated), between that point and what is hoped for flesh or sinew, there may be an ulcer on the skin surface above the cleft. Dry out the fistula within the region touched by your fingers, doing so at this location where it enters; as a result of drying out here, release through (or extricate from) that point which is trapped inside and heal therefrom fully.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	When you purify those clogged veins which are assembled with the penis of an ass and do not break apart from any cause,
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May it happen that the flow of phlegm comes between you and your body when those stones are inside; then with instruments for pus like cauterizing tools or acute medicine, they adjust good habits: thus congestion is relieved from those stones which have been tightened by excessive humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Return the care for that which is wrapped in borders or has been divided within where it lies under the seat belt, and also take care of the young flesh encased with hardened meat born inside therein; securely fasten them all together again.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	When treatments involving application and execution are applied, once restored, the patient is healed without fear of repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has entered into the belly and it is extended on the surface of the body, then bring its thread herein to investigate within there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you have seen hundreds of attempts and between yourself and her it is impossible not to believe in the permeability, then there will be no operation here but rather a path through trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The translated text is as follows:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases the fistula is closed according to this method: when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it reaches the skin of the anus and at the perineum border, a needle-like suture (prepared by surgeons) is taken out following this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that faithful covering of fields or surroundings them, and attempt to insert the foot within the fistula wherein lies continuation;
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May it penetrate the margin of the anus properly implanted therein; and extract the tip of that obstruction you've inserted into the rectum, remove its extremity, and adjust both ends to their respective examples, each first-time used for this purpose daily or over two days. Whenever possible, insert it back where those carnal parts between your anus extremities are located, ensuring they have descended as far inward after inserting the instrument therein today/tomorrow.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Return care for what is inside that has been made solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then you may attempt to make it so in any way that has been prepared for this purpose, but only if there are no abscesses present; and do so within which space will be healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine is what creates the fistula; its curve causes sharp pain and the other division does not cause it to be necessary, thus there may occasionally need to intervene.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From the seam of hemorrhoids in which blood flows therein.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Excretions from these two kinds are like bread dough and those seem similar as they come from grains; between the anus (or below it) appears something that seems like fat, which likely originates from carbohthypsum.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From those small and large ones that come from these times of day and are one with them, their movements, and their exterior belly part, in the limbs of him/her.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Even if there is little moisture in the air, from which a yellowish or clear water flows constantly and according to its nature'dictate (color), at that moment of time:
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	When the treatment of that which was inserted into her colon is to command the humors in order for them to settle and appear within it, here we go:
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you crouch and hold your nails out to grasp that which will be dipped into your blood with the tool at hand, applying them onto those parts where their pulses are located.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May it not be so tight in those places due to their moisture and softness, then take a rough linen or wool cloth (or bandage), place them there for comfort, remove these clothes with tweezers from the areas of discomfort; dust some ash particles on top as directed during cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Return that wound for healing with this other remedy while they are being cured.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the belly does not refuse to pass through (i.dict "obey"), then crush it with pestles in which small portions have been taken, and wash these parts of water that is present in the colon where digestion occurs when the abdomen expels waste during a bowel movement.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are empty in the buttocks, then their cause is humidity and they seek relief by pressing them with your finger or thumb; apply pressure to those areas where you have inserted these objects for healing purposes until they recover as intended.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for one who avulses flesh according to this method: take firm covering and insert that into the needle's eye, then drive those swolthy parts up onto each of these divisions above it using said needle; wrap around with thread taken from the good material outside the place where the point is inserted in another division thereof. Afterwards tighten the stitch firstly, now fix and remove the needle, working longitudinally—and then perform a fresh suture on that broken flesh.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When it is necessary for all of them (the humors), and not that one among those, to flow away from the sick heart, thus preventing its excessive accumulation therein.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Return your hand over the belly, and place it there too, where covers are roasted or baked in oil or cereal; keep that same hand on his colon to command the humors inside not to rise again.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When you place it inside that box; and when it is healed, take care of those inflamed areas within the container, which have also been treated therein with other remedies as well for their health restoration.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treating hernias (or possibly of dealing with abscesses). The term "f
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Persistent aching occurs due to a crack or because of the nature itself, like woodworking splinters that can cause continuous discomfort as they may penetrate deeper into tissues over time and possibly become infected if not properly addressed. In English:
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 When such wounds are old and unhealthy in traditional medicine, you must address the points on the spine or within your tongue where they become moistened with outflowing pus from below; thus preventing further solidification of these areas. In English: This text discusses an approach to treating chronic wounds that have developed over time and are prone to infection (pus leaking downwards). The treatment involves addressing specific 'points' or lesions, possibly related to spinal issues suggested by the term "spumata" which may be referring metapthyically here. A wet cotton ball is placed within these wounds where pus has exuded ('moisten'), with the purpose of preventing further healing and consolidation (solidification) that could lead to more serious infection or chronic pain conditions, as per traditional medical beliefs outlined at this time. The treatment underscores an early intervention methodology within
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 You must take into account the vigorous outflow of pus from wounds, especially those that are newly formed and scabbed over ('excoriated'). In English: This instruction emphasizes taking immediate care for freshly infected areas where there is active drainage or oozing. The treatment should be applied as soon as possible to control the infection at its earliest stages before it worsens, likely referring back to a traditional healing practice which may involve applying specific medicinal agents directly onto these affected regions
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	From healing with medicinal leeches, it is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that if you tighten (alamor), it is the key/cause, and not to be noticed by looking at the color of one' extrusion part on top of a nail; pain occurs throughout the body but mainly in the lower parts such as joints below knees and areas above them. Thus, for these pains you must use an amulet (anklet).
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when the fluid that is entrapped within the joint has entered its fissures or cavities and is extracted from it (presumably by some form of cautery), take care of it carefully.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then burn (cauterize) the second that preceded in his chest.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers are sharply pointed and round on the surface of the body, and they frequently come to the limbs of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	In caring for him/her (the patient), extend and insert that which is faithful or holds within the box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it as we have said earlier in this discussion and at medical urgency.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And in both directions with this tool that you hold, it is done (the procedure).
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May a small beetle or thickened and ulcerated surface appear on the body's skin here below, when it is crushed there in its appearance resembling the bite of an insect, causing pain all over the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Care for the patient involves using a catheter of penis or screw-shaped penis (presumably referring to an instrument used by medieval physicians), which is strong and rests on the inside where it contains within its circle, with your hand moving around the canula as inserted into their body parts; this also pauses there in the flesh layer of meat. And thus removes the humour from the patient'thy interior entirely.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, use a warm iron or steel rod according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to burn the insect as mentioned in the burning of artery treatment, here it comes:
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	From the instruments that are administered for bleeding control.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is pains of silver or lead or earthenware, and sometimes from these small instruments which are administered to them; the one used in children's healing is small, and those causing swellings or dislocations belong to them (the patients).
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of exorcism is great and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the downpipe in which the bag is tied according to this method; and there it connects with where the bag was previously fastened, connected by that many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	E the part of him put down, which is in his anus and deaf to be a lioness (so it'dict not), with one indentation on its side and another below, where two defects are present, and at each therein lies abundance due to dirtiness; thus:
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is in the bag where their potions from bladders of beasts or wool are paused and its handle is a palm,
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	When disturbed by excessive force, and if the space between them is where its thickness lies, then:
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine forces it out (the humors), take as much as possible; and if you sleep all night on account of it, there is hope for improvement in health during the day.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May you suffocate that which is in the abdominal humors and exhalation of life within their chest, then repeat the use of caustics until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is blood or pus in the anus (morroya or apesta), then let the instruments be delicate and light as lions are for those who decide them.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of diseases or illnesses (The translation approximates the meaning based on a general understanding of medieval medical
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 In the division of diseases and their cures, so that it suited free will, you declare this remedy for those ailments and medical practices according to harmony (The translation approximates the meaning based on understanding medieval texts where Latin-influenced languages are used; "divisio" suggests an organized categorization or treatment of diseases ("plaguas"), with consideration given to individual choice, while discussing specific remedies for these ailments and corresponding medical practices.)
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 So you declare that diseases are varied according to the humors they stem from, and by which location within one's body we target them for treatment (The translation reflects a common medieval medical theory where imbalances of bodily fluids—humors—are thought to cause disease. The text indicates an understanding that different illnesses have their roots in varying types or locations associated with these humoral excesses, and therefore
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which diseases occur are due to leeches (medicinal or applied externally), pricking with thorns or splinters, blowing upon them, by sword or axe wielded in treatment actions—methods reminiscing those used against their sources. The passage indicates a range of external interventions believed necessary for addressing the root causes leading to diseases according to medieval medical practice; these methods include leech therapy (suckling at blood, which was thought to balance humors), using sharp objects like thorns or splinters directly on affected areas possibly as an attempt to draw out pus or other debris believed causing the illness. It's a reflection of how treatments were
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the diseases present in body cavities are addressed with maggots that reside on top of one's head (or skull), or neck, back, chest, belly, and limbs—corresponding to where these infectious entities inhabit. Herein lies a reference common during medieval times when leeches were often used internally for their perceived ability to draw out humoral imbalances believed responsible for diseases by suckling or draining the blood from affected areas, including cavities within various body parts mentioned in this context (head/skull, neck, back, chest,
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And for some diseases, it is recommended a cure that rests and rules over the other illnesses.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When you consume foods that are simple in nature, the recall of complex diseases will come to the third part of the stomach for digestion.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore say that when you experience a simple headache without fracture and there is considerable swelling along with pain on the affected side due to an abscess being drained, then: if it's for stone removal or mimicking disease symptoms, immediately press down upon the occiput as much as possible (and does not delay), extract from this portion according to its quantity only if there is no prohibiting cause of cauterization; most especially when such swelling indicates a simple abscess.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	When there is a procedure involving the contrary of the affected partition, and you must protect the abdomen from overeating meat and drinks that are heavy in nature.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If from careful examination you find no cause at all, then reduce intake of food and avoid meat or drink entirely.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When pressure is applied over mud or in the water where it gets stuck, if you heat an abscess with caustic for treatment:
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	May it be certain that the poultice is effective if you place it on the ground recently applied (which means freshly moistened), and as long as neither soil nor air has dried out what was recommended for small treatment purposes.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed and become cold, then rest with warm ointments inside until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the child is large or due to insufficient space and appearance, and their lips are not properly adjusted with puppets as recommended by them for surgery, then do so accordingly (adjust their lips like they suggest for surgery).
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May it be discovered that the child already has bone and pen exposed, but not restrained by you with anything more than a small suspensor; hence insist on attending to this matter immediately so as to restore flesh in its proper place of thighs, commanding malady (body fluids) composed of pills/roots that swell or grow: acorn and beechnuts similar to them for their appearance.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If decay is present in the spine and does not adhere to the bone, then you cut off all this putrefied substance from it, and take care of that which has been removed with water (presumably for cleaning or flushing out).
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases an artery or vein from which blood may flow is not separated by medicine, then ask about the artery, and if you have cut that which has not been severed, cut it with a sponge or ligature; and if necessary to provoke what we have said does not cause discomfort, then perform cauterization where the blood vessel was cut.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is humidity; so that you powder over them with this dust until the air dries those out.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The translation of the source sentence is as follows:
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one performs alone cautioning without being in your presence and with sanction of dragon'se blood,
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in this operation concerning the great humors when they are paused upon those and have been recently cleansed by their sanction, where these humors have not changed since yesterday.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air is altered, and especially in summer, you do not understand where this powder should be placed, then take heed of what we have said before: rest thereon these more refined ointments that we mentioned, or let it dry on bread made from flour mixed with water and honey; and pay attention to those ingredients while they are being cured.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you have a bone fracture in the body, then it is small and requires extraction through movement.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When directing the treatment for skull fractures in this fluid that is causing harm,
De las plaguas del col.	From the humors of the colon (referring to an imbalance or condition affecting one
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	When the feces are acidic in the colon, there is not much difference in treatment; and when it concerns the bowel of a child, things tend to be simpler (implying that treating constipation with an alkalinizing agent might differ for adults). This suggests medieval medical understanding acknowledged variations in conditions based on age but did not necessarily imply complex or distinct treatments beyond
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the colon's nerves or arteries are involved (indicating possible nervous system involvement), it is not merely about using water to produce strong constipation, but rather avoiding this remedy as if doing so could harm those same vessels; and use caution like handling glassware near eyes—avoid these substances completely from their nerves and take measures (likely precautions or protective actions) that they are not mercury-like in nature, which is often used medicinally but can be toxic. Here the text warns against certain remedies for constipation when there's a possibility of damage due to involvement with nerves and arteries (considering their delicate role).
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No causes any external source of madness for none reason; the substance within nerves is itself feverish and continuous flow therein reaches the brain, which then applies to all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If water is needed for the treatment of simple medicines, take some warm or cold water and apply it to the skin along with poultices made from herbs (or without them), while heat when washed in hot water together with other stones rubbed according to this methodology, and ointment moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the child is large, then apply stitching or press their lips together, and take care that it be healed within therein (inside).
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth or softening in the lower parts of the body mass removed by scraping (which could indicate an abscess), then through that location pierce it with a needle for drainage.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the soil there is an inserted artery and a flow of blood has been obtained from it, then separate or dry out that one if necessary; otherwise, perform cautery on it to induce diuresis (fluid expulsion).
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have already immobilized the vertebrae of the collarbone or all, and thus saved the veins in the neck, then adjust your lips on the spinal column's bone with sutures without touching it; afterwards return that area to its natural shape, tighten that part for proper alignment according to bodily structure, leave them like this for a few days until healing. Moreover take care of him so swelling and excitement do not enter where the immobilization is placed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the child also experiences pain in their bones, then I will strike that area; and if there are pieces of bone fragments present, remove all those you can from them; but if it is not possible for me to enter inside, let the piece lodged within allow its escape, so that removal (of the foreign body) may occur.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the child is freshly born then grind over that dust which has been recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	May it be that if there is an opening or fistula in the patient'dict (implied by "plagna"), then treat it with water from which memory will recall, at their head (the implication being towards where they sit).
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From illnesses of the chest or similar when it falls between the shoulders and is felt in the space between them, at the shoulder joints, or on the collarbone or clavicle, or near any prominent bone like ribs or breastbones (the semblance).
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or couchstitch (indicating some form of physical intervention), and at times you assess the depth, consider perhaps that the flatulence from within increases when the belly swells; know then that intestinal gas can be life-thseeking.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is not depth and the putrefied matter has recently come to his sanctum (body), then you pause in that first hour of morning oil anointing, without stretching so as not for him to retain anything deep within his body cavity and return it to his heart, perhaps pausing with oiled liniment on limbs where stagnant matter has gathered over the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your disposal, then rest in the water puddle where you may drink what comes from the humidities; and make sure that gout sleeps on top of the mud so that flows into it which already exists within him/her.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May it be that if from the patient three days or more have passed without aggrafalteness of the malady, nor spasm in the spleen nor trembling of the heart and constriction of breathing passages; then use the other beneficial means available to you. Then take care for this person's cure (and) as soon as they are healed from whatever ailment it is that has been provided treatment for, attend also to their recovery process with these remedies and actions so ensured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of him/her is delayed and there has been an opening for a while now, then you should know that already it'thy become abscessed—take care of this by your own means (or with medication prescribed).
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the pain is caused by a fissure in space or wound and it'supersimplon on the surface of the skin or back, treat that with water which has preceded stitching (if large), or powder if small:
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there is pain before the bone and your stones are already opened (i.thyroid or kidney stones), then use forceps to extract those stones if they have been separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	May it not be separated; hence let them enter that the swarm may be extracted from there with ease allowed by their removal.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other accidents in other body parts, health recovery is achieved through what we have mentioned earlier regarding the fluid (aqua).
De las plaguas del ventre.	From stomach diseases or disturbanse of the belly's passages/pauses
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The condition that causes discomfort in the stomach can be either great or little (numerous), or wandering/moving around. Here "gran" and “pau” refer to large quantity while 'migera' suggests a movement of some sort, possibly
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 From the large quantities of waste that enter (are present) in the stomach and travel upwards into the bowel, causing interference with its walls or nerves; this results in a strong but delicate binding together - possibly referring to inflammation leading to swelling which can affect movement within these structures. Here "y es fayta" (which causes) is linked with an accumulation of waste ("gran alcunas veguadas"), potentially suggesting symptoms related to gastrointestsinal issues like
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 A slight disruption is caused by other's misconduct (referring to poor dietary or health habits), and it becomes difficult for others if not the intestinal contents that have been disturbed enter their place again; consequently, they become overwhelmed ("ure" suggesting excess) with difficulty in removing these elements – likely referring to bloating due to reintroduction of waste which makes its removal challenging. Here "seco es reducio de lor," indicates the struggle or effort required for reduction (removal), and "quar se ubre engrossat per que le intrament" implies a heavy burden caused by internal disorder, potentially referring to bloating as mentioned before in this context of medieval medical understanding. The use of terms like 'mismanagement' ('autra manieyra') combined
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 Therefore, the worst disturbance is wandering (continuous movement or lack of rest), which becomes particularly difficult to address in that case; similarly challenging as it often is within these specific organs mentioned ('les doas spescial'). Here 'migera' and ‘dificil’ reinforce the idea from earlier translations about ongoing issues with waste management affecting both mobility (wanderings) of elements inside, indicating a condition potentially linked to chronic
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Be aware that the belly'mends are divided into four kinds of linings and may need stitches which correspond to those used for other diseases on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other stitches communicate with each other or possibly even among themselves in the abdominal stitch, it may be either mutually between them or within their own seam itself.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	When you recommend that each one of us expose ourselves and declare our conditions.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So when the child is small and has some cause for the hernia (the protrusion of internal organs through an opening in the abdominal wall), it's difficult to reduce that, either because of its diminutive size or due to inflation caused by cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when water is drunk alone or sipping it with a wet cloth soaked in warmwater, and coriander, fennel seeds, and liniments applied to the area within which inflammation occurs, then that swelling should be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And when some measures are taken here where it has been tightened, and water alone is better for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	When the inflammation is resolved, then you wet the intestine in the cavity where it has been elevated and surrounded by vinegar and herbs; thus, watering with a little cause helps to alleviate its condition within the body.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is possible to release the interior from this treatment, then divide the rupture into small parts using an instrument that has been inserted in her groin (emphasis on precise translation).
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary treatment is better when it does not involve cutting and there'thy no need for further drying or removal of excess moisture.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of that tool, its shape is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp blow and the other not acute, and the subtlety that is neither in the slightness of bone, nor curved by this cause narrows a little bit.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the vermin is increased and comes out of the hernia, it is best to reduce its size according to its natural form in its proper place if possible over there, as much better that way.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and it's in the lower abdomen area where you press on their thigh (their groin), hold their cushion under them, place supports below their head so that they sit up; if it's above the stomach region, then support their neck with pillows placed around their back.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And when you administer fluid in large pus and purulent (or infectious) sores,  
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the small pains you have prepared (prepared some remedy or treatment for), place it where your servant is between your most painful parts, holding their hand which encompassees total disruption at its middle and adjusts the lips of him/her accordingly to this suture cause.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here is the translation of each line:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here come the agues to travel between swelling and subtlety, where small needles move within the flesh; large ones are difficult in the spinal canal, hence why they might migrate into both fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And where the needle is inserted into any of the patient'sin body extremities provided for, to ensure that flesh does not separate and dirt doesn't accumulate before its healing process.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And that they are not extended for stitching so that the patient is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Here comes the first source sentence: Place your fingers on the ends of the needles so that you do not allow the malignancy to enter while they sleep, and pause over the widened stitches spread throughout the entire operation site where these finger tips are located; then place them inside once you know that the pus has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	Here these surgical needles are inserted into the small wounds in a careful manner, it is sufficient for their stitching either one of those or an additional thread provided around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	May the second stitch be common: and it is that you gently insert a needle into which has an inlaid silver wire within its shaft, on both of the four limbs' extremities from the coccyx to the upper ends of the legs, using finesse with precision.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the sharpness of that portion from which you are extracting it, to ensure that the wound is sewn up with strong cloth as usual suture material for proper healing and closure.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And there is a pause between each stitch of the thick part of this bandage/bouquet.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitching knows how men should be treated.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: And he has sutured the child who was ill in his belly, which had a large worm inside of one palm and extrusion by two thumbs' distance from the distended bowel; consequently, he reduced that which protruded because it had been stuck out for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And after fourteen days or so have passed, and the treatment has been applied thereafter, care is provided for it, with attention given to motion according to its disposition over time as heals progress.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	Even though these doctors had not been healed themselves; but by miracle of the focus, they did not cure that wax which was in a place where it wasn'thy being touched nor with any medicine at all—perhaps some relief occurred after two days bathing daily in honey water within the focal area.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you present two types of stitches according to what is described in Paragraph.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with needlework on the throat and insert the spit-wiped needle from the forked end into the divided tongue area, it is implied that they are about to perform some sort of medical treatment or procedure using their own saliva as a disinfectant. The sentence suggests an old practice where bodily fluids like saliva
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	So when the needle enters into the throat and down those divided parts of it, as far along both lengths without end, stopping at where you had previously inserted the needle; then make the other tip penetrate from the fissured part to its corresponding extremity on your body. This translation describes a medical practice that involves threading or inserting a sharp object (like a sewing needle) into specific divided sections of one's throat and subsequently proceeding with an analogous process in another area, likely for therapethy purposes related to the areas mentioned. It suggests some form of treatment where bodily fluids such as saliva are used possibly on or near these body parts—potentially reflective of ancient medical techniques that might have included self-treatment methods and use of available resources like spit (as a disinfectant) for cleaning instruments before inserting them into the skin. The language indicates detailed knowledge about human anatomy, as well as proced
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	So once you have performed the insertion of the needle as described previously in this context, then proceed to make another puncture on that limb's fissured area (perhaps referring back now specifically mentioned earlier) with your own tool or instrument; and allow for whatever is outside these divisions—likely a reference once more to parts inside one’s body affected by the condition being treated. The mention of "la extramitat del ciphac" implies an external focus on certain internal areas, while maintaining continuity in treatment methods through repetitive insertions or manipulations as part of this therapeutic practice—possibly aimed at balancing humors within the body according to medieval medical theory. This line further emphasizes a ritualistic and cyclic nature inherent to these ancient remedies, where repeated actions are believed to restore health by addressing imbalances caused by external elements such as "cold" or “humoral” excesses that might be contributing factors in the patient’s symptoms. The translation
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	E begins at this side of the patient's chest and from that, takes hold of the extremity end in the other place (other limb), and thrusts it into that same joint where there is an opening created here on this flank; then removes the needle already inserted in that joint. 
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suture work is that you sew the skin with which hairs grow, ensuring stitching along the part of the extremity of the coda (tailbone), and let it rest until completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Might the second specific type of suture that Gualia speaks and recommends for you to use is what your local medicates as well; applying it ensures all parts are mended properly according to nature, placing another part from yourself on top, followed by its mirror image below. And when needed:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you keep the needle at your chosen part of departure, and make that go into the divided parts herein described, turn over the needle so it enters from two points on each side of this division; thus ensuring penetration back to the departed portion through these same twin extremities.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And turn those bones over, and let the cold humors from within flow back into their respective cavities through either of the limbs' ends that are in opposition to each other on this side (the outside).
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than ordinary sewing and it's the one from which memory returns.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is called "Guaian discourse.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	Even if the patient'thy bowel has been sewn with two needles on their stomach, so that you can insert these into eight places around them where they were previously sewn (within whose bodies), begin to introduce this other thread of yours as quickly as possible.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When there is a disturbance in the intestinal location of the belly, then putting together this part becomes difficult compared to other parts within the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the remedy of medicine for sickness be judgment regarding other illnesses.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	When this cause occurs as soon as you complete the recent flesh before God'dict daily provision is altered and return the intestine (budel) and hernia to their cavity, placing your hand on that skin surface therein; thus preventing it from becoming infected.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the humors within you and causes them to accumulate in that part, whereupon they form hard pus and coat the fields (of blood), becoming consolidated into abscesses; take care of this malaise as with other illnesses until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines at hand, then rest upon that most urgently needed one for now; as it begins to take effect within a day or two with your aid and teaching, by which time healing will occur—you need not seek other medical interventions when afflictions are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin may communicate in injury to the main members of the body, then submerge wool in warm or scalding oil quality, and pause it where between joint angles and limb supports are located; place your hands there as well for additional support.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, it will come and go periodically; if the inflammation reaches its cavity, that black ichor flows out of you quickly, mostly when the inflammation has entered into the cavity itself.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Be aware that what is large from within (the intestine) heals more readily than what lies beneath the small ones (small hernias).
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult for the intestine being called "gout" to receive healing provided by birds in this body; and it is due to the great number of veins present here, as well as their large size within these vessels, and also because of the delicacy of that part' extrinsic to him/her (the patient), along with its proximity to nerve structures.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you are processing from the dirt is fabric (soil), then acquire that fresh and proceed with your action on it as quickly as possible in order to reduce swellings down there manually.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If space has been created and black or dark substance (pus) is already present therein, then you press that faithful part over the area where it is discolored, in order for blood to flow out from those veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the pains when inflamed in the hernia.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When you have disruption in the intestine and it is requested to be restored at home, then this may happen because that which was causing pain in your abdomen due to percussion of a lance and therein resided vermin from the seventh part of the stomach (which are old, infected with worms/fistula), accompanied by agitation and breathing.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And now you administer the treatment for him and it may cease to subtly enter where healing occurs and stability is established in the location.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And experienced ones who when they venture into the intestine are commanded: and you grasp large cauteries; and adjust the patient'dict lips with these great cauldrices, holding them between your teeth, until tightly fixed in place so that it does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Return your pace or pressure here with the first one already placed for its purpose, and do not cease applying another thereafter according to the amount of all the swelling present in the body.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Return the intestine inside its cavity, and rub it there until the wound within the belly is healed, without causing harm to anyone in that area of illness (the humoral imbalance).
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced by something delicate from within the patient's body, placed with a needle; and you grasp its extremity here in your hand, encapsulating it there, covering said point of the intestine with this thread/wool, then insert such into holes made for that purpose on or around this organ (the intestines), thereby reducing disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This cutting method is only a second means of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the patient is large and wide, especially if it's in one of the small intestines, then it cannot be handled directly but requires delicate treatment, and not a complete recovery for all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of care for hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You understand that when a child and lameness occur together as they age, resulting in ulcers which do not heal over time nor detach themselves from the entire armor (the skin), universally there emerges an abscess called pus everywhere, to which we refer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	E fistula according to truth is a tightly woven, hard, white fabric of which there is no pain, and where it constricts as does the pinch of grief; therefore they call that soft rage (gout), namely, this suffering.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In moistened houses where it gets wet and the dampness dissipates within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved here, and it is scanty, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes, and their signs are known by these remedies in the division of medicine.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And when you wish to learn about the treatment of an opening (fistula) caused by surgery, here it is:
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	E understand that fistulas occur in all the members of the body, some of which reach to great veins and arteries, or nerves, spine, bladder, any part on backs, thoracic vertebrae'sfellowbones, or at joint junctions formed by articulation of head and limbs; these fistulas that bring proximity to the main body parts and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	So that these kinds of ulcers from this illness are diseases difficult to cure and do not receive care; they require labor and lack of knowledge about them.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth in the ulcer that does not reach these locations mentioned herein and you expect healing from it, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take iron or barber's tools; if the fistula after correction continues straight, seek her among them.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	May it be that if the fistula is twisted, seek out a subtle lead to which this metal underlies its own body' extrication and curvature of distortion shall occur.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an abscess with horror-inducing pus present, it's not within your power to attempt on top of it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now wash the wound with their ointments; for the moisture used to cleanse that area will also be absorbed by those other medicaments and come from them as well.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood over all these causes and see them clearly fixed in their place, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: for it is that which you consider as fistula close or within joint space, near ligaments, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of those places where they are lodged.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it dries out as directed by your physician'thy methodology, and you remove what is present in that filtration which comes from decayed flesh or meat products such as those found within the body itself, its tissue (the abscess), where these fluids accumulate, will heal.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May if the fistula is of deep length and secondarily healed, then cover it with what you can within your reach as much as possible; clean that part thoroughly from all its corrupt flesh, and apply dressed poultices wrapped in sharp medicines inside this cavity, which you have understood well.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	When some of that which is ruptured enters the cavity of the fistula through decay, at certain intervals while medical treatment persists, then it will be expelled from therein by medicine applied sharply and directly.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore that which is within in wax that produces healthy flesh inside while it heals.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this remedy, then apply a second round of caustic treatment as recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May if the cause of fistula is blood or requires your confirmation, then inquire about that same and dry it as recommended, provided you do not prevent any possible causes related to veins or nerves or main limbs according to what we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If you discover your bones and there is any decay or blackness within, then extract that which contains the rot completely; take care of it with whatever liquid inside the body that can restore its health.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If you are not healthy and heavy sweat occurs as usual, then know that you have not reached the cure for all corruption; hence immediately examine further on yourself with great care to restore balance in body and mind at once, leaving nothing undone afterwards.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed (the patient), eat; but if not, then you should know that this corruption lies deep within the body' extrinsics, and hence take measures to address it therein.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bones are decayed or damaged (les os corromput), it is within your power to extract them; then use small forceps which I have agreed upon for this purpose (ad aquo).
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have an obstruction in the bones, then extract all of them entirely without leaving any cause for your strength'dictorship (doctor).
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If there is any contrary cause of moisture in them, and they have not fear nor mistake within their insight, then you should inspect those ligaments or bones here present, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to set the bones of your hour (hips), then place a cushion under them so that it moistens and softens what is below, ensuring that this keeps its wet state without solidifying into construction material for the body part that has been worked on in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having feared (if afraid), pause over the potion submerged above for three days or in a jar of Egyptian oil, or among other oils they have obtained, when those same ligaments are taken out and their bones become separated from them, at which point these things should be removed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a great bone with the knee or thighbone (os coyssa o camba) of these individuals, and what has been ruined from them it appears on their face so much, then for how long that damage remains visible only as time passes by; after such duration, take care to restore health.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the part of it from which you have been contaminated is great, and decay has already reached the bone marrow, then it becomes necessary to close that area wherein the deterioration has arrived, so as for healing within there may be consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you are recommended that the water should be brought to one'se house, so as to ease and assist with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Once upon a time there was a young man whose state is xxx years old; to him pain occurs in the groin area, and from disintegrated matter that enters into the body through which it has entered, made of dense material itself (a great abscess), not caused externally by external factors.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And now the fever spreads in her because of the errors made by doctors within which pus has accumulated, and its healing focus advances while a fistula (open wound) develops inside it; there are fire-induced objects used by all to drain moisture and heat from her.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after two years of treatment by many doctors and not in the body' extrinsic fluids but within the arts, he was called back.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And here is the cushion of that person and all materials running through it, and already their body was completely swolthy and its hue was lemon-colored.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then insert the thread into one of those orificeal openings and reach through with it until reaching within, wherein to introduce (the thread).
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Return them quickly and examine urgently these instruments for all parts of the change (surgical tool), as they are needed by each section.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And now you have cut and dissected within those places where I exposed one of the bones, having rotten it out and ruined it completely; also corrupted a portion inside which had already entered into the cavity.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Whenever you find water that I have discovered and prepared for bone treatment,
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	When you have ensured that it was not in the bone but rather that decayed condition which had been excised and sealed up, there already has been a reduction of separation (implying healing or recovery).
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	When proper time for restoration of health by conservative medical means has passed and it is not restored (i.dict), the implication suggests that without intervention or a change in treatment strategy, there will be further deterioration of one's condition despite previous efforts to heal using traditional methods over long
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then investigate further upon the secondary layers of the skin after discovering it initially (indicating a deeper examination), and there continues to be deterioration or damage to the bones beneath these outer surfaces over time, suggesting chronicity in their condition that requires additional attention beyond initial assessment.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	Inquire into how the bones have been affected by this deterioration (seeking insight into skeletal involvement), and apply fair healing methods for restoring you to health that are currently being used or proposed; however, these efforts will not restore your condition. This line indicates a need for alternative therapeutic approaches when standard ones fail in treating the underlying issue with bones affected by chronic joint pain caused by conditions like
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And so you discover further details of it within your body incrementally and apply restoration efforts piece by piece (indicating meticulous attention to the repair process), aiming for complete recovery before completing a full rotation around yourself, outside these interventions removing what is believed inside them—the bone marrow. Once extracted as needed, this material finds its way back into medical treatment; it helps consolidate and heal (referring potentially to therapies involving the patient's own materials or biological components). This line suggests a holistic approach where even small restorative actions are taken with precision until full recovery is achieved within one turn around oneself. The phrase may indicate that this careful, iterated process could lead not only to physical healing but also contribute toward spiritual purification (consolidate the leugierament and sanat), which in medieval contexts often intertwined bodily health with moral or ethereal well
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	It is not necessary repetition in the operation of Lu and Lui unless for the disposition of Lu'se humors and their low tolerance to suffering, as Lu will act throughout all hours due to excessive bowel movements caused by malady.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so heals the entire body, and nothing is within hardened flesh; good fortune lies in his disposition on his own limbs, returns the vitality of himself back to them; converses harmoniously with their dispositions without causing disruption during walking or any damage from causes.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If your arm protrudes and you are twisting it according to this method: then take the bandage (ligament) around that limb, tighten it at its extremity on that outstretched arm, command an assistant to extend it further; pull apart a thicker part of the first bandage from the other, place that here over the flesh you want in those parts now detached for cutting.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When a cuddy or table is placed over the body when you make an incision, it's permissible if the saw does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	When the screw is worn down little by little at this location and does not appear in its entirety upon feeling it, then another burr has been used on it previously.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decayed and not prominent, they form one division or another in it; therein is rupture occurs within that which has been divided into parts—and when this happens at once, pause briefly with a sword blade from where first occurred destruction (i.dictio), and cut away all of the remaining flesh throughout these divisions entirely; afterwards, wait some moments before proceeding further, cutting anew what was broken in the initial division while continuously maintaining that which has been repaired so far intact.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if it is necessary for the cautery (point) to be placed according to the location of the decay, as we have mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If decay is present at the joint, cut away that decayed joint itself, and saw off where it connects to the other parts.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If decay is in the continuous flow of joints, it is not for lack but due to a deficiency.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the mouth or chest, it'se difficult; however, if you seek out wherein this decay appears to thee and remove that part which thou canst manage according to any manner at thy disposal, thereupon do so for correction until no contradiction from within (the heart or nerves) occurs.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	E understand which instruments are appropriate for each bone situation according to the state of these things – their size, texture, delicateness and grandeur; fragility and rarity – so that you can prepare suitable tools for this entire operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	When you understand that this operation concerns the specificity of the instrument from which it is performed; when you are great in knowledge and long experience with these instruments, as well as witnesses of their use for illnesses, then you have already mastered what has been necessary to treat them according to the needs of each patient.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And when you are forming in the day of this chapter, prepare with ease those tools which will be used for your treatment process that you will undergo on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw (This line is likely referring to an instrument used in medieval medical
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of other cautery/saw: This prompt seems to be asking for a description or
Forma de autra serra:	Form and shape of the alternate saw (possibly referring to different types of surgical instruments used by
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of other large cautery/saw: Here, it seems you're asking for a description
Forma de ray:	Form or shape of the rake (possibly referring to another type
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head/beak of this rake is shaped like the star-shaped keycap (this might be a reference to an instrument used in medieval surgery or dentistry), and its points are similar to those on tweezers ('astragali'). This line describes how specific shapes were relevant for different medical tools, implying their purpose was tailored according to function.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	Instead of conventional methods, they are meant for grinding or scraping the heads off joints when corrupted (this could refer to removing diseased parts during surgery), and it may also be a broad mouth tool ('mors grande' suggests an instrument with significant opening capacity). This line further elaborates on how medieval practitioners might have utilized tools differently for specific medical tasks.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the other larger rake(s): Here, we are looking at a description or comparison that likely
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of smaller rasors (referring to finer instruments like scalpels used in
Forma de razori lat:	Latin terminology for 'shape' relating to rakes or similar tools, possibly
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The alternate saw's shape is that of a sharp bone held in place by iron (likely referring to an instrument where the cutting edge was made from sharpened animal teeth or naturally occurring materials, and bound with metal for durability). Additionally, its member/hand pieces are fashioned like punches ('membra punxament' could be a specialized tool used alongside such saws), possibly indicating that these were multifunctional tools in medieval surgical practice. This line indicates
Forma de lu:	The form of Lu (assuming "Lu" refers to
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 La forma del rasurador con curvatura se refiere a un borde o mango curvo, que puede hacerlo más cómodo
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Una forma alternativa y sutil para una navaja podría implicar la geometría del filo (
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 La referencia a otra forma de rasurador con curva en las extremidades sugiere un diseño que incluye algún tipo de
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Esta descripción implica una pequeña navaja, quizás delgada y similar al aspecto o forma tentacular (como
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 La frase sugiere que la hoja u objeto en cuestión tiene un diseño dentado, como los dientes encontrados dentro del cráneo (oss), lo cual
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Esto podría referirse a una forma diferente y más pequeña o discontinua que el patrón
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 Esta descripción probablemente se refiere al patrón dentado y discontinuo que imita una representación simbólica rayada (ray), destacándose a través del corte realizado por el instrumento. El "motzo" podría significar espacios o agujeros, donde estos dibujos son evidentes en los huesos cortados durante la operación de rasuramiento. Aquí se presenta una forma no convencional
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 Esta afirma015_enlace este formando un vínculo con el patrón "ray", utilizado como referencia para describir la forma del instrumento usado en las operaciones sobre los huesos, que implica una ac
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 La afirmación indica claramente que el final o punta de este objeto está diseñado en forma triangular con un borde afilado, lo cual sugiere
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and seemingly all causes related to incisions and saws are of this kind.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From joints and bone fractures.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened or due to internal/external causes, or when you treat that corruption with these remedies and the cure does not comfort them, then sometimes the corruption moves from a limb without being touched by any cause; thus enter this body part into water (likely meant as immersion in water for therapedictinal purposes) to make sure the humors escape their natural course of flow outward/toward death or malignity, which is considered worse damage than not having a touching external factor.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the name of that person to whom you have inflicted pain, is because their limb has been deeply cut where the flame consumed it completely or if they are pale due to blood loss within that body part which affects the whole body; therefore, this torments you intimately.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the decay or rupture is in the said limb'dictum', then you shall incise it and not leave spaces for the decay to enter into its cavity.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you reach the point (likely referring to treating or examining an area), then cut that piece of flesh near the fire source'dictor ('focal'), and do not leave space for decay within the flame-heated arm part.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that one enters (enters), then you will insert your arm into the cleft at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another flaw passes and I send the thighs downwards, then in that case it is the death of humors (indicating a severe condition), and administering further treatment according to necessity becomes an act of virtue/care.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When a portion of the foot appears sickly and decays within it itself, then insert that part into one of its bones.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you ascend on the foot, then cut it entirely through the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May your pus enter into the cavity within the abdomen; then you shall make an incision in the cushion within that junction of the abdomen.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If rot (corruption) has already reached the diaphragm, it is not engagement but expulsion of the humors from life, and thus remove melancholy to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	E the act of inserting or sawing the limb is that you tighten the bandage on the part where you intend to insert/saw, and stretch another bandage over the location; extend the minister's bandages to the parts at once, extending another servant'thy bands in their places; separate the meat between two lath splints within which it will be entirely exposed. And tighten or saw inserted/cut herein.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is wrapped around the entire body in such a way that it does not touch the affected area and allows for proper drainage of the adjusted injury or abscess wound, then:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If you wish to drain the flow of phlegm while working on it cauterize, or place some powders that restrict phlegm therein; and return your medicine within which has been completed so far.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return its injured limb to what is natural and take care that it heals within there.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And recommend to you that which comes into the home on your foot, this accident for which I advise you herein; it is darkness coming upon your foot due to cold gathered around there by fire (possibly indicating chill or frostbite).
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When that decay occurs for the first time within your body, take care of the entirety of the limb where it is located.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that home prepares for the patients to go towards their limbs where they feel pain and hardness in them, inserting the finger into the joint, which heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Once there occurred that same doctor's misconduct in this matter of importance.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now I am affected by this excess water that has been retained upon the surface of my body, and I cleanse its humoral composition; there is no further overflow or coming to another part within it.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And now you are asked to insert my hand into it (the cavity), and do not wish to perform any action on its repercussion, for the humoral imbalance was about suppuration or pus formation.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When he is dismounted from me, returns to his land and comes back to me that this man has prepared himself completely in every way, and becomes healthy again.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This sentence can be translated as: "It has not been healed in this accounting only for the purpose of aid concerning what comes from this illness and to serve as a symbol by which it is understood and its treatment carried out.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of treatment of the belly and quality of enema administration with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess is formed within the flesh of the limbs and its space extends until it collects disease, then it is broken through and perforated; thus, we treat the illness herein contained, applying poultices as needed (as dressing), placing a cloth undernethy for absorption purposes. It has not progressed to any further corruption nor penetrated into bones or nerves/tendons—it is addressed with gentle pressure and named without becoming fistula;
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Indeed if spaces are extended within which the decay affects any part of the body, it is then called a fistula and cannot heal on its own.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure for him/her is that when you immerse the entire thigh completely while turning it over and mainly when it becomes like a drape so that it does not stick to its place due to decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the intestine will stick and not have been affected by any previous consequence, look at it in the navel area; then take care of this with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And take from it what is necessary and dissolve in water and honey; administer this enema into its cavity, strengthen with steam therapy using that liquid, and leave the medicine for as many hours of dosage.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Return that which is outside, and let it be expelled for so many days until the curve is purified and modesty regained:
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the malady cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer that same mixture of water and honey three times, mixing in vinegar each time; this allows for cleansing and washing (because of the properties of honey), making it adhere to dryness, primarily when excessive secretion and dryness are present.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have taken some waters and find that the belch has come upwards, then perform an enema on what causes discomfort in him/her now.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And when wax drippings dissolve that oil and honey, or you administer some medicines and ointments they already have properties in their treatment within these substances.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the bowels in which nothing has been received via the catheter inserted therein are dry, then gradually increase that small amount and pause at intervals wrapped in Egyptian oil or waxed linen until it is increased.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	When the suppository is large, then you must insert it into the rectum and leave a quantity in which part of the cleansing material can be added within.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the warmth applied to his body causes his limbs (the braces) to rise above their place in him so that he runs quickly, when his arms are constricted by the curve of the flesh where the meat is generated within him;
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to incise the sinus within the osseous cavity as you wish, then pierce what prepares your limb for the braces of the skeleton so that there is no obstruction in its pathway according to how you dress and ensure nothing prevents this.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And apply long-acting remedies that rest on the suitable curve for drawing out what wishes to exit through the cloth (the linens).
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When someone is above the channel of flow (possibly referring to blood), they are warmed up instantly in such a way that any accumulation present in their chest vessel becomes evaporated or dissipated quickly.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	For that you know if what flows from the bowels is good or little and digests well, or not at all digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you should carefully observe where that sensation occurs in him/her, and if it is an ulcer there, then proceed accordingly:
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical care is prolonged in this manner, and the material that adheres to the entrance of the wound sticks on there (adhesion), then you should apply it or cleanse for three days, and when dressing changes are made, change the cloth and renew lubrication.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If from the sinus you extend spaces for subtle viruses to enter (meaning if there is an infection or illness entering through body cavities), do not despair of him, as healing takes place within those very places where decay generates flesh during feverish times and on which his current affliction lies.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If from the belly it is secreted bile indigested for days, you will know that the belly does not adhere; and if delayed adherence of the belly occurs as its cause (likely due to excessive greasy food), then apply decoctions made with medicinal herbs internally or externally from their substance and humidity. If these remedies are moist, they should be applied in abundance like a drapery when superfluous addition of seed is needed for adjustment.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here come the first source sentences to translate:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, you understand that the corruption lies in its depths, and now investigate bones or hard limbs; already cured tendonous conditions as per instructions given by above persons.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of cure for paronychia (skin around a nail) and torn or cut fingers, insertion and cutting are added.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess wherein the pus of this foot or leg has now also occurred in other places, and as it prolongs its treatment becomes highly valued; if it's a simple purulent inflammation (abscess), then apply cautery for suppuration, but if corrupt (spreading disease) occurs at that spot where the pus flows out under pressure of odor into bedsores and turns blackness to extremity. The color also becomes dark brown here.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have applied that amount of fluid which we mentioned in the division and do not interfasse with your treatment, then apply iron to remove all excess fat from the skin, for this will invigorate healing swiftly.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May the bone be and the ulcer is healed, and its accessories are removed from the parts divided by it, whereupon you begin to lance and drain that part which has been paused under subtle blows of the scalpel on the site of the wound. You then lift this up and inspect it while applying pressure with a salve until all corrosive medicines within have burnt out; afterward paying special care for where the ointment is applied, to ensure its complete healing.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May the corruption be already in the bone beforehand; therefore you must insert it into that place and extract it out because there is never a time when the bone becomes rotten within its location.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the liver and gallbladder are moving within it (the body), then you should incise that part according to what is prescribed for its healing, ensuring that such thing enters into recovery.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May you use percussion or incision on the spleen where there is intense pain as if preparing for bloodletting, and dry out the wound with salt applied to the spine across (or under) the transverse abdominal muscle; thus causing significant discomfort in the organ enlarged by excessive congestion above its natural place within the body. Be sure that this area gives way when wet so you can attend to it, as such will provoke spleen pain and due to misalignment of flesh piled up at this location; herewith provide care for said spot with fluid (water) once discomfort is relieved.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May adjust it herein among the bodies of fleshly men, for its entirety is in muscle and bone as well as in skin; thus they ensure proper alignment according to nature'dictates or observations made through experience (or "experimentum"). Here 'mays', referring likely to an instrument used by doctors at that time such as a cautery tool, adjusts its position within the body where it naturally belongs - primarily among muscles ('carnis'), b
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Here they are in the flesh of our bodies at joints, or perhaps their natural state is within the bones of these very limbs (or "fingers"). In this line, it can be understood that certain body parts like fingers might have a specific location wherein they naturally reside – possibly indicating anatomical positions significant to medical understanding in medieval
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Those which naturally reside within the bones of our fingers do not fall ill here (referring to joint pain), and those that are found at joinings must necessarily suffer from ailment or inflammation ("must undoubtedly experience discomfort"). This line suggests an observation where certain conditions affecting parts like finger bones might cause symptoms, while
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are muscular in nature; the section is light and it requires you to take one into consideration for a central nerve or sciatic (the term here may refer loosely to what we now understand as 'sciatica', involving inflammation along the pathway where spinal cord meets with leg). Here, there's an indication that muscular structures might not
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of those dwelling at the joint's core, care or treatment is difficult (implying that conditions involving inflammation in this area may not be easily managed); therefore keep a watchful eye on it as well. This final line emphasizes vigilance and possibly suggests routine observation to monitor such challenging areas where injuries might occur due to their delicate nature, aligning with the medieval
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May he who is born in this place eat nuts, which you insert into his flesh for inspection inside the mouth and with one of those saws appropriate to it; also take care that what' extrudes therein be cured.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Might strengthening that occurs between their movements or due to birth trauma they experienced in life, or from childbed (postpartum recovery) and combustion of the fire within them, which is why it' extricate such restoration back into what their bodies are naturally.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here's the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	When you feel congestion in the area of your hand on the backside (palm), once it has been prepared and suited to the shape of the body part, then proceed accordingly:
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From ignorance of deficiense (deficiency or lack), they become swollen.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Variations in the veins are present, and these swolthy yellow humors flow within them of each part of the body; they primarily occur in the cushions (bolsters), especially among travelers and workers, and merchants who carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now when you administer the purge of cholera black several times for strong evacuation, and bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Medicine may have two courses of action for this issue: one is that it should be made clear and drawn out the black bile within them; the other course involves raising the vein and extracting it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Here's the line-by-line translation of this medieval medical treatise:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return it here (referring presumably to some substance or treatment), and commands that he refrain from black humors which bring forth illnesses.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Iterate the cauterization for varicose veins when they are swolthy and come upward in the malady.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation be according to this method: if you lift the cushion of the thighs and immerse it in water so that they become pinkish and the veins are swolthy; or if it is exercised with vigorous activity, as long as there's no bath present, until the limb becomes injured.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	When the cushion is placed on the back of the vein at its end or in the long part or tail (the latter being below them), there you must draw it out along a section, or down to the foot base where one should pull it out.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	So when you withdraw from under the necklace that holds its string, it is time for a change or removal of such item. (Here "evazeys" can be interpreted as removing oneself/stepping away and "quais la sua
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Therefore take your tool down from the arm that is raised and held above the necklace where it has been gripped tightly like a lion's claw. (Here "dejos" means to remove carefully, "ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena" refers to an item or tool being lifted up by its arm from undernethyelong
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then take another section of that same piece and apply it here for three days, after which you will scrape the area beneath the vein where blood appears (this could be referring to a treatment involving applying medicinal or healing material over skin lesions). Here "excorja" means scraping gently.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E prop elava aquella et insciadys aquella en deriera seccio tali, e prope elevada aquella entro qtora yssida pera secçia d'andra, pere la quà sberta es sobre quella.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	When you extract that from the part which has been sewn up or any of all parts, until everything is extracted, and at this time insert your fingers in it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you don'thy obedience in extracting and elevating it, then insert an iron needle double-strengthened with thread, pull that out, or alternatively introduce the sharp instrument into its tract and rotate your hand throughout to ensure everything enters as far as possible wherein it is situated.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that entire atmosphere is let out, then pause over the location where wool soaked in vinegar and oil has been immersed, to heal whatever is inside it.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vitals are contracted and have twisted formations around each division of their body parts, which is not what we've previously discussed, then you must cut into that area completely across all forms of contraction and encapsulation within it, placing your hand there to elevate everything contained.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Here comes the line to translate: E guarda te deves la tua seccio that not enters into vein and does not trouble it there; serve your caution in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient in which it is weakened or sickens refers here as follows:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an ointment:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Not accustomed to sitting as the others nor is it an acute extremity that threatens the vein; leon has great flexibility, even if subtle, will insert itself into the vein thanks to its finesse—we have too much bulk in our sits.
De extraccio venae cruris.	De extraction of veins in the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hollows of the thighs, as Al-Ateg did on Arabic land and dry lands with little fertility where neither grass nor plant grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When it is in other parts of the body as well (implying that joint pain or another condition may manifest elsewhere), place cushions on them (referring again to places such as legs, which are
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	When the gestation is of decay, which sees immediately a poison entering through the navel with snakes and worms being born between the belly and flesh (this line describes what seems to be an ominous interpretation where putrefaction inside could lead to serious infection or complication). Here "gestatio" refers likely to pregnancy, while terms like "putrefaccio," which means decaying matter; "codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentiz e vermps et scarides ande verm
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the patient's susceptibility to this event (possibly referring to labor or illness) is in that vein which you heat up violently at its joint with the leg; and here, it gets inflamed ('es vesicat'); then begins the flow from that same swollen vessel as if driven by a plant's thirst for water. Here 'senhal de la suscepcio' indicates symptoms or signs showing vulnerability to an oncoming condition (possibly labor in pregnancy), with inflammation ('es vesicat') at the junction between leg and body, suggesting that there might be a significant change occurring – potentially childbirth. The 'vesicación', referring
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, I wrap that around it – encase of lead where there is weight like that of a dragon (symbolically suggesting using heavy or dense material for bandaging). Inside this enclosure ('ii drac'), you introduce more; and then perchance scent that same slab suspended at the joint. Here, 'adonc cum appar' means "then when it appears," which in context refers to a situation where an armor-like covering is applied for protection (possibly referring to treating or handling labor). The metaphor of introducing and possibly scenting lead within represents perhaps some form of intervention—
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	When so many times there are causes of disease beyond these parts, wrap them up in lead and this will prevent the issue from worsening further.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is prolonged, then you cut a part and wrap the wound; do not insert that which comes out into it while cutting it, otherwise if inserted, contracts inside the flesh causing suppuration (infection) and boil formation in the place affected by decaying matter.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that it may be treated gently and removed gradually from the patient'se body without causing discomfort or pain in their limbs:
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein in men, who are at its full length of the arm and fingers, it has already reached me by which I have touched one out of twenty finger lengths.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is inserted into the hour of his medical care, then insert the sponge into the wound and penetrate that long ulcer on the body part until all fluid present in the matter has been drained out, and administer putrefaction from this place for several days as medicine; and take appropriate care for abscess treatment.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein occasionally has blocked passages, and mainly when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, bringing forth pus from various abscesses; these are its blockages.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore take care of that ache as we have discussed in division and water which has been mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the worms generated under the skin it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in no land outside us without the four moans that wander among beasts and are few as between thighbone and flesh, moving throughout the body and shown to our senses by touch of each limb part where bone breaks and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of him is due to the putrefaction of some humors with worms and snakes, and roundworms and hookworms in his belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When he fears it due to its malice, when he goes on his feet and rises up to the head, then his liver becomes hot inside him and within in there, destroying the liver, so that afterwards he may move with caution.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you intend to heal and remove it (the condition), provided that you use your walking apparatus and the feeling of their limbs is present, then forcefully stretch them tightly over there and dry up what is above as well on where they are attached by ligaments, and once done so extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is struck on the flesh and not covered with a poultice, then place cautery near the location where it resides, and the greater fear arises from this wound which causes its cavity to fill up as we speak of it together.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May if that being has reached the proper depth of the belly tightens above it with great strictness and presses on it; and remove what is therein using medicines to evacuate bad humors, ensuring not from foods generating decay.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From above illness worsens or deteriorates furthermore.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is well-known in our land and it causes pain that appears in the upper body parts, which can be transferred from one part to another (body part).
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you already see that second one who recommends it to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called a sick woman to the village, and discovered her arm had a small inflammation in the vein of the arm; you let it bleed for an hour, possibly applying pressure if she were alive when moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then this pain spreads to that location and settles in the muscle here, stay for one hour at this place.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Return correction in the other limb before reaching for it with the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Recommend that I should rotate my entire body as directed, and it becomes more effective due to the exchange of humors within myself and the movement between limbs.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E yout ja had seeneth there now in our hems as per that manner, but youh sawest blocks of pain which do change from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not there be a fluid within her veins?
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have hard veins conjoined by tying.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to heal the patient and they feel that pain, then it is not apparent at first glance as we have discussed here; rather, stand firmly over them and dry their sweat (which may represent bodily fluid accumulation), and cauterize the area where such effluvia are trapped.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not time the bleeding of the wounds immediately, then treat that part on your body and remove what comes out due to winds (bleeding), as well as those pills filled with decay and seeds for medicine and similars.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extracting joint pains (or possibly 'extracting symptoms' or 'removing ailments
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	The setts are diverse according to the spices and where they dig into our bodies—where there are those with large points and small, concave ones that are dull-sounding (implying hard or less elastic), as well as those shaped like a cone with three angles. There are also some resembling tongues in shape, and others reminiscent of spears—each distinctive based on their formations which can be felt upon extraction within the joint regions where pain is experienced.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here is the line by line translation:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the serpent'dictum enters into you and breaks through bone structure over your skull where it becomes intense due to strong acidic flowing (possibly referring to acute inflammation), causing blindness, dizziness, moaning in throats, tongue spasms with reduced understanding, vomiting of cholera-like quality and liquefaction similar to meat juices; there is also the exodus from wet humidity appearing like frothy fluid at mouth's opening (indicative of pustular rash or eruption), foul odor rising up.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if there appears on your thighs, do not attempt healing or extraction of the stone unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the joints of the shoulder are inflamed in the chest so that they are near the left breastbone and their pain is firmly fixed without cause (not due to cold), and its movement resembles both the movements of the arm and crawling bugs, it shows a combination of swelling at the extremities, redness, trembling hands, fainting; therefore you know that death approaches.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lungs have been struck by damp mist from pests and the vessels of the chest are protruded outwardly, leading to a change in lung color; exhale thick spirit forcefully, demanding fresh air movement.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the swelling is in the skin where it'dict on their body and the pain originates from their small backs, then there will be a great amount of intense pain accompanied by spasms, but not affecting all parts of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is an excess in the stomach, then vomiting of some improperly digested food occurs.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stone is in the belly and fixed therein, a hole of some kind has been made by it—whether through dirt or cloth (the substance that was broken), with no hope for its extraction from within.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the bladder is swollen and there's an effluvium of urine, with any cause present in its parts removed, then pain occurs on the lower abdomen; these are signs that it may be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members be like skin, chest, and shoulder blade, shoulders and arms, thoracic vertebrae of both sides, neck bone, hip joint, kneecap, thighs, cushions for their legs, resembling limbs' parts are saved according to major principles when the lancet does not harm veins or arteries nor is it venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend water that has been seen from these texts for the purpose of curative treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in one'thy home there lies an eye sac within the nasal cavity of him/her here, and I extract it from another part, with haste using the auricular herb leaves, and heals without harm to his/her nose environs.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extracted from a Jew the object that was in his belly, gently touched with just one finger at a time; it was hidden and not obtained except by touching a small part of which clings to his sword handle—a great beak-like spike belonging to Turkish swords without any pommel.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And now, O Senate, it does not happen in his own hall or on its floor that an unfortunate incident occurs.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extracted from another home in Carcassonne where it had been thrown away, and was an Arabic remedy, which I have already taken; moreover, now submerged in the poultice of my body here at this time; therefore, carefully applied to that area between these two thighs (which are guiding), having extracted another one from there as well, and removed it out completely, thus healing the patient Carcassonne.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extracted another stone from a man who was lodged in his belly; he considered that it caused death for him, and so I kept the orifice open for XXX days without any change of cause related to their arrangements affecting them, focused on the stone and engineered treatment thereof, and thus they recovered, not falling ill through an accident at this place.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And in the house where they catch a worm on his/her two legs and secure it there, placing fire above for several hours until the worm is extracted from the coccyx area.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	Here comes another man who has been bitten on his face and solidified there is the swarm that pierces without causing pain here or seeming strange to these people.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extract the semen of the king'thy body that was sought in my nose place and had already descended into the seventh stage by a little one, and it was entirely concealed therein.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And it has been called for its treatment with cautioning, and after three days is when this procedure should be applied.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And now you rest the medicine' extraneous and corrosive for a few days until it has burgeoned (grown or become active), then attempt to apply that same substance onto the tip of your instrument, which attaches firmly to the stick.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here the translation line by line would be:
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but they restore it and solidify the young one (infant), healing the ulcer completely so that nothing remains in him for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The skilled craftsman compares few over water, and where there is present what was absent; atrocious operation and new instruments must be used for removing external causes when sickness sets in.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so it is said that splints are not inserted into the parts where they are fixed, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they intersect or through opposition from the other divided part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And those who enter through that place or crawl in fleshly parts and are thrown out:
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not heed the medicine at the time it is to be taken, then leave it for a few days until the meat in your body returns from where it has gone out, and adjust its entrance (or reintroduction) accordingly.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Here comes the translation:
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not observe your treatment for more than three days, then when you penetrate the circuit of the saddle in that bone from all parts taken out, and extract it therefrom, its area will be greatly amplified by the use of the saddle, and remove it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the stone is lodged in the skull and has proceeded into one of the chambthy's cavities, appearing now as those accidents which you have described to me; abstain from attempting its removal and leave it there until tomorrow comes—if the stone pervades within the cranium (the head), rest assured that death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the stone is not fixed in the bone and does not penetrate into the cistern, and it moves within a few days without being caused by any of those accidents, then your engineering (or skill) lies in the setting of the stone and at that location.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is not possible to make an incision and you do not obey me in the extraction process, then apply tweezers throughout the healing circuit of the wound as we have recommended here, taking care that the area inside remains clean.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the seed is also affected in the region of the body and by sentiment/emotion, then you should seek out this troubled soul; if you feel it therein, draw back such troubling spirit towards itself where its needs are met for your well-bedict.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot lift him due to the contraction of labor and prolonged standing, for there are neither nerves nor veins here, then place him on the bed where it can be intensified and extraction made possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you find your veins swollen and if there is pain throughout the entire part where blood flows, then use an intelligent approach to heal; for if you cannot remove yourself from this obstruction in the vein or within those parts which are congested due to illness.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any location where it has formed, then use your hand strength and forceps to remove all parts containing that abscess; with great care so as not to break the pus lump or make its removal difficult for yourself and from this procedure.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot touch that of your time, then lie down for several days until the parts in its circulation are healed, and repeat this action each time you feel unwell.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May it be that you encounter opposition in your body' extraneous fluid flow, and then provide the remedy we have discussed for its cure herein within this chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Here is the line-by extralinguistic translation:
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And when you contract the swelling to make it conform to its shape for which the focus of attention should be directed in this way, as it may also provide relief.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If it is not in your power, then apply what you can for these figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the spatulas that are removed by the contrary of another division, or which have already proceeded with some removal from outside divisions, cause prolapse in the extravagination of said tool due to feeling above its designated area and sometimes even this action; hence you press on it therein. Depending upon the amount they grip with forceps, then draw out that thing if lightly soiled (i.e., not heavily infected or filled with pus).
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then twist as required until the pulse enters before entering into the bone and increases its extent; do so accordingly for your patients' sake.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, let her lie there for several days and repeat that action while she is on fire (i.dict).
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is from the sac or that which belongs therein, then you will move it along with her (the patient).
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the staff has been struck and you wish to administer an injection, then insert it there if it is hardened; otherwise apply warmth so that it enters into the hollow of its body in the area of the saddle seat and push it down with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the bed is concave, then you push that strong instrument into it whereby the bed becomes elevated by that very same one.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the humidifier is exhausted, then you must concave all of the flesh where it really lies, if it's at your capability to do so, and apply that which fits appropriately therein when needed.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the pain is in the chest, or abdomen, or bladder, and it's pressing where you touch her so that she feels it when you do (and thus indicates a possible urgent situation), then quickly relieve pressure on that area—hold your hand there without causing harm to veins or nerves. Remove whatever is inside if the patient desires digestion of said contents, and treat this issue until healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of these instruments with which fingers are drawn is as follows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs, like saws when they take hold of the leather for that they do not let them go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those are special movements: large, small and intermediate ones, according to the magnitude of the joints and their weaknesses, as well as the size of the limbs and contraction forces within them.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the pushing effort from this limb with pain as if it were hanging down in there is to push against that hardness inside her uterus, and exert pressure on that dullness.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of driving out sound limb affliction:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	aychim quod ex parte illius in cavitate sedis adflectetur, et acceleratur propter hunc motum.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of which are customarily catheterized, where these arteries that supply the hands are located in section six, and it is to these vessels that blood flows into the fingertips; herein lie herbs found within both temples' apparent structures; as well as venous channels present at two tear points of two humors referred to as aspicientz (which could mean "looked upon with respect" or a term for clear, transparent fluids); and the vein prepared in this region is hereby described along with other vessels: those within the collarbone; from beneath the lower lip; underneath both lips; which are called algelic venous channels (potentially referring to "cool-touch" or a term for cold blood flow due to lack of heating); and veins associated with the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that have been cauterized in the arms be: one cephalic and must be treated with wild garlic; this is called "the vein of all parts," whereof the domesticated variety used for treatment at home is named “cillary,” which doctors also refer to as “vein of the abdomen.” The arm's brachial artery, cauterized over the flame and visible through apparent manifestation; here lies that vein. Moreover, this limb contains two branches: one between what is called "the small pulmonary" (auricular part) and little bladder ("poutz petit"), which are in it located within lung-shaped structures known as “veins.”
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins: one of those is where the curvature of the popliteal vein from wild bears (latrone) is located; another is saphenous, which occupies the region of the knee joint from domestic bear; sciatic vein also locates in this area. In addition to these there are other similar veins around them.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of the veins connected to the arteries is ancient and migratory, causing old wounds and ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for what I recommend that you do with your head (the patient's head), it should be stretched atop where blood flows freely in broad draperies; secure its neck with a bandage so that veins and other spots appear there, offering two locations of pressure on the top part. Look to see if these areas cause discomfort when you touch them with your tongue (and feel those same areas with your tongue), here is where secretions may emerge for examination; examine it well then decide what treatment should be applied as per my guidance.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the sharp cautery in hand and that is what you insert, also take it to introduce slowly into the vein inside where the bladder empties its contents into the mouth.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	When you raise your hand above the vein and vertebra, trace along the inside of the vessel going upwards, this is done to inspect its course further into the body.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the intestine is equivalent to two fingers adjusted or enclosed by fluid, and it expands as desired:
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength at the joints and let that within which is healed rest therein.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the initial stage of treatment within this book, they have addressed those humors and carried out their purification or cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Movement of the arteries and veins in patients after cauterization is an ancient evil done badly, with excessive fluid discharges from wounds at once.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And according to what you are recommended: tighten the sinews of your thigh within which blood vessels appear as sensations and it is demonstrated through palpation by your hand, then attempt this method.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Raise your chin over the vein below it, as indicated by you here, and insert the cauterizing needle gently into that; examine other varicose veins there too, if present in these legs, and make them flow according to what is necessary from you.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return the abdomen of the malady to its position, and rest your hands on it for an hour; pause over that spot where there is a cough or wheezing so severe that breath becomes difficult due to constriction by tight muscles in this area until healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And when they are already remembered by them and of that one, the attachment takes place in the free area.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the bleeding of phlebotomy from the jugular vein is applied to the venous bleeding in ancient facial illnesses and migracing, groaning, and putrid sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the surgical incision recommended to you is such that it tightens the patient'supinator muscle with one bandage appearing within, and applies beforehand the instrument made from which this form belongs.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the emerging point at which it reaches the surface of that vein, and strike upon it as you tilt or for another reason in its throbbing (the painful sensation), according to the extent you wish; tighten then the perforated hernia within until healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the strength of both veins that run through the eyes' vessels come from humors within the body due to tears and coughing in the mouths, affecting facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the cauterization is that phlegm hardens on its own at one end and you hold it with your head (presumably indicating readiness or positioning).
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	When the sanction runs as needed to you and rests upon those spots, strengthening them for another day, and lifting up those places:
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bloodletting of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent coughs, as well as illnesses affecting the face and neck area that worsen upon aging; these are mainly manifested on the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of his blepharoplasty is that it tightens his chest and places you under your left arm so far as to hold up the scalpel where in the nostril'dictum vein does not appear here, nor blood flow begins therefrom.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you finish your touch on my little finger and make it run down the second joint according to your need; place that one in a nook, whereby it is restored healthily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of the cauterization for wounds guide contraction and resolution of leprosy, as well as treatment of diseases and poisonous sores with acid exacgyce together when they burst forth like a phantom monster.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	E the quality of that patient'thy cauterization is such that humidity tightens its course along the spleen in their colon; and it remains with the artificer on top of his/her abdomen, while the humidity settles upon a vessel.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply pressure on the long vein gradually, and extract as much or as needed when it is necessary for you to go there; do so in appearance like another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Return the ligament and strengthen the veins to prevent arterial narrowing from becoming focused on that area whereafter it is believed healing begins within the womb of mother nature (the body).
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The lancet for cutting the veins alleviates small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of gums and bad sores that are on the nose and around the body,
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	E for the quality of that which is done to those joints by them hereafter, and harden their collarbone with a bandage, and turn over their lips, looking at one vein on each side of the lip (left or right), whereof one belongs to these very ones mentioned above; and this demonstration for any one among both sides through negligence - now it may be in those small black venous vessels there – hence you proceed by inspection.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	May you doubt at any time, and if unsure which one it is among them, then consider the larger of those presentations as your concern, and also pay attention to what appears on that surface; this knowledge will guide you in understanding their condition better.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears as if veins are present in the upper lip area.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Often it is customary for them to insert needles into the veins that are in their lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the veins that come from behind the tongue be properly prepared for trepanation of the cranial to prevent conditions in the throat and mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for removing those humors that follow within your thighs from now on under the sun, lift up the tongue of yours and observe it briefly; look at one vein below its center and another above its center, noticing any decline in color towards black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And when bloodletting is needed (and thus), be mindful that you do not bleed too much from the area where they are drawing out those veins; soon afterward, those very same vessels will become reopened again.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here come the veins in the groin where blood usually circulates for all men, and their puncturing is performed according to two methods; either insert a berry or an olive with delicate downward manipulation; or use a lancet and call upon tendernthy fluid if necessary, this is how it's done:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this determines the number of species and subtle ones, according to the extent of veins and their narrowness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of foot mortarium:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	If the veins inside are filled with blood thickly appearing as large vessels, and they contain substantial grain-like substances within them, it is decided to open these convoluted (or tortuous) venous channels repeatedly, in order for their contents to be released or drained.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs an olive operation:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This lancet is of smaller length and subtle touch, and it is suitable for lancing delicate veins that contain thin sancti blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of phlebotomy from the basilic vein (which is one of three veins), where sickness comes down and goes up into the groin and belly area, be sought after by this treatment.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When the bleeder arrives, when that specific cutting is performed by them (bleeding), they must keep it there and maintain fear in order to prevent unnecessary blood flow beyond the point where the cut was made; every now and then a vessel opens up during this process, if an error occurs at the puncture site of the bleeder, insert that opening vein back into place so you don'thy accidentally stab them with your needle again alongside their nervous system.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear for obvious manifestation, then you should keep what you laid and change to another, or if any bone is broken in that part of your arm where it becomes apparent; apply pressure there with cautery at that point as we have discussed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the fingerlopping of your patient's arm, then apply force where you touch the location within which we discussed with our hands today; and secure the arm so that its vein is sealed by the lobectomy instrument used this afternoon as if together we are performing it now. Also ensure your hand resting on their thumb (tena); position the arm properly, drying off any remaining blood from the concave section of the fingerlopping tool; and be mindful that percussion is carried out in certain spaces around the artery location within this area today.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you tighten the bandage that you have bound around it at this time, its inflammation occurs here where you've applied pressure, and therefore causes swelling of the artery; thus causing more swelling.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see the sign of flow during surgery with mercury from a child, then realize that it is blood; and your hand lies over that for long spaces; place your hand therein, and if the blood has already detached itself, gently move your arm and hold onto what remains.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard the patient'dict muscle of their mind and its fears above that which they are allowed for days until healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May not the sanction be torn away, and if you are required to bring medicine for it now, then incis with a knife when present; as the extremity of him is contracted, he loses his sank (sinecure or position); grasp that which fights back fiercely, apply this treatment swiftly at the site where the vein has become rigid due to pressure and fluid accumulation within it.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction has separated (split), then this is illness of water that came before; otherwise, remember where the dust particles have fallen from the separation of the sanction for treatment purposes.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The translation of this medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the puncturing of the dark vein facilitately lift up the limb from above the lowered part at the back and below the joint; for this is composed of branches of basilisk and calf, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then make the vein as long.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The puncture of the jugular vein' extricates the headache and relieves humoral diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Here it is in English:
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Even so, you must perform the operation that keeps your cautery from piercing the head of the patient too much; secure the place where it is applied and ensure not to touch it unless there has been an initial strike over that area which indicates further action may be needed at this first session.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Mayhaps if an incision is made on the abdomen when it's dry and hard, one might not notice that cut later on.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May be due to that state of his puncturing and the accidents in them wherein you must think for correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first source sentence to translate: The one from whom you know that bloodletting is not performed but for the conservation of health and hope, as well as caution against diseases; it should be done in one of the veins located in the groin (cephalica, femoral, and basilica); during breakfast on Monday or Tuesday morning, after meals, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When a flesh incision is performed or if it occurs within three hours after passing the day'thy,
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May cauterization be administered when it is convenient or necessary either in the morning or at night; may this take place anytime and all day long.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Even if a woman has not undergthyoplasty for more than twelve years, and it is only after the seventh month of pregnancy that she should be subjected to such an operation, women who have already endured this procedure for sixty years may safely proceed.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to perform a clyster for any reason and keep the vessels from being forced out during their insertion into the bowels (which are inflamed), so that these discharged fluids do not enter the body cavities of the pills, which are purulent, and thus avoid entering the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E they are not suffering from diarrhea or coughing due to illness within them nor because of impure water intake and may experience colic pain in the abdomen, vomiting, issues with their stomach and bowels as well as all causes that dissolve their vitality either bodily28 (human body) or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider carefully in the subtlety of humors coming from what is thick and meats/beverages consumed, as well as if it'thy body allows moisture to flow back into that place:
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Whenever there is any cause that does not prevent bathing or exercise for the sake of health to make it more subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the cauterization of him in his chest is paused, it becomes time for a third hour as we have said before.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And if you take care of the patient's chest today with all their anxiety, anger, fear, and bodily accidents such as cramps and hernias, here they come:
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his own treatment be it that the causes are presented as follows, according to what customs men have for their fragrance and scent, following after possibility quantity.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the lancet on a spot that is pushed or where it should have been punctured (the patient's vein).
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	When you lift your arm and rub it with the liniment given by the bloodletting practitioner for three times, and tighten the ligament of the waistband while working that way for several turns;
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	Either the early constriction that is not caused by impaction of stones in the gallbladthy (when there are no such obstacles), or a superfluous stricture itself, we forbid their passage; otherwise, they will be milked out through the sanguine channels.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, because it is necessary for the surgeon who performs bleeding (bloodletting) be ready and active in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	E reposition the patient' extricating their vein if inflamed in a cramp, and otherwise alternate another venous constriction of that location intermittently until discomfort subsides or numbness sets in as an indicator for cessation of movement.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is excavated or hernia protrudes, let it be for a day or two without straining the ligament, but rather apply firm pressure to treat the hernia before bathing.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	When surgery of the fistula is necessary (if needed), then perform its operation/closure herein described.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and done subtly, and you fear that it may expand beyond your control, then perform cauterization in that irregular part of the rectum again tonight before any swelling occurs at a few spots opened there for treatment; these are homes to pus where things must be attended quickly.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	May you see that which has already been punctured and do not move it further over him/her, for there is no excuse due to any cause; pause above some division of the hole in his/her body, as this helps relieve the pain from their limb.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place where there are also other fats (or substances similar).
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If in the location of the incision there arises a great suppuration (infection), which worsens daily and mostly affects that part not currently bleeding but rather seeping with blood, or at the site where small veins are exposed; if you have your cautery, then apply it to this spot covered by a moist sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scraped over. Keep there for an hour until dissolved (the pus is resolved).
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up that which is drained from that vein of said patient or another, it complements the fluid returned to their body'dictions (or circulation).
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is darkness or green discoloration in the location for a few days, do not worry; and if you wish to pause it over any cause of inflammation or dissolution caused by myrrh, honey from bees' nests, or resemblance (possibly referring to other substances),
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically extracts adhesions and elevated points of cauterization from below the pubis (basilica).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so you place your hand over that, and if it is necessary to apply pressure on that, then only a soft compress must be applied there; for when this elevation becomes bad and evil, as we have discussed before, strong blood flow comes from the artery of life itself.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When placed in water for setting the point, it hardens, and care is taken so that other treatments can be performed within while healing occurs therein.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	When you remove from the sanctum as much of the body'thy quantity and according to its vitality, then what is removed will appear again in the same amount at the sanctum:
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black (indicating a problematic condition), then you must insert and observe when it becomes rigid or thickened like clay; similarly, if gout appears, ensure that its sharpness does not become apparent.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for that person who is weak and has needed extraction of pus in a day (an abscess), the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased, as well as bloodletting by lancing.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	When someone is feverish, their opposites are also present and it may cause them to become restless.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best that is administered through a venectomy (which implies removing or operating on the vein) should not be an artery incision; it's preferable to avoid cutting into the main trunk of the blood vessel rather than its branches.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This incision for cauterization is saved from bleeding and nerve injury, and it has been placed safely according to tradition and duration.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is inflammation of the complexion, then apply poultices infused in myrrh or spiced honey applied with pepper, cinnamim, ginger, and similitude (perhaps meaning similar plants), or an aromatic and fragrant ointment.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you experience sudden fainting spells due to the evil breath of motionless souls, and it is caused by an inner fire that exhales into water vapors while strongly smelling aromatic substances; then use fragrance from any herb, apply its juice on your chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When it is necessary for these other causes mentioned in Part III of stoppage due to defecation, use them accordingly as directed at the head of constipation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wishes to remove their arm and dissolve their blood according to the course of time will use it from where cauterization occurs; its function is evacuation, which removes small amounts of blood gradually as per the quantity present in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May those who intend to affect their arms and shoulder bones must have strong hands; otherwise apply pressure for up to seven or nine hours after the first surgery on these body parts.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May who wishes to draw blood from the body' extraneous part contrary where it bends away may expect that such an act occurs on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that part of the body where it has been cut and felt tender be heated up quickly enough to cause fever; because if such a wound becomes gangrenous within, with large amounts being produced rapidly and amplified (leading), you will have maintained all conditions necessary for bleeding cauterization. Place your hand over his pulse points on the body of that cut area so as not to die from syncope while lacking care or neglectfulness by the one performing surgery when it occurs again during recovery periods after wounds heal.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you intend to unclasp the arm and evacuate stool according to schedule, when its claw is already moistened by blood flow, and hard feces from the colon are present which force your push under that urgency, it is too much for health.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	1. Habentur locum foci interni; aut remanet fluxus coagulatus in caliditate venae sanctae, aut reposat super ejus fauces tyriaca alfarachia, sive saginae, et comprimit eius leucas exitio.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is thrombosed (blood clotted), do not touch it there so that the clot does not become agitated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to expel the bowels subsequently, and that is not an exemption, then cause a movement of those in that region or in another vein as well.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	E the vein referred to as "vein of the arm" is punctured in the dark or base place, when not anesthetized or operated upon, it consists of those things.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bleeding performed on him is that the humour enters his body via the tail end into which the fire intensifies and veins become apparent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Return its strength over that limb affected by constriction, and apply pressure along the transverse diameter but not longitudinally nor laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	When you perform an extensive opening and your cautery is for that very purpose upon the joint'se connection, small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeatedly draw out the blood in the tail (anus) so that the blood can circulate properly until your need is met.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you may be excused from bathing in the tail of the stream, and your legs are paused therein during times of rest.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And with this vein puncture it is a safeguard that from all other veins none pulse here anymore nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	E the surgical intervention of the saddle is granted for the illnesses of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bleeding from you is that you clamp down on the vein or your own, placing it in an ash tail cord, until the vein becomes inflated and visible to demonstrate; then perform a transfixion puncture thereof.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the patient's flute (most likely referring to a medical instrument or device), for as long as their exposed nerves of flesh are still present.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When extracting the gallbladthy according to necessity, pause over the vein and salt so that it is not drained out completely; seemingly performing in all parts of the body at once.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the strength of that treatment on her right side be for the diseases of the womb (or female reproductive system).
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Even as in the surgery of his bed he had appeared, so did he appear there too with pain.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	E the vigor of the venous sephira from phlebotomy is related to illnesses present in various parts of the body and menstrual issues, as well as ulcers and old abscesses on hips and cushions, likening their appearance.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply a large amount of poultice or soft material to the cushion under your foot and heel (the area where you have applied pressure), as it is better for health conditions such as this one with its moisture, which helps in drawing out fluids from inflamed areas.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If there are facial boils on the face, keep your nerves away from those areas where the boils are located on the face, and pause your incision at this place if you wish to insert it further.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Whenever it is necessary for you to use forceps (fleuobotomies), then proceed as follows
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Whenever the sanction is forbidden, then you must rub the patient's leg in the tailwater and make the sanction run within that area where it has been purged (evacuated). This suggests a medieval practice of applying therapeutic massage or manipulation to relieve pain after supposedly cleansing an obstructive element, possibly related to worm infestation ("sanction" often refers to intestinal parasites in historical medical texts), with the
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the person using forceps (fleuobotomist) makes a mistake during the initial cleanse, then they must try again on their own fingers or hands in that very spot where salvation has been found; and do not fear witchcraft—may you guard yourself from our shared missteps. Here it is emphasized that if an error occurs while attempting to remove parasites using forceps (fleuobotomies), the practitioner should try again with their own fingers or hands directly in where they believe salvation has occurred, indicating a removal of impurities from within ("salvation"). There is also advice against fearing supernatural accusations and
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And it seems that the other patient's foot has been bound up in advance as well (as part of their preparation or treatment). The term "engualmet" refers to binding with band
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the case of sciatic nerve entrapment (indicated by "vena" which might be referring to a vein but here seems misused in context, possibly intending for 'sciatica'), you must urgently lift the heel downwards on that very spot where we have mentioned before. This directive appears aimed at an exercise or action believed necessary
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The text is attempting to convey medical procedures and observations using archaic language with influences from several languages including Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French as you mentioned. Here's the translation line by line:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	So when it appears, you should apply pressure to that area every time and along the way, best of all – either by incising or sectioning that part accordingly (either cutting deeply into it with a cutter/incision tool or dividing it using forceps), this ensures its location.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	She is in great pain and if you worsen that condition, she will feel a limb of her body hurting either between the earlobe (auricular) or around the little finger ring area (anular), indicating joint or muscle discomfort on one side of her leg.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let blood flow as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return and tighten on the location of incision cutting and suturing to heal the wound.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From windy conditions and those quality of wearing them (possibly referring to medical treatments or garments suitable for cold, possibly related to joint pain):
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	When winds from corn silk, ash wood, or wool arise,
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors: And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; place your hand over that area so as not for the intestine to protrude out again. You have already opened up space
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This joint pain that is being punctured or operated upon according to these two methods (one involving a knife and the other possibly involves heat like fire), represents one of its types for treatment: And when necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed instrument. Then return the intestine back
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The joint pain treated by methods of puncture and extraction at these twelve locations in the body are described: One is performed where we pause, which lies towards the head (the end part), while from our neck down; there ventosages on the chest region near the breastbone. Also mentioned are those applied to the mouth area below the jaw using two spoons and above it over a cup's lip edge – this is likely referring to some form of oral treatment with utensils at these specific sites: And in terms of ventosages, there includes puncture techniques on twelve body parts—one involves piercing (potentially surgical), followed by extraction; the second site lies towards one'thy head region. Additional locations for treatments include areas above and below your neck down to where we put holes with spoons around or inside the mouth, as well as over a cup’s lip edge – suggesting procedures involving cups used in traditional medicine: Furthermore, there are ventosages using two lancets (sharp instruments), applied on both sides of one's breastbone and small bone knives at specific joint sites—these could be related to therapeutic interventions for pain or discomfort around those body parts. The overall description points towards various techniques used by practitioners within this medical tradition, potentially addressing issues in multiple regions of the anatomy through localized procedures that involve manipulation and possibly minor surgical-like actions with tools like lancets (knives), spoons for making holes or creating marks on specific body parts such as joints.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And extract the phlegm not from the veins thin and scattered throughout the flesh, but rather through those channels by means of flebectomy; nor does it indicate that chyle is a fever caused inside any part where there has been total expulsion within these vessels.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May it be necessary to provoke breeching due to illness or continuously, administer that immediately at the meal time of the day and night, as well as during sleep in its place and anytime else.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When in men the cause is that which within them demands removal for wind and humidity from their grave, causing inflammation on top of their body (head), chest, and back; and causes atrophy beneath it (abdomen) with groaning therein and darkness and weakness upon their limbs. And those who have an accumulation in the place of its humidity; and whose seed multiplies within them causing grumbling or bittern0n when speaking, and restless sleep filled with moans and similar issues related to appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it occurs at any cause of those things, especially if it happens on the third or fourth day after they have passed through that same day in three hours, command winds to be painful as these are passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And when the youth of wind from the back is that which, when it concedes gravity to the head and descends into the humors in the chest; perhaps this enables the expulsion of all morbid matter from the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This discomfort is in the location of trepanation for the skull (or cranial). Here, "trepanation" refers to an ancient surgical procedure where a hole was drilled or scrap
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not unknown that one uses the part where infiltration of cold humors completely occurs or even becomes inflamed; therein lies a great detriment to them (the patient). Here refers to areas within the body, particularly joints affected by excessive accumulation and resulting inflammation from "cold" bodily fluids. The text highlights how
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore I do not use that part of the body where diseases are easily visible on its skin or in those headpieces (or skull and scalp). In this line, it suggests a medical approach to avoid areas showing clear signs of illness during treatment, likely emphasizing proper diagnosis before
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And thus I do not use that which is often forgotten and overlooked by the physician; hence when you command the windlass to pause its movement slightly on those parts temporarily with light pressure using a cushion, they fear generating forgetfulness (or loss of awareness). Here it refers to potentially causing discomfort or neglecting certain symptoms that may require closer attention. This line underscores careful and mindful application of treatment methods in order not to overlook significant signs during medical interventions. The text appears concerned with avoiding the escalation of a patient's condition through mismanagement, advocating for attentiveness even
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And the coughing is in place of trepanation for the black vein and basilica: hence I will confirm asthma (or obstructive pulmonary condition), constriction of airways ('ale'), division of lung structures, coughs, and restoration. In this line, it appears to describe an ancient medical intervention where a physician would diagnose respiratory conditions like bronchial spasms or pneumothorax (lung collapse) by manipulating the body with techniques that might involve internal 'openings' such as trepanation for veins and possibly thoracic surgeries. The mention of confirming ('confereys') these ailments implies diagnosing through physical ex
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When a small vessel is inflamed and painfully pressed on slowly, it induces weakness in the body and the abdomen.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the cooling of almond oil provides relief for headaches and eye pain, migrates away from them, suppresses the pains in the teeth'dictions (i.e., where one feels toothache), and is performed at a dental extraction site.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the windlass not to press on your hand so that it does not injure an artery and cause blood flow, here is the translation:
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When breathing through the mouth is comforted by alcalus in the mouth and decay of the gums, as well as resembling their diseases present within the mouth, they are located where dental extractions take place for those who have them in the cheeks' lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the warmth that is felt on the honeycomb-like surfaces provides comfort to the patient' extricated through rubbing or friction; this heat comes from increased temperatures absorbed by these areas, providing relief due to its warming properties.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	E the suction of the divided parts of the focus grants excellent aid from the lithotomy of three veins, which are part of the basilica (inferior vena cava), fusca (common iliac artery), and cephalica (brachial artery); thus attaching handles to all these veins placed within them, allowing for their connection.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And order the knife not to proceed in cutting outwardly (i.dict "scarificatio"), where there is no flesh left, and immediately after remove its tendons and vessels.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E is caused by wind that blows over the abdomen and confirms with bloody sores on the anus and wounds filled with pus just now.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the windlass to be a great gust of earthly air, and it is directed into places where strong contractions occur; powerful but subtle movements with cutting instruments are employed for incision (scarification).
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May gentle breezes from the cushions for gradual manifestation, which drive away all ill humors of fever and phlegm in body, bladder; they alleviate past pains, discomforts both above and below the waist, prompting menstrual flow, flatulence (belching), and urination at sites suitable for cauterization or drainage by doctors.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Despite all efforts to heal the body as a whole and prevent fainting, such incidents still occur in patients' bodies.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From these breezes flows health into health from those changes of body'supinations'. Here is the line-by-line translation: From this wind, life comes to life through adjustments in the positions of the patient’s upper limbs (or "cushions"). Note that while some words may not correspond directly with modern English
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	From this position of the winds is that it stops and sucks in moisture early on without prolonging its presence; however, if necessary, it can pause those leaks or drippings momentarily while directing fluids to arrive by way of blood flow (or "engual"). Here's a more detailed translation:
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this action and continue until you see the place become reddened and swolthy, whereupon rage of the sanction will appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	When you scrape and repeatedly suck small amounts, pay attention in the disposition of the limbs.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that house (body) has rare flesh of the thighs and you do not scald it with warmth to prevent its location from becoming ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And order the suction device to intensify the scraping and apply a poultice with ease of use in mind.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is swolthy, then cut and cleanse these parts as directed; in the first washing there emerges an undercurrent of subtlety to the body and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May occur during the second stage of acquiring knowledge about the removal of the large sancus.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is due to fecal matter, then cut through the smooth surface of the flesh so that it continues its course as before.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	When we aim to remove even just one stone from its place at once or small ones too, it suffices for us an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a sick humor (disease), cut it out with motion cutting; and if the sick humor is thick, let us first make an incision for cutting beforehand.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of cauterization in which only the depth of the spine is concerned.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the intestine is thick, hard, black, and its pore spaces are sticky or moistened, then make these spots unctuous (lubricated), easier to dissolve; if it's summer time, add olive oil from aloe or ruined olives, honeydew jelly, cumin seed oil, or sanicle juice. And for autumnal times use honey wine, mint leaves extract, lime blossom water, and thyme decoction; to these resemble substances apply them as well.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is great and sudden, then apply honey, or balm of St. John'thyne, oil of Aloe, wine cider (vinasse), or juniper vinegar; according to their appearance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be that the bellows is made of large pieces of leather from tendon, and may such as are prohibited to oil, or suited for these locations where they place their bellows (to breatthyoke fires), soaked in water drawn from iron vessels filled with rainwater, dew collected at dawn, spring waters, well springs, or any similar source.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And from that one who is of moisture's motion, washes their breath with water drawn from myrtle and sumac, or similar substances for them, here comes the treatment described:
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From the one whose excesses are thick, wash their noses with vinegar from old wine or acacia water, or thistle tea of nettles or chamomile, according to their appearance.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E cover that cleanlinency be guarded during bathing; there must also exist places where this cleansing water is applied for an hour or two hours at a time, and there should likewise be periods when one rests from such washing.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is required for it (the patient) that should be performed by bloodletting before wind suction?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the patient'thy condition: if you see that their chest and abdomen are stiffened with coldness and inflammation, possibly due to dry humors like honeycomb acetones (which may refer to certain types of sweat or thick discharges), combined with indivia and diphasal herbs, as well as dried ginger root, saltpeter, wine jelly, and their resemblances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When their food is consumed with wine and cooked meats are served to them, along with the appearance of fleshiness:
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that of which the complexity is feverish and induces flow in breasts or alsecanavian seed mixture with honey, spice (and) aromatic herbs to smell between Christmas and Epiphany; it is recommended for them to use little beer/alcohol consumption and eating habits. Here they should pause the intake of legumes, cabbage, grains, fish, chickens, pigeons (and possibly other animals), which are held in their hands or used as food sources during this period:
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in the day of ventosification and bloodletting, it is necessary for one to drink more than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	Even if it is given to drink in some hours at the patient'thyrtic (a specific homeopathic remedy or muscle medicine), or administered through a mouthpiece, so that the main limbs are comforted and its essence does not get absorbed; but do not give rise to swelling.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May these pains that are being cut be coughs and gout on the belly and in the joints of the knees, at those places where there is phlegm or thickness inside a chest, but none of these limbs suffer cutting upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not for these reasons but rather an affliction of the sanctum within a member, wherewith pauses like a breath upon the breastbone in melancholy madness due to the flow of bile from the sanc (gallbladder) du jaundice; and they use it such that the flighty vaporiness is dissolved both on one's abdomen and umbilicus, which then often reduces the limb size and alleviates pain as if dissipating wind discomfort.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when pressure is applied to the reddish or purplish swellings in their limbs due to fluid accumulation and strong suction of fluids, this removes those impurities from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When it seems that breath and movement are taking place in these chambdicts,
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These breezes are administered with suction only, and some treatments are applied at the fire's flame.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When certain measures are fully administered in diseases of the mouth,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: It is for that wind increases and becomes thick, thus water alone or with certain plants can be poured into it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	When the form of ventosity administered at the focus is as follows: it consists of two drips (as we have formed); and the quantity of the prone [liquid] is a palm's measure; and in its place, located where it resides within the circuit, its measurement corresponds to that which enters into you with one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is pain caused by heavy stones or gravels and hard-boiled eggs (causing difficulty in maintaining the position of its limbs on it), thus, doctors advise taking restorative herbal remedies composed mainly of earthly minerals for relief.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever there is a crossbow or iron flame present in front of the fireplace, then keep the candle at that location.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great wind that we have previously discussed about that which accompanies those illnesses and affects how they use it,
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When liver swellings and distended abdominal pains come from other sources than those of young people and large limbs,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this fire above the limb is to gradually heat a candle flame with tallow wax and pause it over the membrane in the area where swelling occurs, so that the focus can be ignited quickly before the part gets burnt by malaute.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Here is the line-by-line translation of this medieval medical text:
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And with fire according to its nature, and repeat that which is digested from it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May an air catheter be administered in the plague of diarrhea, where there is no transverse or disruption present, and it's filled only with water, resting solely on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it goes: And this is the form: The more it enlarges, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Given that "Capitol" is likely referring to an excerpt or section
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	When bloodletting is not administered to the limbs but where it can be applied because of their small size and proximity to veins (like teeth and gums), or in a naked part of the body, like when done with fingers near nose and lips; this refers to traditional methods used for phlebotomy.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	When it is necessary to use those found in the body fluids of patients with swelling from bathing, then:
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Return their positions during the day and night in water so that they are famished, but without causing any harm to the stomach of those individuals; similarly facilitate bowel movements through enema or by applying pressure on abdomen (via manual stimulation); return swelling inside the hernia back into its cavity; place pauses above them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When filled and case occurs (when they are full of something—likely referring to a bodily condition
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to suck the substance away into the windpipe, one may draw in air more vigorthy (likely referring to a method of improving breathing or drawing fresh air). This sentence suggests that if there'
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	But if not, open the location for wind to enter and move water over it (meaning that without sucking in fresh air through an opening or applying pressure with flowing water as a form of treatment), then both methods are frustratingly used excessively (indicating perhaps repeated attempts at relief). The text likely describes two different
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the legs of sanctity are prolonged with cauterization using bloodsucking tools and residue remains inside (suggesting some form of bleeding or wound treatment), then you take a fresh cloth in water, place it over what is left within to prevent further exudation. Herein described may be an early practice where after the application of heat from cauterization that has caused internal bloodstains ("residue"), and if additional healing measures are needed due to continued leakage or bleeding (exudate), a fresh cloth dipped in water is used, carefully placed over this area with pressure applied externally. This could be an ancient treatment technique for w
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the sanctum is multiplied (likely referring to multiple wounds or a condition involving several body parts), powder made of triple sulphur along with coals and ashes from ignited stones are applied on it; then, wherein lies each cause sharply indicated by these materials' specific placement. Following this application, the treated area is allowed time for adherence (where likely poultices or medicinal applications have been used), after which point—the condition has ceased to exist within that part of the body ("sanc abscidit"). This text details an old method whereby powdered sulfur and ashes from heated stones are applied directly onto wounds, each dot correspondingly placed according to the sharp pain's origin. The passage likely refers to a rudimentary form of topical treatment aiming at localized issues in ancient medicine by using these substances which then bond or adhere ("adheres") when cooled and possibly aid healing processes for certain types of injuries involving
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeated infusions of bloodletting when possible change those humors.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the blood clots are prohibited from suspension, then it will be inflamed at this moment or an arrow (or needle) should remain inserted within these places where the clot forms; and they shall rest until I feel any new clot coming upwards.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice on those joints, apply a little of powdered arsenicum or salt, and mix it well therewith now.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And begins the process of restoration from the clean or pure division/partition: recovery.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is frequently necessary in the practice of medicine; it concerns restoration and repair for bone fractures and displacements.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, understand that these physicians and barbers boast about this chapter of our textbook today, which some may not have the liberty to read by themselves or appreciate in ancient times.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason the disease of these learned men is deprived here in our land; and I have not ignored it for any time; nor did I apply anything to it afterwards except what was derived from the reading of ancient books and studies on understanding them, whereby I extracted science from those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Return or adjust in experiments and studies throughout one'se lifetime.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol primier.	Capital First. (This phrase is likely an introductory statement
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures are required before we begin to recall details about the members affected by these breaks, whether one or several in number. (This translation conveys that a summary is necessary regarding various aspects related to broken bones; it appears as though some preparatory work must be done with knowledge derived from actual cases of such injuries.)
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Thus, in the preamble of this chapter I shall present summaries from the discourse on these matters and within which chapters we will understand what skilled craftsmen know about them; for you and they who are quick to comprehend or learn such noble arts beyond your own. (Here translation indicates that before diving into a deeper analysis, it sets out an intention to provide summaries of discussions on relevant topics—the speaker seems aimed at informing those skilled in the craft about established knowledge while acknowledging others' expertise and speedy understanding.)
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so it is said that when you experience a bone fracture or dislocation and twisting, then take care to apply pressure above where the injury occurred; if there are no other reasons preventing this action, do so with debility relief on top of it, or for what causes pain directly upon arrival at your senses, as much suffering from intense coldness or inflammation.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And return the intestine (malady) back to its original place in which it customarily resides, at what time or moment?
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone breaks begins to be repaified, then cover it with nutritious foods rich in bulk and heavy substances; similarly feed them with wheat flour boiled in water, rice, vegetables, milk from cows, cheese curds, fresh meat, large grains resembling these, making coagulation of the fracture mixture using leeks and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Be aware that the bones break when they are in people who have lost their youth and whose bodies are weakened; it is not possible for them to remain continuous or solid according to their nature due to excessive purging of body parts.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	When they are solidified and continue according to their nature for as long as possible until the removal of those members (referring to affected body parts), just like bones in infants' bodies do during growth, so too will these be continued and maintained under such conditions.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature may adjust and tighten over the broken bones of any part caused by excessive consumption as if it were gluttony within which you are bound together with others forming a mass, inside where poison from rich foods or heavy drinking (similar to drunkenness) cannot prevent your work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason it is necessary that we pause the foods of malady (which have gravity and viscosity/thickness), as we have said before.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motley different types of fracture according to the type of member (body part).
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the causes of bone fractures are various according to the different parts, and a fracture in the hipbone is different from a fracture in the skull'sup; and a fracture in the chest is different than a fracture in the forearm. Similarly, all other members among themselves have their differences.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And recall all types of bone fracture, each in its own section within the capital dedicated for it hereinabove mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion various types of bone breakage in oneself is present.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The whole specialty is pain that specifically occurs upon restoration of the body in its respective locations after a recollection unique to those places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motive for bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For this translation task involving an archaic or pseudo-Latin text related to medieval medicine, here's a line by line English interpretation:
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	So when there is no apparent twisting or cracking upon touching the bone and joint affected by cold humors, nor does it inflict great pain on your hands, here we are not dealing with a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Have it possible that there is twist or small crack, where you touch and apply pressure to the entire body; here pause over him at times of recalling those medicines which were used in that moment when he was brought here; and place your hand tightly for gradual constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Be aware that the place where it arches and does not divide into two or another which does not arrive at this seat, when your whole body is swolthy throughout, then you will commence to correct things as they happen upon arrival here by means of applied bandaging.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an apoplexy occurs and you must apply it, let that for each day until the apoplexy ceases, applying heat according to any movement or elevation ability you have.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Given that you understand restoration and cauterization is easier than dealing with bone in the which I have fractured,
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Return strength to that second which will come back as memory of him/her (referring potentially to patient' extrinsic or intrinsic body function). Here, the text instructs on how one should regain energy in a person
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is broken within your body (referring to a limb), then it's necessary to extend this very member, whether that be leg or arm; use your hand if the part in question is small; otherwise apply pressure with two hands on either side of what’s fractured. Here are detailed translations:
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If your position allows for it, as parts of the limb are extended and stretched out, then proceed with returning those additional elements in accordance with each patient' extrication technique you perform there.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When you touch it at that time with your hand and if hereby any other cause appears different, correct whatsodictate by the amount of your virtue (or intention).
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive extension and compression, as doctors say these movements often cause apothecary' extrication during their work or result in contraction of the limb they have observed due to such actions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of a relaxed limb is what I recommend, to know that members are diverse in their smallness and greatness, as well as in shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	From those who are small in stature and resemble others like the arm and torchlights to them, it is necessary that their covering be a thin but refined cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who are fat with the thigh or cushion have a covering that is tough and tight around them so that their belly does not protrude in any place within it; thus they will not show themselves outside of its boundaries.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the procedure, take your evacuation of bowels in a convenient manner for this injury at the location where that fracture has three or four layers around it; tightly hold onto one end of the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return it to its natural place in the location of the fracture, and keep your strength so that there is not a lack on which you have tightened up the area where the fracture occurred.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Here is the line-by extralinear translation of each sentence:
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the sentence to translate:  
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Here comes the line to translate: Return the pause between the thighs' folds where it is wrapped with cloth, if there are signs of a broken bend in him; otherwise, there is no cause for concern herein.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Return your hand over the other bandage, and place it gently on these wrappings to prevent inflammation or infection if there is no abscess present at that location due to such intervention, apply this treatment for a few days; and tighten those strips firmly onto him.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Here come the splints of canna'thy seed, and they are formed carefully; or from wood; or branch of palm tree. And each bracelet according to this shape and form:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, if the splint placed over that fracture is thick and a small one has been put under other splints, then adjust its length according to where it rests on the limb—its extension being proportional both in height and size; and strengthen it above these splints as per your initial restriction order; so that this restricting bandage aligns with the fracture site inside and outwardly corresponds to the extent of the break, extending further from there only when elongated by said distance.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And if there are delicate threads not suitable for tying them tightly among those waters you wish to bind together, and where between each stone or ledge there is a day'dicted period of time.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the malady is led through the extremities of your legs to cause constriction in these places, then quickly intervene with a halter or woolen bandage so that it does not inflict injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some accidents break bones and cause displacement of the vertebrae, leading to memory recall in that part at the second unique characteristic.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	E understand that when all body members are broken on the first day; this causes parts of the member to become large if not paused over them for days or even a week at most, according to your certainty about the coming apothecary' extrication.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how medieval healers addressed the conditions that they previously repaired, which include breaks and dislocations as well as twisting injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of immobilization after bone healing is convenient for complex movements and mainly in the legs and belly; therein lies no heat or effusion: hence, grains moistened with powder are used to hold down the movement of the millstone on the stones.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When it is necessary to apply that comfort with them as well, but break open and stop the thickness of their flesh from being too soft or subtle; use that which they provide.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Other plaque of impalement fracture and dislocation: recipe for saffron, hedgehog (lapdanum), acacia, myrrh, mint, which is roasted from thousand grains of dragon's dust; mixed with mirra and dragonwort berries; ground into powder or crumbles and dissolved in water or aloe oil if the complexity of the malady has been pierced.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other manipulations for the splint that will ease fracture and twisting: take a mixture of milk thistle from white amber dragon, myrrh and aloe vera also from white amber dragon; acacia syrup from black dragon, vine resin from Armenian dragon. .xx
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are crushed in mortar and pestle, they have pillules (or comfits) immersed or administered in water or an alummed book:
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of the splints and bones apart, causing pain in those places, a tightly wound yarn is grasped and immersed in oil and wine; it is fixed on that spot:
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May not be for restoration and pain is removed properly with applied caustic and extraction thereof directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other types of plaster that restore wounds include olive and poppy seed, mixed together to make the plaster itself.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of the cast applied for bone fracture restoration and to resolve osteomyelitis: mixture of althea, clove leaves, flower heads of violes (likely referring to violets), flour from barley, all parts divided into three portions; these are ground together and bound with vine. When the limb is not cut or broken.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut (injured), then apply that same water of the colon and its fluid to heal (treat).
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Other applications of plaster poured for healing purposes must restore the first limb injured: a recipe using alum and wheat germ, along with balm, mallow root, majorana, flowers from violets or chamomile, all chopped up; they are soaked in water taken freshly from spring sources or distilled waters according to their quality.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ipocras does not prescribe rest for the patient lying on their injured leg, but rather remedies of wax and oil, nor any other cause; it is recommended that they move between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia have seen that they are stops on the broken part of him and his causes for dryness due to excessive heat taken with myrrh, seeds, and spirits from those things which I recommend as remedies.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Mending of the plaster that soothes wounds and pain: recipe made from cheese crumbs, hooves or chestnut shells, and thyme; powdered and ground into paste, its poultice form is ready to apply.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you open and separate (the patient' extrication), is that if there isn't pain or bleeding nor bone fracture at their place, then do not leave them without care for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you feel severe pain or inflammation at the location, then bend over that area for an hour and apply a plaster from there.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that subtlety under the small and does not strain due to your initial tightness, gently apply it where it is healing inside of you.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If at times the ulcer and soreness and pain and inflammation are already so severe throughout the body, as well as indigestion requiring enema or strictures, then repeat this treatment on the patient lying down as you have done before.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of those causes mentioned above, then wait three to four days or seven (seven being an approximation), and some care will be applied for up to twenty days after you observe the healing of the injury, as previously stated: until the fracture adheres, and flesh coagulates over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And when it is necessary to adjust in the tightness that may occur anywhere at all on your initial narrowing, and fasten within the belly of humors (presumably referring to body fluids), as soon as memory returns to you.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May if you find the fracture location and dry out or weaken it any further than necessary, know that nourishment is forbidden to prevent reaching this area; therefore feed that part only with water given daily for three days, apply a small poultice herein, which will supply nutriment to the limb through these means, thus healing the inflammation.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When the bones are not restored to health when still injured after being healed outside of meals and according to their twisted shape, it is a mistake in accordance with their practice, and great fear; if done rightly, they expand the ancles freely while soaking them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	Even if they have not seen an elder of theirs use it before, it is reasonable that they do not apply it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol second: When a bone is broken in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The spices of breaks are motions, and their forms are various, the causes distinct, some from percussion on space (fractures), which immediately enters into the cranium where it is felt in the head as a painful sensation; or when pressure marks through an incision upon bone, cutting flesh without penetrating to below the skull. This type of fracture injury is called dislocation absolute lift-off (literally elevated out).
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	E from these joints the children are either large or small in size, and of fractures they have been crushed or dislocated; it is caused by percussion on stone (for treatment), causing their appearance to change.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This break or entrance has already been applied to the periosteum (the outer layer of bone), and either it is large or small in these broken bones' areas; if it penetrates into the bone itself, then this occurs on the face of the bone.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when there is a bone breakage, it occurs in the subtlety of the hair strand and thus this particular kind of microscopic fracture does not get named.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it hurts in the bones of our joints when they become dry like phlegm (cough).
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So for all these heavy bruises that have been laid upon us like separate planks (steles), they are treated as splints.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this fluid returns to its place in the body.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special vessel is known for having been discovered under the bone, and it has been removed from there; where now a black fracture appears.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	When treating fractures consider the accidents of humours, and if through these accidents signs manifest pain, vomiting from cholera, distension, loss of understanding, abscesses, syncope, acute fever, examination of their fluids and requests, as well as appearances corresponding to those injuries in major dispositions, they do not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If an accident occurs due to misalignment (or disharmony), then you begin healing for them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is such that when the inflammation comes into your stomach during feverish days on the twelfth day throughout the entire disposition of your bones, cover it with care as you study its effects upon the skeleton in the eleventh hour before noon.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, when you press your cheeks with your hands throughout the day, and because the skin has been corrupted by sweat (or humoral imbalance), then problems arise that have already been recommended to treat them.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already reached the meningeal covering of the brain and consists of small fragments and arthritis, then it is necessary to insert the broken parts carefully as recommended by you (doctor).
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	Here comes the sentence to translate: When you raise the head of the hernia and discover it on the upper part of the body according to your ability, allowing it to lie over the hernia.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you have caused the bone to crack or developed an ulcer that bleeds profusely, then immediately press on it with clean water and bandage the wound soaked in wine and olive oil; this will allow the inflammation from the fracture/ulcer to rest while keeping moistened linens applied undernethy patient's legs and chest. You are holding their hands for support (translation may vary slightly due to archaic language interpretation).
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it is one of two methods for operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The one thing is that you insert the instrument into the body as follows, and this is how it should be done: Insert another smaller tool than that; here's how it should be done.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And apply medicine or poultices as needed for the second day.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "When various instruments of cutting are used by me and I continue using them for others; when these tools made from iron or steel become blunt at the ends of their use on the extremities, they should be named accordingly.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	When they use it for gentle tapping on the joints, in order not to hit the head and lead that one along.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then break it in its course before you administer the needles on the pillows which they are not deepening into.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	E for there is no name given here but these that are stopped below the bone of the chest until they reach the extent of the skull's boundary or edge upon which it seems a small margin or circle, thus preventing submersion and passing through the hardness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these many ladders of which each one corresponds to the precision required for any part of the body in your present state, whereby the sharpness (degree) within all areas of the brain's extremity shall be according to the extent of such preciseness.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	When you take care with utmost caution so that the scissors do not touch any cause of cholera,
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	When the bone has been pierced and if separation continues around it as long as it is in the body'thy substance resembling inscriptions, although there may be some pushed outward (pus extruded) like sharp or subtle points that other inscriptions have.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If any part of the small bones and joints is painful, take that which makes it easy for you to treat them with what needs to be done; care for these pills made of leeches and ointments as we have discussed.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other aspect of the operation is painless and distant from fear, which Gualia and Lauzec perform with great honor; this is their speech: "You need to be in your presence while you discover the broken part of bone where the fracture was forcefully applied and clearly evident. When you have discovered that area and paused briefly there holding the slowly moving and cheerful figure representing it, which forms its shape.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And since the lunate part is like a lion and does not admit any cause, its sharp division into two parts before entering long-termly; that the lunate part should be adjusted at the hip joint where it enters the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When any cause is attached to the patient'thy kneecap in its bony location, insert that part of it at the extremity inserted by you thereof; and when done so without harm or fear, then remove it from under your hand for which purpose has been provided (a pointed cautery).
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what remains of the bone is its face, which has roughness and fine lines upon it, cover that roughness with materials prepared for their specific sizes so you can administer them at all convenient locations on the patient's body according to your plan as dictated by when time runs out during your operation.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	When in any of the others small or delicate cracks (fractures) and breakages occur within you, administer treatment according to what has been lost for correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is that which has not been healed over all these things studied by them in this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	Stepping over what we have shown in great breaks.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you remove the bone, then take for threads that which belongs to him according to its quantity of flatus (indigestion), and immerse it in olive oil; submerge this thread under another folded or tripled one as well, immersing yourself also therein with olives and olive oil. Place the first cloth over the second, and administer that fluid on top without causing harm to what you can treat above them (the pancreas). Apply it only so much time until such is spent by flatus; then apply another layer of cloth either folded or tripled as well, immersing this one in oil too. Do not tighten these bands more than the belly's capacity allows for at that moment.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas, as quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina d'errs, enses polvera i simenatz ad aquells.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: "And when these powders have been dried if they are dry already; universally it is given in this entire medicine which has its property to prevent ingestion and not to bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here is the line by line translation of this medieval medical text into English:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When pain occurs in the skull and bone becomes moistened as treatment approaches for it, there is numbness on its surface; hence consider if you experience accidents that have happened to us all of a sudden, understand that your whole body has been affected by them.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not cure black bile but through the medicine that is paused beneath (below), and this medicine forms that darkness, then take some honey and oil mixtures in three parts each, drape them over these lines (areas affected by illness), place it on the region under pressure; furthermore apply care with those healing spices which you believe will help make one healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Given that this text appears to be an attempt at translating medical
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When the nose is broken, or fractured. (This translation attempts to convey a common phrase related to facial injuries
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that it is not the nose itself which gets broken but rather different parts of one's body; sometimes there are several warnings before this happens, as now you have two or three bones cracked (the nasal bone), and these fractures indicate a grinding motion inside—this refers to bruises. The phrase suggests that when it comes to nose injuries involving broken parts of the face rather than just noses themselves, there are signs like multiple small cracks in the bone structure before they get severe (e.g., facial dislocations), and these symptoms could signal internal grinding or twisting movements inside—implying potential concussion from impacts that might not be immediately apparent on superfthy examination but rather seen within as bruising, which alludes to the idea of subtle trauma being an indicator for
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the parts gets broken (implying a nose injury), you must interpose your finger in its place within their nostril and hold that fractured fragment there—this is what it indicates as being "in dislocation," meaning displacement, which should be held until returning to normal position. The translation explains an old method of first aid for nasal bone injuries where one would gently reposition the broken nose piece back into place and hold pressure with a finger in its nostril while expecting natural alignment or restoration over time under medical supervision if needed, though such practices are now considered outdated by modern medicine standards.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And that for your sake to make it easier and remember not to harm the area of operation (in this context likely referring back to handling or attempting first aid on a fracture). Here, there's an added cautionary note emphasizing care when dealing with injuries in order not to cause further damage. This line stresses gentle treatment during any intervention
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper chest portion of the body and does not go towards it, then cover with a bandage applied directly to the part wherein there lies the broken bone (the injury site).
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If there is a break in two parts of the body, then you make it seem as though this (the broken bone) was already present beforehand.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if you can restore the wound in the patient on the first day of the fracture, that is ideal; otherwise, apply rest for seven or eight days after the period of cauterization (aposteme).
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here is the line-by-line translation into English:
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this now, and if you want, apply warmth.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you apply a caustic application externally and place melted tin or lead in wounds filled with oil and vinegar (or aqua vitae), do so carefully to avoid harming the patient further.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not cleanse the ulcer with caution, then apply that which is made of sage seeds and pomegranate peel powder ground in alum; place it over the wound baseplate (le stoppa leone), without touching the nose by any means.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If bones of the nose are slightly broken or displaced, then you must separate them here and take out those instruments that correspond to these; apply pressure where there is a fracture, using fluid (like blood) as contained within it for healing and bandaging according to necessity.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you crush worms in the nose, cover that which heals with lime and insert iron tubes into it for complete recovery.
Capitol .iiii.	Capitol III. (The Roman numeral "III." indicates this is
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When there's a fracture of the jawbone, it can be referred to as a mandibular fracture or simply broken jaw
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and there's also displacement (meaning it has not only fractured but moved out of its normal position), if the break consists of just one piece without any bending or deformation towards parts, then such an injury might be considered less severe. Here "lesser" implies that while significant damage to the jawbone structure exists due to displacement and misalignment (deformed into separate pieces in this context suggesting possible comminuted fracture), it may not require as extensive or complicated treatment compared to a break with more complex deformation which could indicate multiple breaks.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is broken into two pieces, then provide an extension of force to push it back together so that movement becomes possible for them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you apply pressure on the tooth causing disruption, then firmly press those parts wherein you hope it will break through silver or gold (or copper), and place your pause above the broken jawbone cauterized with metal filament, along its length from the chin; also position that portion of a single gauze under which dressings are applied to this area when clothing is put on you. Here, it instructs how one should apply specific pressure points and materials like metals or gauzes for dental disrugy treatment without damaging existing treatments such as cauterizations with metal filaments at the jawbone site.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When commanded by the humors that are overly active (malaute), rest and calmness should be used, stopping the patient'dict consumption of heavy foods with bile stones.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If your figure has become distorted in any manner, then tomorrow you should tighten that part and apply what it already is altered from - be it lead (cerate), albumen (egg white/album of humour), or flour dusting (cornmeal) - placing these on the affected area while applying pressure with a lint cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is applied and the position of the bone is not altered, let it stay like this so long as the fracture heals slowly over three months.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another lapse of rheum occurs as a result of the treatment we have applied previously within that which lies in their abdomen (belly), then administer what has been provided for those lapses and cure this eruption accordingly.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is of bone (plaga), consider whether it has been separated from or detached, then gently remove those pieces that are submerged in water within the positioning of those bones belonging to the skeleton.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the patient'dictor (likely referring here to a poultice) is dry, then apply it with more lint as per your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished those satagias (which could be interpreted as treatments or poultices), and there is no further discharge remaining from them, if the space is wide enough for soil to enter it – then cover that area with dirt; otherwise, rest on one of the supports meant specifically for this purpose and wait until healing occurs.
Capitol .v.	The provided line "Capitol .v." does not appear as
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When broken, it is essential for the wing (furcula) to be repaile in a restaurant setting: this metaphorical translation suggests that there may
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 When the motion is made repetitively and carelessly during games (implying physical exertion in sports or exercise), it may lead to a broken wishbone bone of each player, indicating that such an injury has been classified into three grades based on severity: simple fracture, compound/open fracture with displacement, and comminuted fracture (where the bone is shattered into several pieces
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the wishbone is broken and separated into two parts that do not fit together again (like bones no longer matching after being severed), it poses challenges for restoration in a restaurant setting: either there's difficulty returning to normal activities within such settings, suggesting significant disruption or inconvenience; alternative methods are needed if one cannot manage without external assistance—meaning that the patient may require help from others (like caregivers) to cope with daily tasks and dining experiences. If not provided for in situational supportive services (referring again metaphorically to healthcare or aid), it might be impossible ('ayssi') due to ongoing impairments, highlighting the potential long-term difficulties that can accompany such an injury; furthermore, if left unattended and not properly addressed by a skilled professional—
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the broken wishbone requires attention ('la operacio en aquella'), it means two roles must be filled: one hand (the tengu) assists and holds together the fractured wing bone; while another, possibly a caregiver or medical professional, extends support to assist with other aspects of their condition—this implies coordinated efforts are needed between patient assistance ('tengua') for physical stability and additional help in managing daily tasks associated with injury recovery. This metapthy outlines the importance of comprehensive post-injury care involving both personal aid from a family member or friend, as well as professional medical services to facilitate rehabilitation (rest
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the bone in its position where it was broken as is proper according to how it has been formed since being fractured, and ensure there are neither prominence nor hollowness within it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion extends, then you must pause intermittently the thrust of the malady'dict hope for a drape or woolen cloth; according to your need size - and expand and lift the shoulder blade, contracting it as per how much is needed when covering.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot lift the extremity of the shoulder blade to the parts beyond it, then by so much this humid has ascended to the top of the chest and rests upon its muscles in a way that makes one joint move significantly larger.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the line to translate: E le ministre pressione o musculo do paciente nas partes adjacentes enquanto a oss da furcula est elevado até as costas del seu, e lahoras tu rectifica a fratura e engua aquela às junturas dos seus tendões.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel tightness in the shoulder and neck, then it is necessary to cut into that area and remove those tightenings for ease of relief.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then you will ingeniously apply one of those instruments with which you have prepared for this purpose to the shoulder joint' extrication device that serves; and its form consists either of wood or metal.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It appears that this text is attempting to translate from an archaic form of a Romance language with influences similar to Latin and possibly medieval medical terminology into English:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of it be as far as you can for surgery; that there are two limbs available at a time, one large and the other tightly stretched out.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the bone you have inscribed when extracting the splint is wide open and prone to infection, then adjust the wound lips on the fracture with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the separation is slight, or you fear for appendicitis (which may require surgery), then place soil and pills according to the quantity of the patient'thy disruption.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you apply a cauterization and wrap it in cloth dipped in vinegar or oil, place your hand over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the bone when it is crushed and cracked be treated with plaster of Paris mixed in egg white albumen if constipated by that same substance; place a pause over where stitches are required, holding hands which contain serpentine bands used for long treatment times or several days, ensuring they fit comfortably on the hand as one palm fits under it. Also apply two layers of plaster powder above and below the strip/stitching area; ensure that these strips have three fingers' length and appear in a manner resembling them when fully extended (when stretched out); cover this entire apparatus with cloth, placing another layer of fabric over the plate or stand holding it at the fracture site within its location. Secure hand bandages applied thereafter; rewrap those specifically around their collarbone and gently rub that area along with any painful points on both sides (thighs/groin) alternately, repeatedly until bone fragmentation ceases to be perceptible under your touch.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here it is: And that the jaw should not become hoarse due to broken bones; and as you see the humidity every day, when the ligament softens or becomes moistened, then correct your diet and strengthen the throat.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Return the patient' extramandible bone to their neck column and slowly titillate it, so that they can sleep there at night within a small pillowcase; thus, his assistant lifts him up from this position, elevating the fractured furcula towards muscle contraction or raising the arm along with its col.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the ligature unless it hardens or becomes infected within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Return the plaster if you have seen the patient's face turn to water (indicating fever or illness), and adjust it in the constriction, restoring what has been broken and allowing for clot formation of the shoulder bone fracture.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	It is rigid and supported according to the month in XXVIII days, and some discomfort may occur during these times for certain home patients.
Capitol .vi.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide text for translation
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The given phrase in Latin, which translates into English as "the treatment of a shoulder fracture," pertains to the medical
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The provided Spanish text describes characteristics of an injury related to bones, specifically mentioning a spatula (which may be interpreted metaphorically as the affected area) and its location within or outside certain boundaries ("lo lat" - perhaps meaning "too far out"), without being
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	When the location of your body part (implied as being related to bone injury) is broken — and it's fractured within its context or space—it cannot be understood without manipulation; hence, according to how you prepare for healing this entire method in which one might restore what nature has altered can only possibly occur.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: Return your pause (or pressure) over the polished floor of moisture and albumen, stop with a leopard skin; return your pause on doubled cloth fabric as per the quantity determined by the entire spatula or possibly just one portion.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the stone is concave in some of the areas of the scalpel, then grind that concavity with sand and balance the blade accordingly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from above in order that it does not decrease below the length of the spine due to contraction and closure of the vertebra within which they should remain intact:
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, treat again and strengthen the leg bone if it has swolthy from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When you lay down your patient's limb (body part), here it is referring specifically as mentioned in line above about putting a cushion under their
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula will be restored within xx days or .xxv (where "xx" and ".xxv" would need to be replaced with specific numerical values indicating the time frame
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you will break down the ligaments (ligamentos), and ensure that they are secure from where I started not to worry or attempt removal again with these bones in mind. This line implies a medical procedure likely involving careful manipulation of injured connective tissue while maintaining patient safety concerning pre-existing conditions, such as fractures around which the initial concern may have been focused ("es de los osses").
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed from the bone of the shoulder and place pins downwards diagonally, divide them here, and fix them firmly, as we have described in cases where there is a fracture of the sternum due to osteomyelitis abscessation.
Capitol .vii.	The text provided appears to be instructions or observations from an old medical treatise related
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of healing the bone of the chest." (Here, it's a general statement about treating a rib injury rather than specific
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some of the bones near to the chest have been broken in this place and tossed about, with their ends fractured." (This line describes a situation where certain ribs or other small nearby bones are damaged beyond simple breaks.)
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	From the accidents that occur when his sleep is broken it declines into parts and aches in him, causing difficulty in breathing, coughing up blood or foul sputum; this becomes evident inside the bone where its break has occurred, but not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of him is that his thighs will be elevated on their two legs, with a space between the shoulders left by placing a pillow; and to relax the muscles of him, adjusting the back so as not to exceed two curves in the spine, subtly engage during the operation according to all manners possible that are feasible and appropriate for his condition. Return their body shape once completed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke dismemberment of that corruption or inflammation present in the location, then take out and rectify what causes pain therein with whatever cure you have for your patient; remove any plaster applied if on their face at times; adjust so as everything within can heal properly.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The provided text does not contain enough information
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When coastlines are fractured or shattered, it often refers to a significant geological event such as an earthquake along a fault
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	When the coastline fractures, it happens in large areas that are split between two sides; and from their limbs at impact, they do not fall directly into those cracks but pass through small channels or gullies made of sandstone.  
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Upon learning that he is not afraid of his feelings during inquiry with him,
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration is to be done as best possible according to the patient'supinity or supination condition; and apply plaster and bandage when needed on the broken bone at its position, following what this one suggests.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the backbone fracture is declining towards the divisions of bone, then it causes intense pain and piercing sensation as if with a needle at that person who has cried out (the intensity of suffering), and for this reason you must clothe them; also they will experience difficulty in breathing, cough, vomiting up phlegm, which is hard to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	Even then, they have begun constructing in that place with great effort and determination.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "For their purpose that they said covers dietary foods from malady and swelling, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, causing displacement of parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we draw out the water to prevent it from causing rheumatic inflammation if you do not injure yourself; and if already injured, may this help with drawing out the fluid as well.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the groin (waist) is violently contracted and does not suffer, pinch it with a lancet for puncture; be mindful of the waist, where they may tear over there, discovering the broken bone fragments, and pause to ensure that this instrument preserves the fracture pieces (remains), which precedes its use. Hold your hands firmly so as not only to facilitate their removal with ease once done.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And adjust if there is much pain in the patient'thy mouths and apply compresses on it for healing to take place inside where they are applied.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have chorebly or ulcerated nodes (deduction of the disease), then apply pressure with soft touches on olive oil and pause over the location, so that healing occurs due to the liquid applied for this purpose.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And lies upon his back where he rests, so that it is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately recognizable as
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The text appears to be in a language related to medical terminology, possibly Italian or Latin-based given the phrasing and structure similarities with these languages. The phrase "restaura
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Translation: Some weeks after the bone break in the neck, and their rehabilitation efforts seem similar to those of thoracic vertebrae fractures.  
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When you have applied the poultice to the patient's elbow and wrists that you wish to know if it will heal or not, consider: If your hands already feel softened, stupefied, and dead, and cannot be moisturized nor stretched therein—and when compressing those areas with fingers or needles they do not cause pain —you understand that these parts are beyond salvation. In matters of disposition, this is death.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If those things cause pain in them and tighten the bone of the skull or make holes (punctures), you will understand that the head'dicts need care, for they are under protection by their marrow from this illness caused by malady humors.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see that the vertebrae of his neck appear submerged in water and wish to know if they are healed or not, then pay attention to his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you find yourself already soothed, apply those waters to the areas where it occurs on your back and buttocks; as they breathe wind and urge for evacuation of their will, some may recline over their backs and become unable to hold or control themselves. Therefore, one must not attempt treatment in such cases.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May it not be that any cause of those things is worse and put them lightly (i.dicta).
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And its treatment is to perform ablations on the scab covered with dry blood or moist mud poultices, applied for several days until it soothes the wartcure; apply these remedies intermittently over a few days as needed for healing.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And when one of the cushions for comfort and existing is placed, resting on that limb; command the humors to take a break and maintain calmness so that no pain enters where it has been injured until healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you experience pain in the bone or if there is already an underlying cause that has separated from it (possibly indicating fracture), then place pressure on the spine where this causes discomfort for that bone; and adjust the lips of the wound, suture large ones as needed. Also provide care to those parts covered by bandages until they are healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the bone of the hip is broken and it'dict wherein lies the cavity (of the coitus), then you insert your hand into its left side at the mouth (and what can be done in this situation with an instrument, if necessary; place a sponge or padding over him/her) and above his head to prevent further injury. And apply pressure on it tightly if needed from these things which are used for that purpose.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel shattered fragments within it, then attend to that fragment and restore what was broken, doing so with the healing medicine as long as they are being cured inside where they can be made whole again.
Capitol .x.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treat
De restauracio de la ancha.	Based on your attempt at translating, it appears you are trying to convey something related to 
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The provided text is in Catalan or related to medieval medical terminology and seems complex due to the mixture of historical language use with specific technical terms from that era's medicine. Here’s an attempt at translating each sentence into English, preserving as much meaning as possible:
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of him is that you stretch your hand over whatsothy beareth the figure of thee, whereby his broken bone shall heal.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the bone is broken in only one limb of him/her alone, then take that second which you have previously dressed on their body and place it inside where the fracture has occurred so that it may be restored to its original shape naturally.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May it be that the fracture is at the length or has already declined to its divisions, then you shall speak of pain in your abdomen while preparing for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have applied the plaster to that area, pause on the beam or bone piece thereof, and firmly press over the point of constriction where you do not fear a chiseling injury or damage to the spine.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when there is water inside that which causes constriction according to equality, command the humidity (or fluid) to lie on its back or between its ribs so it can rest comfortably.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May you apply an ointment for the inflammation, and cease stretching out of it and its restoration until such time as that applied remedy has soothed the inflammation, and pause there upon which settled medicine is taken by him who precedes; then return to restore his health, bringing along with you this same aid.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you crush or fracture in the bones of stability, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (Assuming "Capitol
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Regarding the treatment of a hernia repair, here is the translation:
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	And there enters a person between the shoulder blades into the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, the restoration of him/her is done by one of these two methods that you grasp with your hand as per this formulation herein described:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	E for those limbs with bones connected by ligaments, and positioned above their place raised upwardly.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the humors down to the sinew; and lift out, with care, your broken arm inside where it reaches the joint of its column hereby associated.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the hump rises on the patient's back and suspends its tongue from their chest with silk threads, two servants are commanded by them to hold these threads using their tongues; one holds it close to themselves while the other extends it outward.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish to stretch the extension forcefully, then stand on the breakbone and that other bone fragment together, so that both servants (referring to parts of the body or limbs) expand their respective portions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	So if the fracture is near the muscle' extrinsic part, you must pause the tendon above and below it immediately; also quickly attend to the injury with your hands as well.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if it is apparent that the break has occurred in the hip joint, then hold a ligament over that location and on top of that hip bone.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	May you cauterize the ulcer, and leave it tight within a week on fine woven thread bound up in day six of rest and applied oil to re-cauterize that periodically:
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And when the arm is fractured, then place an embrace on the fracture itself and wrap a cloth napkin around it; also adjust your hand over that which has been bound therein (i.dict), holding tightly above the bound limb's muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the drape and strength over the assistant' extricating arm to ensure that it remains in place if not prevented by any cause of bone fracture.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And when they use forceps (literally "they make use of tweezers"). Here is a possible line-
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And when they use forceps on that fracture piece put there and pushed out by the others of those instruments; pause between each instrument, according to its length as pertaining to where it's been joined together in three parts (translation implies a medical procedure involving careful manipulation or realignment using tweezers when dealing with bone fragments that have become displaced).
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength over the stones at which I have mentioned as limitations for our patient's constitution,
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your constriction at the site of the fracture is tightly spread out.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When I have elongated the fracture as well as the minor strain.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the situation of the stones and stricture as we have described in this hour for restoring their body part to its proper condition, then do so accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an abscess is forming, then today at the seventh hour (of prayer or daytime), do so by loosening the swelling and stones within its confines.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not occur at the place of protrusion or inflammation; food is prohibited to advance towards a limb due to excessive constriction, and thus correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If today you are above bedrest where there is no cause for this fluid coming out (referring to an effusion or discharge), then do not break the ligamentum but rather wait up to three days, perhaps even more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And if his malady of the thigh lies upon his two legs, and their hands are over his stomach,
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the food of malaute according to their order as we have for dinner, so that the food is subtle during consumption within which they eat soup, and cover them when it gets heavy.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As per the custom of the assistant and the pillow of him/her, they are strong every X days; furthermore, when they become loose and bath and ointment applied to them repair it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If there is a crack that has become hardened (fracture), do not attempt to remove it from the limb within days or even two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol XII. (Note: The Roman numeral "XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	From restoration of a broken arm. (This translation interprets the Latin phrase, assuming it refers to medical treatment or
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made up of two bones which are called the smaller and larger; the former holds what they call a finger (presumably referring to one or more fingers), while the latter is held in place from where it was detached, indicating that these refer to parts used for fixing a broken limb. This translation breaks down into:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And only when either the large or small fire is broken, and they are all torn asunder (either by accident or intentional damage).
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire below (possibly referring to a heating or warmth source), its restoration is relief and it puts their health back in order/better condition.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the patient's fire (body energy) is broken for a long time after an injury to their body, healing becomes difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	Put salt from that when those bones are broken down.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that has been broken is undernethy (the smaller one above), it becomes necessary for a doctor to restore it until such time when this can be done with ease inside where said limb will become strong again.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the large fire is what causes it (the pain), then when you press down firmly on it, hold back its spreading out forcefully.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two flames are joined together tightly, then when you pause their withdrawal forcefully press upon them.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of the hand must be restrained and extended over a limb, place their palms on the parts below it, put all others in position as well, placing each ear at the base of those other points, and gently lift up the patient's chest with this structure.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	When a hernia is present now or on top of the patient, in order that the humors do not worsen their condition.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Extend the hand of the party placed downwards or upwards along their body sideways; another minister extends outward from above them.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Return (or bring back) the doctor'dicts hand into the bone that has been moved, doing so in the best way possible as they can manage it.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone fracture you find it necessary for displacement of all pressure at your location and within your willpower, then proceed as follows:
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in the patient separate signs that pierce the navel and are not hope for recovery at this time, then act upon it herein as directed above (from our discussion).
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the bone is cracked and wet, you have already applied salt water on it and thus take care of that part.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you prick the ulcer with cauterization at your meal restoration, then tie a linen bandage soaked in olive oil and white wax around that area until the ulcer recedes; afterward remove the wax and apply an emplastrum of powdered clay prepared from heather or turf mixed with lime to pause there where the fracture was placed, holding firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Be aware that the name of the bones in the arm are found mainly or be a fracture at one focus point or two points simultaneously engaged.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your pressure on the site of the fracture hard and firmly, apply it until you may see that the swelling has gone away from the parts above or below the fracture, stopping only when recollection occurs in the patient' extramand. 
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the body part (member) and its proper alignment today.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any cause that requires correction for the body part affected, apply it firmly to the affected member and wait until the irritation subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Whenever you recline into rest so that constriction returns, restore its tightness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If extraction is softened and the bone appears to have returned to its place relative to these, then straighten it with your willpower.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Here is the translation line by line:
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If there is no cause within the malady that we have mentioned for it not to subside in two weeks or less among those things, do not consider that it has been resolved inside them.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And lower its intestine from the malady due to intense motion, and have it rest on its own two feet.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You understand that this fracture will be healed in either xxx days or xxxii days, and all according to the complexity of complications and disposition of spirits (or energies).
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	In the context of treating a displaced phalanx (a bone in the finger) and associated dislocation, this line suggests that there is likely an instruction or description related to medical inter
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Translation: When the phalanx and associated joints of the finger are displaced due to a fracture, do not attempt forceful movements on them but rather gentle handling or motion as directed (presumably by medical personnel). This suggests that one should avoid any unnecessary manipulation which could worsen an injury. Instead, restrained care is advised until professional assessment and treatment can be provided.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you injure the finger's phalanx or dislocate it (fracture/dislocation), cover it with clean cloth and apply pressure evenly for as long as necessary; simultaneously place your hand over the extended area to prevent further injury of the affected digit. This instruction indicates immediate first aid measures, emphasizing immobilization ("keep covered") until medical professionals can assess and manage the situation effectively. The use of consistent applied pressure may be aimed at controlling bleeding or providing comfort while awaiting additional help; placing a hand over an extended area could serve as temporary stabilization
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Extend the broken bones and have them aligned by someone skilled (the doctor). This directive is part of a larger context, where it appears that after addressing immediate concerns like bleeding or swelling ("congongiz"), attention should be directed towards proper alignment — likely referring to setting any fractured limb straight for the healing process. The phrasing suggests either manual manipulation by trained
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	After applying pressure or bandages (if needed), pause and prepare for cast application if there's no open wound ("apostema caut"); ensure the limb is positioned according to its location relative to gravity, already wrapped in a blanket as described previously. Here, the focus shifts towards immobilization using casting material following initial stabilizing measures such as pressure and bandaging; elevation (positioning "desus segon la quantitat del loc") may refer to propping up or adjusting limb position for optimal healing conditions while already having provided some immediate covering with a blank
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the bruise is in the parts of one'thy belly, and it appears like drape threading, then order the humors to tighten that portion with their hand at once upon the wound, holding firm as a long cloth; thus directs thee thy physician.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it is necessary for the body'dictum to rest on the cloth whereupon it stands and strengthens itself further with each cover or layer applied, then:
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the parts outside, then cease pressing below and above stone pieces from that parting at once; hold firmly so it may be covered and tightened; furthermore pause the constriction until you have turned back your hand as far up to between the legs' tendons.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you injure one of the bones in your leg, and it is that very same bone which hurts when touched, then rub it with strength using palms or fingers if you wish; pause at a small stone on its spine for so that the fracture may be raised and not become swolthy.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be so that if the fracture is in those places mentioned herein (the knee area), or at this spot (where indicated), hold and fix with what was applied to that specific part; otherwise continue placing them according to continuation, which would be better, or pause over a small stone like we have for our foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider the arrangement of applied and opposed cautions during healing—that which is done when addressing any cause brought up in your account as it unfolds.
Capitol .xiv.	Given that this text appears to be medieval medical terminology with influ
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	The restoration of a hip bone fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh crumble and are declared according to what is converted into disembodiment below, in that place where it protrudes above (the body).
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the patient is done so that the sinew tightens over the fracture and another ligament shortly afterward; the humors are pressed down on their abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	When the minister extends it entirely according to its quality where the bone breakage occurs in the joint of the bone:
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	May it be beneficial to the thigh's bone marrow, then tie down firmly with silk thread at the part of the femur joint, thus preventing excessive extension in those areas and also securing another piece of thread for the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the break is susceptible to dampening (moisture), then apply linen properly soaked in water and extend it over the parts immediately.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here the doctor wraps the two parts of their body together as naturally and with good union; provided that he does not immobilize it for a fracture (apostem).
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If an ulcer appears in you, then apply it for several days until the ulcer heals, and return to your care regimen.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The constriction of it is suffering: cover that which encases the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it twice or thrice for some days, and reduce its excess; then wrap another covering within so that reaches up to the ankle and backside of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Here inserts a long staff between the thigh and knee joints of each body parts, as directed by those who have bandaged her wounds well; they turn it over on the leg area where there is excess from the bandage for healing purposes.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return your pause over the knee joint at that location of her breakage, and maintain a pillow above their shoulder bone as well.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return and fill the empty spaces between the sheet'dictum (couch or bed linen), ensuring that any discharge is allowed to clot.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When pressure begins at a strong point of heat over the location of the fracture within three or four layers/envelopes and as you move away from the site of the fracture, your pain becomes less intense and lubrication is applied with more moisture.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Here the tendons of the hand are extended to the parts entering when they reach the cavity of the foot, and gently stretched by the other ends of their sticks until they do not go out from their place again.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Apply pressure on that area so as not to injure the corroding or inflamed limb nor cause an abscess; if any of these conditions are caused by it, then rub yourself and correct what has been mentioned above in regular practice.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If bone is pushed against the other which has been pressed upon it by you, then immediately press that second part; if not possible, apply pressure to this place and cure what was remembered before healing begins.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And some measures are strenuous for this hip fracture, as we have mentioned in the aid and on the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even after such treatment in this manner does not heal the cramped thigh; and if it is restored alone, another cushion must be applied there, so that they continue walking with that leg which was previously affected.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You understand that the thigh is tense for up to ten days or a few months and everything depends on the complexity of conditions and other available means.
Capitol .xv.	The provided text appears as if it were written in an early form of medical Latin
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	In the context of a medieval or historically themed translation where modern languages like English, Italian, Spanish and French may blend with older forms of language (often referred to as 
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	When the dislocation or injury of the shoulder joint occurs again and often worsens over time without proper treatment: "motades" here likely refers to movements that exacsly aggrathyse ("aggravate") a fracture, especially in an elder population. Thus, it may be understood as suggesting gentle movement is avoided until professional care can
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it is indeed just a crack or dislocation in their parts (shoulder), and only if the patient feels able to move without severe pain: "plagia" translates here as restraint ("rest") necessary for healing, implying that movement should be limited until professional medical help arrives. This maintains adherence with traditional treatment wisdom where one must carefully assess motion in relation to injury and comfort levels before proceedwards are made towards recovery or further action:
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the patient is achieved by applying water that has been broken up from their parts, and joining them together in a way that can be accomplished quickly for horseback riding (and ease) as well as construction purposes.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Return an ointment and apply it over that round stone if inside of it; tightly press downwards below to prevent from entering the stones into its cavity.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	The text provided is in Old Occitan (also known as Provençal
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Regarding the treatment of a patella fracture, here's how you might translate and interpret that statement into English:
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You understand that in the couch there are two bones of which one is large and called 'couch', and the other small and named 'needle'.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	When vinegar is applied to the two bones of the arm, and by virtue of that application healing occurs there as well as in the arm itself, then this operation belongs entirely to him/her (the practitioner).
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If there is an opening between two bones, then the cushion becomes all parts of it.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the bone is quivering undernethy pressure, then the cushion becomes divided into parts as far downwards (Denant).
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If there is a fracture in your bone, then immediately treat it now, and these are the causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Accordingly administer stretching and exercise of the joints according to that manner of treatment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Even if the wound on the scabbard is not deep and bleeding profusely, make it swell up and place pressure with your action to control blood flow. And rely on your willpower herein.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is any cause for operation on the arms, and when you clamp down with tongs that complete the entire surgery, taking wooden pincers made of ash wood which has been allowed to dry after use at once where causes are paused in soles (likely referring to setting fractures), they will be used as forceps. Place these tools on what is being considered for growth removal and do not involve fingers; the length should correspond with that of the limb, and insert into it so quickly afterwards when entering pus afterward does not enter your hands.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Envelop a cloth over each garment according to its length, and pause one on the division of the cushion for each leg, ensuring they are within the putrid matter at the foot' extraneous part (presumably referring to an area affected by infection or inflammation).
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Return the limbs' pins to three locations of pain and at nighttime, here is where they are not allowed to touch each other on both right and left sides for good measure.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a bustle of wood is administered according to the length of the cushion, and it's positioned underneath for that purpose, ensuring its mobility remains intact.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you perform this action in a bone breakage, and at that moment it is done properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii.: This line seems like it could be a reference or
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	From the breakdown of the ankle and bones in the leg and foot.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Although the foot does not break entirely; it's possible that some bones in the leg will have breaks; and when broken by them (the legs), they are only fractured within their joint spaces, where things get arranged according to positioning needs.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot have been broken and sometimes those bones are raised above them, then let the humors stop in their place on the earth prepared for this purpose with antidotes administered herein.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Return the foot over what is lifted from those bones, and apply lime to them, then massage these limbs back into their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And apply pressure with an elastic bandage and place it under the patient's abdomen in which there are two small cups attached.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Return strength to that part of the body which lacks structure and have wrapped it in cloths along with other potential reasons for their condition. (Here's a line by line translation:
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, and grate away the broken bones that are either fractures or dislocations, thus completing these operations with joints (probably referring to limbs affected by injuries).
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	May if you drink these things, they restore them and ease their pains as well, according to what I recommend for the restoration of those ills in my care.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May you pause on any given of the patient'sin ribcage covered in a lion-skin garment, stretch the table under his chest, and stand over one of its legs so that the tongue can maintain good retention inside him.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not overlook the reasons mentioned to you in other broken bones we have discussed here, and pay attention to everything related to this incident at hand.
Capitol .xviii.	The text provided is written in an archaic form of language that draws from Latin
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	This sentence appears to be describing a bone break, specifically mentioning the "coccyx" (tailbone) of women and possibly referring to breaks in both legs ("os pedis") as well as potentially involving other structures like ligaments or muscles ("vergua").
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the tailbone of a woman is broken (note: in modern medical terminology this would likely refer to fractures involving different bones such as sacrum or coccyx), she should lie on her back with one small part inclined towards, and be supported by something behind. This translation suggests an old method where the individual was positioned carefully for immobilization due to a spinal injury rather than what we would typically refer to in today's context as "fractured tailbone.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And place the matron on top of the potion, and pain is in it as hope; and put the maid into motion little by little until all that has gone out comes back inside where the body part (probably referring to the womb) was during coitus with desire.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Here applies pressure to the two of them (referring back to perhaps previously mentioned parts of the body), and when urinating decreases discomfort for ease, reducing further as directed by instinctive action—returning firstly to their original position:
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	When applied for seven days or so these things will restore it.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take once upon a time's sheep and stretch it over the patient'thy chest with reed; insert all of the bladder into its cavity, and inflate in the canule while contained therein so that the bladder swells within said cavity, which results in healing.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary that its borders be sealed and kept for two days since the treatment has been applied, enter until healing occurs.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of either male or female become cracked, apply treatment and massage to that person'dict body fluids we have recommended for their hip joints.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	E when it is not hidden within these specific breaks and seldom occurs to them whom I have studied deeply in my book; this fracture signifies directly the true cause at work beneath their surface during restoration and tightening of body parts, which means that they understand me.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the wound of the home occurs and apply grease made from goat'se skin (or any animal fat), place it in that area; cover it with a cloth wrap, enveloped herself, and leave it on for three days or send them here to be cared for, until they are healed.
Capitol .xix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual information similar
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When a bone is broken in an infant, the treatment for it often involves:
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	With such an injury where you apply pressure to the fracture on plaster, and primarily if your arm is significantly swollen like that of the thigh or assistant's limb, which resembles what we treat when performing amputation here today as described by our fellows.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the child vomits after taking it in, then you must hold them down so that they do not spill over and regurgitate again if there is another cause for their discomfort.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When beginning restoration of the fracture on that day, do not extend it further unless gangrene sets in.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you apply cauterization if there is an ulceration present, so that the healing of it can take place within one day until when said ulceration has receded and not on the third to fourteenth days in total; during this period, avoid causing any bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is broken and protrudes above the neck (the point of breakage), then it must be reduced, which will make that very easy for you to handle and apply only a little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be your preparation and the equipment of you, then reduce that here with yours; this thing made of iron will have a length of seven or eight digits, its width according to the size of the patient—these are tools for me (the doctor). Accordingly, as much is needed from these three or four in total quantity by your indication throughout healing within all types of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Give it back, and be for a little discomfort in order that the patient does not feel pain during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	When it is an acute injury at the level of their hips or when the groin tendons are stretched and they enter into the parts of the body;
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it goes for him/her:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E fornite in Greco "Labervolant Atelerema", thus it is small.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that purpose when a limb is immobilized above its bone, it should be raised over the part of the bone itself.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When that bone returns within a period of time and is gnawed by any kind of horse apparatus (which could refer to medical instruments or devices), here we have it:
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then you must grasp the ends of the fracture with your hands, and if that portion is subtle and not suitable for good reinforcement, then it's necessary to insert therein an instrument which has power in water (or moist).
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May you not be able to reduce the bones of all that we have poured into them, then cut away from us what comes out through those insufficiences which we provide; or saw one among our saws in any way that is within your reach.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Return that which is rough in the bone of agitation and sharp thorns,
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and with that reduction you cause a severe pain in the area affected by the dislocation, so be wise that the bone does not return to its natural position; therefore do what must be done for the dislocated joint significantly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and you submerge the cloth in a wet, black moisture materially (possibly cold), especially if it's summer time without pausing on dirt or any other cause that could make soap to occur where applied, so as not to happen accidental scrapes and corrosion.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply bandages at high noon, when it is convenient after bone restoration, and place what has been discovered undernethy as wrappings according to the quantity of that which was found beneath them.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be very careful not to strain the child who has a fracture; this is what doctors have warned us repeatedly, and an accident could occur that harms your sickness or worsens it severely.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a looseness of bone that tightens and differs from other types of fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the child is large or small and fears those harmful accidents upon them that they have recommended, causing pain in the area above where it rests, do not stop over these pillows; perhaps you may bring it to this hard covering of sheets within the bed space and hold onto their hands.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once or twice a day the patient begins to sweat itching (rash), which is generated under that cloth where you have placed your pad for absorption, and apply honey on these spots as per our custom when treating rashes with bee'dictum medicines mixed together.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And when you have prepared the ligament and considered the swelling in any part of the body during daytime or evening until it is consolidated and closed, ensure that the limb is ready for treatment according to this method.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the child passes through days without rest and recovery is not achieved nor does it cease to be attached at its place, then understand that small pains are occurring there which you must investigate in order to prevent further attempts by the body (or 'plagia').
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (likely referring to the excess or accumulation of something harmful) that are separated and extracted from them, those which cannot be separated and place their limbs causing pain; for you, take note of each one according to what is possible in your ability.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you crush the soft parts or joints (accidez), they will swell, which is either inflammation or decay and rot of some kind; then it's necessary to pause pressure on one of those same humors that have been brought for healing as described in this chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	When the fluid in which I hold my speech is present and you perform this task before me with your hands on the patient's thighs (and shoulders) as if they were those of large members, do not presume to draw it out or remove it for long periods driven by excessive bitternthy urges; have mercy on that which lies within where pus accumulates and treat it accordingly.
Capitol .xx.	Capital .xx.: This line appears incomplete or not directly translat
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The phrase provided in Latin translates to English as: "About the care of knotting that occurs at the site of any fracture." This sentence is discussing a healing or reparative process related to joint pain, which may
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 In English translation: "The knotting that occurs during these movements in the healing site of a fracture is mostly at joints, and it appears to be associated with how much force or movement on the limb; for this reason doctors forbid its usual operation." This passage discusses concerns regarding natural body motions impacting the knotting (a possible reference to scar tissue formation) during healing from a fracture. It emphasizes that these movements, especially at joints where more force is applied or there's significant movement of an injured limb post-fracture, can influence how and if such natural processes occur after the injury
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 Thus consider the recent knotting and administer in such remedies that have staunched blood flow to these areas; apply some or all of those treatments herein mentioned: worms, snails (eels), pepper, mirrans, and similar substances. Apply pressure with garlic cloves, raw onion slices, or gauze bandages tight enough for proper constriction over the knotting in linen cloth; compress firmly to effectively control these areas of concern. This segment provides guidance on how specific remedies were historically applied topical treatment methods that included localized compression with natural materials and substances believed by ancient practitioners (likely medieval or Renaissance) to aid healing, particularly when addressing the formation or management of knots—which could be interpreted as either literal interpretations involving physical injuries related to fractures, dislocations, sprains resulting in scar tissue that forms and behaves like a 'knot,' or metaphorically representing internal imbalances addressed through home remedies. The directive suggests an immediate application of natural agents for constriction—a practice not uncommon before the widespread use of modern pharmaceuticals, aiming to reduce bleeding (hence 'staunch') and promote healing in these ailments or inj
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that the connection has been turned into stone and locked up out of necessity to provoke that which is already contracted therein, and you shall divide this excessively protruding part with a sharp tool so as not to further irritate what'thy inside. Treat within thee whoever requires healing from it all the same.
Capitol .xxi.	The text appears to be in an early form of medical Latin heavily influenced by Rom
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the restoration of the bone is complete and Roman water (presumably referring to proper hydration or other healing elements) has been applied, gently return the delicate limb following nature's course as per tradition.  
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and healthy blood flows to the fine parts of the body below: these are not pains due simply to causes such as excessive sun exposure causing weakening of tendons or ligaments inside where nourishment is forbidden for movement; or an abundance of obesity placing extra strain on joints and muscles, leading discomfort in hips (hips) with the malady's exacerbation caused by excessive laughter.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: In giving care for this fluid, reduce and allow the body' extrication of its essence in it (the sanction), apply baths, and administer cupping and lubricating substances on him/her;
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand over the body part so that it catches nourishment from above or continues in its watery ambulation within until the nourishment returns to its normal form of the body.
Capitol .xxii.	The provided medieval medical text appears complex due to its unique combination of linguistic elements
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	When the bones are crushed and their operation is forbidden, it implies that a medical intervention or treatment of such damaged skeletal structures should not be attempted at this time due to potential complications, contraindications, or because healing must occur naturally without surgical disruption. Here's a line-bydependent translation into
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member is in a state of healing from its twisted condition and bone fractures are joined back together firmly, it becomes prohibited by nature to perform surgery on that body part; yet even if such members exist with new breaks or injuries resulting afterward. Here's an English translation:
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Mays already stand our doctors and innkeepers, who have caused us pain here in this treatment; such an operation is lost to great fear for the sake of which we are condemned.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	May cramping and knots be recent occurrences; if they are in the water vessel where your thighs reside (probably referring to a bladder or vascdict), take them away using poultices made from aloe, fennel seed, mustard, and similars—these substances also serve those on their legs. Apply these external remedies as healings with diallacrion applied well; or use the mucillage of fennel seeds mixed with hog's grease (or olive oil) for this purpose, and apply it here too—these being fatty fish concoctions ground into flour and poultices made from fleece. These are remedies named after medicinal women that provide consolidation of the body.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some waters are soluble by persistent cold breeze that is applied all over the body throughout the entire day and night.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May it be that bending is here to come and turned into stone causing need for iron care, provided the patient's fluid discharges below their joints are evacuated continuously, as well as excess water deposited above this place due to metallic work from such doctor being absorbed under these delicate bones, which facilitator will be administered with great diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	In translating this medieval medical text line by line into English with an attempt at
De sermo en dislocacio.	The provided Latin-like phrases appear to be related to a discussion on joint displacement or some
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	In translation: The speech concerns the treatment of joint displacement from any point within its locale, which prevents motion and necessitates intervention for a dislocated limb; this causes great pain in the groin area as well as large bruises or injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when you decrease the displacement of a joint, do so quickly and without delay; if delayed, it becomes fixed in place, making reduction difficult due to fluid accumulation there.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	Through so much haste that there is neither gout nor inflammation in the hour of anesthesia, but moderate movement brings on pains and cramps.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When you apply heat, then cover yourself with the fomentation of the abdomen, and let it rest until the inflammation subsides; also wrap your member in water cloths dipped from head to toe, for ease of movement.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every part of it is cured with the same water from which its memory will return there, in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And when the displacement comes as follows after a fracture, from the upper portion enters into the lower portion.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol XXIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of treatment for jaw dislocation just now.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the jaws if not set; and a dislocation of both is called according to one of two methods: for they are slightly displaced from their places by slight removal, and gently mollified with a small amount – or so completely dislocated as when there'thy tongue wrapped in his word (saliva), which he cannot retain nor close his mouth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	May when the detachment of it is slight, in major positions returns by itself a little.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and finished, then immediately apply reduction to it in order not to delay overall healing.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce (the dislocated jaw), and mostly if both mandibles are displaced, administer warm water or oil enema while holding the head lightly so that reduction of both may occur at any time; thus we have what you need when needed.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	So when they return and are swaddled again, with the bubo'gy (likely referring to an abscess or similar condition) mouth not softened, there will be cushions of cloth on those pills/bubbles, wax candles dripping oil over them, and their limbs made easier through this.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is to be administered easily, and not work upon the opening of the mouth for consumption and drinking until the jawbone has been numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws at any time and not converted to their respective places is difficult, then continuous fevers occur along with persistent thirst, and also vomiting blood frequently occurs; furthermore, it aggrathy the stomach within the malady, and often brings on cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it again, then know that I lose it; and after such time as you cause the substance to harden in X days.
Capitol .xxv.	The provided text appears incomplete for translation as it lacks sufficient context or additional sentences
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	This line translates to: "Reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the limb's tendon." The sentence describes a medical procedure whereby an orthopedic surgeon or healthcare professional would address issues related
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The translation of this line is: "The collarbone is not displaced from the chest due to its continuous connection there; and sometimes it becomes dislocated away, whereupon it'dictates (or indicates) a certain feeling." This sentence discusses when or how a collarbone might become dislodged—not because of ongoing movement within the body but perhaps as a result of an external force that moves it from its usual position. The mentioning of "sentiment" suggests there may be accomp
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The translation for this line is: "For the treatment, it's that humidity of excessive fluid affecting its two sides and extending beyond them." This sentence likely refers to a medical condition where an accumulation or presence of fluids (possibly referring to edema) spreads out over both aspects
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The translation for this line is: "For compression here on your hand will aid in fixing the contraction." This sentence suggests using pressure or bandaging techniques to compress an area of swelling (contraction) within a patient's body with their own pal
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	The translation for this line is: "And apply pressure on that plaster and pellets, making them strong." This sentence implies the application of additional force or reinforcement to a cast (made from materials like plaster) in order to make
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The translation for this line is: "May the limb that stays with it, without displacement on any day; whenever you wish to reduce and reposition as per what we have said." This sentence seems to be providing instructions or advice regarding managing an injury—specifically a dislocated joint. The focus here appears to be ensuring proper care for someone who is immobile due to the condition, with guidance provided by medical professionals ("asper") on how often and when (tied into "segun que havem dit," meaning according to what has been said) repositioning should occur using a device or apparatus referred to as "tu
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Return the compression over that bandage, and light massaging, drainage, commanding the humors to settle down and rest within until it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this treatment method, pain is reduced from the limb when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	The text provided appears as if it is composed of an amalgamation between
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Based on the fragment you've given, which translates to "From the reduction of the muscle dislocation," here’s a possible interpretation and
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The provided Latin-like sentence in English roughly translates to: "You know that the muscle is not dislocated but by three ways, one of which occurs when it's torn away from its place." This suggests an understanding or observation related to conditions where a muscle may be affected. Here’s breaking down each part for clarity and translation into English line-by-line:
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is that it has become dislocated above the muscle joint, and pain occurs herein; it does not concern the joints behind for the shoulder blade or in front due to nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is a dislocation and displacement outside of these parts that are tapped on the skin surface above where blood vessels course through (the areas with thinner flesh), there they become dislocated; possibly also in those places where muscles protrude, illness seeps out due to difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	When ardor is directed towards the abdominal area through palpation or casting out (percussion/cauterization), and their body has already been twisted due to a previous displacement, it is subjected to treatment for inflammation.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now cover that which you have spoken is overly exposed and now proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the translation line by line:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is a dislocation of either leg or shoulder and you have caused visible touching without fear, do not be afraid.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation it is feared that reduction will occur when cold and inflammation ensues in the malady.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	When the reduction of it is for lifting its mass to the lower parts below; and pause gives them timely rests from their pullings, and strengthens that joint in its place therein, and elevates its mass upwards into those places again, giving a pause afterward so as to return gradually.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May it return if not returned already, and as for the commensal that occurred today, then we bathe (the inflamed) malady in tail water and administer brown algae to soften and lineages with high-altitude chestnuts, fenugreek, honey in tail water, which is also given.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to reduce this second manner: and make present a home that is long than the limb (the affected joint or area), belonging from there (belonging within it, implying originating in the body's own humors/fluids), insert your muscle quickly into the space of the malady immediately upon its elevation to above-air level by another servant who pulls upward on this home.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	May it be that the hernia protrudes (is out), and you see what else causes its suspension, in order to seriously address this situation; once identified, then we can take immediate action for correction or restoration of position.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another reduction method is this: make a long staff with which figure can be taken away like a broomstick, that it should not be thick nor subtle; place its pause at the head of the stick lying on the ground as if lined with mortar, and let the part holding down below stay there without movement. Let it lie straight over the top of the staff's padlock, stretching out to each other piece from time to time according to their strength, so that when they are extended together for power, the joint returns quickly back to its place by speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment: grasp a staff with its length equal to two arm'se lengths and hold that stick vertically so that the top of it aligns with the chest button according to this method.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Ensure that clothespins are placed on top of their head, so that it does not protrude from the waistband.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Here the humoral excess is settled in the groin area immediately and arms are extended over it into the divisions just as quickly; similarly, the staff rests on assistants and arms and hand extremities.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Return your arm on an inclined plane according to the direction indicated by latitude, and stretch it out over the joints immediately afterwards; another limb is suspended from the other, where they meet internally at this point.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the internal part of the patient is completed according to any possible manner and you pause intermittently his spinal cushion made from wool or alum dye with these quantities; a plaster massage prepared using powdered lead mixed with water, applied throughout all muscles until he turns over (assuming this helps him turn), continuous gentle manipulation of the spinal cushion on strictures, and his body is attached to its collarbone while lying down. It should not be said that his chest pad remains in place for seven days without muffling it up.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When food from indigestion is stopped and the body member feels comfortable, then it's placed on recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Return food is given more and it's exercise with movement; therefore, if he closes himself up and does not soften, then already he gets well.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that you have caused or for another reason, then in that case apply three kinds of cautery as described in the treatise on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this pain is present and the ligament or joint isn'thy not sealed for seven days, then reduce swelling on it occasionally with plasters/bandages; they will not be fixed in place nor prevent that arm from being raised to body parts above, as you know that their nerves are either located at the muscle head (cephalad), or extensions and mollifications.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation that you experience in your chest and thighs or parts behind them, reduction is done by forceful movement within where it returns to its normal position upon intervention.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it is administered in that other stricture, and cure for it lies within being healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you harden the body'gyma in their limb and slow down movement, then let humoral excess be washed away through bathing until that gravity is relieved and they return to their original state of health.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (This line appears as an annotation or reference rather
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Curación del desplazamiento del codo." This sentence in Latin-influenced Italian translates to "The treatment of
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The provided text appears as an explanation or guideline in the context of medical examination and treatment for shoulder dislocation according to medieval or classical texts influenced by Latin language structures:
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When you encounter hernias and reduce the displacement as much as possible until it heals after a cauterizing treatment, which is difficult if an abscess has formed; most of these are caused by all other species of dislocation and greater pain, accompanied often with urgent visits to those places.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When the restoration is possible, it means that their body should be extended with hands and arms spread out, and doctors or attendants stand on the hips and press down on the joints of his limbs until they return to their proper place, thus bringing them back into position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is at the joints ahead, return as quickly as possible and bend it back to its place; when doing so, press on the area where you can feel the knee with your hand (located in the palm of your own).
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the displacement does not submit to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	When two ministers stretch out their arms and hold them together so that nothing is torn asunder.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And turn your arm completely over it (the patient), placing a long cloth or cord around the area of focus on them, binding tightly.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, apply some oil here to help with the lubrication of the joint and then press firmly on it until it returns to its original position; these are the causes that assist in this matter for ease of movement.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And for its reduction that has been placed on top of where there is stiffness and effusion in the place where fluid accumulthy are present under pressure due to strictures descending from above, with arms hanging down by bracing them.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if it is necessary for it (the condition) to be loosened, and therefore when the joint formation occurs at that place, then loosen its ligaments and ease that position.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not strong or stiffened, then repeatedly apply the plaster and bandage, leaving it in place for several days until it is no longer extended; subsequently return that as well.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you apply gravity to the reduction of the joint and its position is in movement, then administer moisture with warmth delicate touches, until it heals; if at that point a hernia appears above the movable fatty lymph node (which may indicate inflammation), securely bind it there, and place it on the bones of the chest and back during day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return that one and immerse it; when boiling, rub the joint where cold has congealed with warmth alternately for a day and another time (the third), holding their hands.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Am inserted into that which is within (the body'thy cavity).
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, rest on that moist and split cow'se edge and strain upon it; apply some times, then the place will become dry and return to its proper disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The exact meaning of this line is unclear without
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	In the context of a medieval medical treatise where several languages like Latin and regional tongues such as Italian or Occitan might intermingle with French due to historical influences (e.g., during periods when regions were under different rulers), this sentence could be translated line by line into
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The dislocation of the limb is some kind of displacement and its correction lies in other joints; perhaps even more urgent recovery when it comes to realignment at the moment or while an apatemyc (or avulsion fracture) occurs, whereby the location becomes immobilized. Here'dictation appears as a multilingual medical account detailing procedures for treating dislocations and emphasizes prompt action in case of joint displacement potentially leading to further complications that require immediate intervention such as apatemyc or avulsion fracture which necessitate quick stabilization, often by immobilizing the affected site.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you stop the joint between the thigh bone and pelvis on a table, and the attendant extends this part, while the doctor places his hand or palm over the imminent joint intersection, pushing it back to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Even if it is considered that the palm has been placed on the belly of her (the patient), then let the humors be extended and reduced; and if dislocation comes before, place her body so that its abdomen rests upon a table to ensure that the doctor's belly covers this impending joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, all is well; but if not, that part will harden and become an abscess, and you cannot cure nor treat with the reduction of its pressure applied today.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Indeed the knee joint according to its curvature; and there is nothing in the bladder causing it, but rather that the matter has become softened, and you cannot strengthen any cause for this—knowing that your nerves have been twisted or shattered, so do not engage them herein with cautery aimlessly.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when the patient retracts, place your hand on what we have applied to them for this condition (presumably gout), and their limbs will be stretched out over it; meanwhile they should lie down with that layer upon them for days, while also being cut off from food.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient' extrinsic motion is absent and feels pain in there due to some gravity or coldness of water/frosty conditions, then apply warmth until they are relieved (alleviated).
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix.: (Note: This line appears incomplete or out
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The phrase "de la curacio di lo scivolare dei dieci" translates to English as, "of curing the sli
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some walks have caused dislocation of the joints throughout the body. This sentence suggests that certain movements or activities—referred to metaphorically as "walks" here—have led
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When any joint of those two (perhaps referring to the hands or abdomen) is dislocated from its natural position at the palm or in the belly/abdomen area, one must hold that part and apply pressure firmly until return. This advice indicates a primitive first aid approach where manual manipulation may be used—with caution as there's potential for further injury if not done correctly. The phrase "entro que retorne" means ensuring it returns to its proper place, which aligns with the traditional understanding of setting disloc
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Hold up (or provide support) for the head of that particular joint which was dislocated and suspend it in place above ground level or resting position; keep this arrangement going for two days at a minimum to allow healing before reassessment, according to these instructions from historical medical practice. This statement is about immobilizing an affected limb—likely the upper extremity
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Hold up and extend that part until it's properly aligned for its place in today (the current day). Here, the directive seems to be about aligning a dislocated joint back into position carefully while providing support or immobilization during this process—perhaps as an immediate treatment measure
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	Whenever necessary (indicating that the dislocation should not be ignored), keep it aligned with what's described in that account/narration, and do not allow for displacement during daylight hours; instead hold onto this position at night time—and continue doing so until firm. This sentence likely pertains to a routine or protocol wherein the joint must remain immobile except when specifically mentioned (perhaps as part of an ancient remedy), with specific attention given to its care after dark, implying that healing may occur better during these times due to various belief systems in historical medical practices. The use of "st
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems like water (indicating the presence of excess humor or "dampness" in a person), and if dislocated into the abdomen area, make as much with water initially for this primary operation to be healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it is made of water when displaced to other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital : (The reference seems unclear as it does not provide content
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	From the treatment of vertebral displacement in pairs." - This line translates to English and refers generally to medical intervention aimed at addressing issues with
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in the back or neck is dislocated and fractured outrightly (in situ), it cannot be treated here; rather, death must ensue within the womb." - This line suggests that if a spinal injury occurs where bones are severely displaced from their usual position to an extent not repairable in this setting ("here"), and these severe fractures happen "in situ" (directly), it is too grave for treatment, leading instead directly to death. The term “womb” implies the unborn child or fetus who would be at risk
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	A sign of the womb's expulsion (miscarriage) is that it goes against one’s will, and cannot be retained; hence, we soften or mollify their limbs/body parts here or there with cushions for them ('of him'), a spinal column from his location [or an inserted pin], which after initial insertion must also remain fixed while treatment is provided. After the removal of these objects (the pins), they are divided into four sections to be treated accordingly.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So now it is inflamed at the posterior parts and has no sign of purpling.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of it be that if there is a yellowish discoloration due to youthfulness, neither is its treatment nor recovery for this entire thing.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Might enter for examination or by touching to those areas directed towards recovery; might they already have discussed the curative speech in detail, from which I return with insightful understanding—might you also open and remove what causes discomfort from therein, due to its proximity bringing about clearer comprehension of their situation.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	When you have induced cold in the area of departure from below (implying making someone feel colder by cooling down their lower body part), it is neither healing nor recovery for that illness; rather, it seems to be pain on two legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From those it is not healed except for that which you apply directly into them, as recommended by the water they possess.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the humidity is spread over his face above the chest due to moisture from breathing, and it extends quickly downwards such that it does not touch his chest.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E apone an ullu graffe reticulat sia sospitatus, set in terra firma fundamentalis pug entrancia super caput suum, et alii ulla fusti armature omni potentissimis pesibus eius extremitatem.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds a staff and does not leave it in the hole; another minister holds the second form like that.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here the minister extends the ligament to the part of the trunk, but they should not be tightened between the two staves and their joints where they are fixed; nevertheless (but), as we have said before.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The doctor places his hands on the spine for strength as he returns it backward into place, and adjusts their weights within that position until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	May it not return through this manner, then take a table of which the length or breadth is three cubits, and carve into the wall where we have stated that the malady resides in an interstice between the ends of this table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to turn the part that has been revolved above it; and you must stay on your back with the head of malady at the end of two sticks, whose lengths are one arm's length each, plus where the heads meet is a palm-length, therein already made in any stick which turns while being carried over land so that nothing else may happen to it.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And if it is a wooden staff that he holds and turns in both arms of the two sticks,
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a defect where it forms the staff' extruded length which equals a handful of water when turned over, and in both other staves they appear similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Return strength to the ligaments you have stretched in the groin of your thigh where it must be returned by lifting, and return those that are stretched between the knees back into place so they can support their legs again.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Return each one and place them in their proper position with the aid of a minister who turns them as directed by the doctor (and possibly others).
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes for this injury (or dislocation):
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And place the spine back in position, and secure it with glue made from albumen (egg white), and apply wax; let this mixture thickly coat the joint of the vertebrae where displacement has occurred, over which the traction table's pulley is set up at three or four turns to pull out until movement disappears.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Return its ligaments as stated before and insert the patient's humors into where they will heal inside to restore health.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any chance of healing at the end of recovery, it has been recommended that they be administered medicines to moisten and cleanse for a long time, which we have advised; and now such medicine has already been applied in this location with iron plates.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And at times the urgency is felt in the lower back of the spine due to that dislocation; it'dictstheonealreadyrequiresmedicine now or soon will lead youto your demise if not attended promptly.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitolo XXVI. (This indicates that it is Chapter 26
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Chapter XXVI pertains to the treatment of a dislocated hip. Here's how one might
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Chapter XXVI discusses that the hip joint and muscle connection may only become dislocated without much force (not merely by chance), focusing on not causing pain at other smaller body parts or concave structures where injuries might happen otherwise when you cause harm to these areas. Here's a more comprehensive translation:
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the wide is dislocated according to four ways, it can be dislocated at the divisions of these parts, or in front of them, above them, behind them, or under them.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is displaced in various parts of the body and scarcely at or behind these areas.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	When the dislocation of limbs is present among these parts it becomes long and hard to manipulate that which was healed within there; hence I apply pressure here causing bleeding from what used to be healthy, so that the head (the top part) of this hernia comes down into place. Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line:
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And if that person'dicts displacement is at the parts beyond (i.e., distal to joint), then their accidents are contrary to this one.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	E whosoever has dislocated their parts may experience pain at the joint above where they are placed on the couch so that it cannot move further; and if urine flows out of them when this happens (implying a possible injury to the bladder), an abscess forms inside, making walking difficult. They must walk with crutches on their feet for support.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Here comes the sentence to translate: The name of that person whose dislocation does not expand the joint or bend what is already bent therein, and who has a short leg placed where it should be in relation with others, which cushion calms down the joints, and the head of the thigh belongs to this place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May the reduction of these spices for this dislocation is what you consider, and indeed if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been addressed by your provided reductions here at home according to its disposition; therefore, there'se no need for further attempts in that treatment. And so now we can proceed with other concerns.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the one where dislocation has recently occurred, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then turn your head to restore the joint and extend that position to the parts before and after, as well as left and right sides; when this action returns strength without needing other treatments.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May it be that if the patient does not return in this manner, you must prepare strong medicines and extend the cushion placed under them from time to extraneous times or even more than usual; another servant extends such medicine above there where previously nothing was applied—and yet they tightly bind a rope over its length. Another attendant stretches out that same thread upwards, applying it directly atop their joints' tendrils; and with additional force secure the ends of this line upon each other so firmly bound together above there on top (of or near) said cushion to ensure immobility: tightening a rope over the thigh bulge in such fashion that no part escapes its grasp.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	When it extends from this point or below the shoulder joint to the shoulder joint itself, or from the chest joint down to the back joint.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	When all of these are extended within a period until the malady is raised to its head above ground and begins to break down,
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This particular type of extension is common among all four (likely referring to different body parts or types).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	So if the displacement returns with water we have mentioned, then do so; but if not, it is necessary for everything special that I can say about its treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of oneself, when dislocated and displaced to their parts, so that wickedness is raised upon one'thy back; and pause the ligaments in the place between the thigh at which they are located where the head of the thigh meets the location for lowering them down; and extend those ligaments along the part of the shoulder joint towards either end portion of the breastbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Here comes the next sentence to translate: "Apply another strong minister of cauterization on their wrists, and heat up heavily in the hollow parts of the affected thigh for effective retraction; that will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular species is of purulent exudation for which this member has been reduced, and it concerns the other substances as well.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you are able to stand on your feet and not yield to this particular method of treatment for all, then the two legs at the base of the thigh will bear us well together with both heels and knees, as well as both shins and ankles holding them.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of the body has a length corresponding to four digits (which would be roughly equivalent to two hands or feet), and when the groin extends as much as another digit, it is indicative of an imbalance in bodily humors.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Return (or fix) the hump on the patient'thy chest and make sure it is in its place; the length of his body from Earth corresponds to two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Appoint a strong youth that will reduce the head of the thigh, and have another young man suspended above it; let another boy also lower the hip back into strength, whereby the juncture returns swiftly to its place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it dislocates from behind, where the hump of the sickness lies over the leg according to what we have discussed in this session; and its ligaments are placed precisely on the hollow of the illness and on the chest of him.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Each minister extends to his/her portion; and the doctor holds on with their mouth according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So then, if you obey the reverse method [presumably of treatment], it will be sufficient in itself; but if not, rest on that which we have said herein with regard to its application through heat management.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayhaps the patient's limbs are swollen with fluid accumulation.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation occurs downwards, it is necessary to spread out that cushion and pause with one'thy hand on the sore leg joint; as stated in this medical advice, the doctor pauses his palm over the knee area of the patient suffering from a painful joint. Here we have translated each line into English:
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the joints behind (the knees and ankles), it has spread out onto the ground; they have covers that are placed firmly on its cause as we described earlier for two wide areas; their face and ligaments should be extended, just like what we've said before—there will be no pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When compression is applied with a tablet at the location where pain occurs in the joint,
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is complete as instructed, and you should not feel pain in your leg (the term for "reduction" may vary), extend cushions under their thighs; once again apply these same devices to loosen up tightness and expand slack spaces. Then adjust hinges and pauses between the knee joint parts so that there is no swelling on any of those sections, fasten a bandage firmly in place for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the ligaments and bandaging back into place, comparing one cushion with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those lumps in the abdomen, you understand that the detachment has already been fixed, and thus make the humors move outwards.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause for softening, then return and apply that bandage according to your first treatment technique, and leave it on for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And bring that back into place, and make it walk on these crutches for as many days until comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of Latin with
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	In translating "Curacio de dislocacio del denolh," we are dealing with a phrase from medieval or old Italian
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The phrase "Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras," when translated into English line by line from this old Italian context, would read:
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The sign of dislocation that you command is for the humerus (shoulder bone) to apply its cushion at the thigh joint; be aware, it has been dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it is about restoring his position in which he lies, that part of the cushion presses against the thigh at its elevation without exerting laborious effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Here applies the plaster to that and fixes it on the couch at the thighs, applying those for three or four days, fixing them all together.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the humoral fluid for walking on painful days until it has healed and provided comfort.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of it allows you to be excused, then apply force externally on the ligaments which were described in its previous treatment for the hip joint'thy healing process.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Regarding the treatment of tarsal dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The heel occasionally becomes swoldoned due to slight motion, and sometimes it is dislocated either at the joints of fingers or feet.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May healing of his recovery be through gentleness and ease, and it is that which is extended to make things more comfortable and has the hand inside while returning.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment when it is dislocated according to complementary position, make sure you stretch the thigh correctly and hold that servant firmly with your hand behind the back of what' extraneous there at this spot on its joint where they will grasp their hands for support during recovery.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Return yourself to the position of your belly button down to the lower part of the leg closest to the pubic bone area and place your left hand in that section within the hollow wherein lies its space (belly).
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Return the leg to your left arm for three steps, and then move it to the left hand twice more, pressing on the chest with the right hand as you do so.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Employs the firmness of the foot to place it in position comfortably, and you are at the cradle/cavity (implied context).
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if he returns in a period of rest or two following this treatment and his foot is also swolthy (engular), then all is well; but if not, continue the operation again until that return occurs.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May you be prohibited from reducing (the condition), and the ailment will complain between your thighs on top of earth, with an immovable bed placed there; furthermore, wrap him/her in cloth so that he does not expose his illness.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The minister of lie holds their thighs together, and another minister extends his/her leg up or over the collarbone above it; he/she also stretthy elongates each limb against its own stretching so that the body is not pulled apart from joint dislocation.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	When the doctor extracts dislocation at their hands (patient' extrication), and another servant holds the healthy hip joint together until it returns to its place (the repositioning of the dislocated hip).
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	When the dislocation is returned and it's declared to you that there has been reduction of him/her, then apply strong compression bandage on that area immediately, and bind the foot limb to the cushion firmly.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When you fear or protect the tendons behind which are on top of the foot, to prevent them from being violent and leading that strength downwards.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	After applying it for two or three days, and if the ligament becomes soothed, extend that as well.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return that part of it either during day or at night for forty days and prevent the melancholy humors from entering the intestines.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If you go ahead into that space without caution, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be loose and corrupted on its way, nor receive any treatment care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply poultice to it (the wound), then proceed as follows in the place where we describe this healing process herein mentioned above for treatment and bandaging; while ensuring that it is sufficiently moistened therewith, within these locations of care and dressing.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The provided text seems like it is from an ancient medical context with some Latin influence given its
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	From the fragment "Capitol .xxxiiii.", I can infer that this might be referring to a specific section or chapter within another text,
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Translating the provided fragment: When that which is dislocated should be gently moved back into place (suggestion of traction), and if it's not too difficult to do so without undue force ("abanzi"), then proceed with caution or attempt realignment. This translation attempts to preserve both meaning and stylistic elements reminiscent of the original language context, which may have drawn from various linguistic trad
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation occurs in either knee joint of the leg, take measures to lift up (or provide support) both hips and apply pressure as if holding them on a table or any stable surface; keep it so they feel steady like when initially supporting their body weight was taken. This translation reflects an attempt at understanding medieval medical practices for addressing dislocations while translating the language nuances present in such ancient texts into modern English, maintaining fidelity to potential original terminologies and procedural descriptions found within that specific context of care as depicted by means akin to "engual" or
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Rest the body part that is affected by placing it in position and pause to allow for time at these joints (where you’ve aligned them), then apply calcite beneath where pressure was applied on the area; watch until returning what already has been placed there, ensuring no further protrusion appears. This translation seeks accuracy while attempting to replicate medieval medical instructional style concerning setting a dislocated limb and monitoring for complications or success of intervention as indicated by movements at joints after rest periods. Here I've maintained an effort towards the original structure suggesting body handling techniques, emphasizing positioning ("engualha") alongside preventive measures against potential issues during recovery phases in medieval medical practice contextually presented to
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Return the stomach of his body into its cavity, and apply pressure to that area with two caps (presumably for compression), ensuring it is tightly secured firmly for three days; then allow rest from walking for a certain number of days until healed completely, at which point replenishment can be assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or text related
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	When joint displacement occurs in children or due to a bone break, or in any case:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you address any cause of it and engage in its cure or restoration, success is assuredly leading to life' extrication from death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And now you must urgently perform the reduction in the cause'thy cavity to prevent further development of osteomyelitis (an infected bone condition). Thus acting quickly is essential for curing this painful ailment.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we administer it, then apply the regimen that causes cautery and heals what is required from us for its lubrication of greasy ointments applied to dry liniments removed by doctors.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation is a fracture and you feel pain in the separated bones, then perform the setting of those bones properly, as previously mentioned for simple fluids encountered at these locations in their bodies.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid as your will directs that part of the body within which fear enters according to what preceded my preaching; for this is better from you towards your Creator, perhaps forever in honor toward him, and also health for all things here below during these times.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Assistant's translation of the medieval medical text line by line into English:
Amen.	Ah. (The phrase "Amen
