Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi begins speaking (or announcing) with them/themselves/their words related to Albuccas.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, you have completed this book of mine, which lies at the heart (literally 'the end' or core) of medical science due to your praise and through my expositions and declarations; I see that you understand this treatise divided by operation/surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	When the operation is prostrated in our region and time, entrusted to me due to my knowledge of it, I see nothing but small descriptions in free Ancient texts; these I correct and adapt them so that their intentions are clear, and thus lengthen understanding and refine art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "And I have seen that you understand this tractate in accordance with its second part regarding explanation and demonstration as well as abbreviation; for these are necessary forms of tools used by cauters and other instruments, which cause necessity.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through Aqua of Hippocrates who knows his name is power, may in the small workings it does mainly in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we already have told you of that in the entrance to this free space; who do not know what we have told them about anatomy, will fall into error and thus harm themselves unnecessarily, as they might from hearing only some aspects of these things which are formed within this science and extracted through it.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the line-byse translation of this medieval medical treatise:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor ordered that the patient drink a stone from a homely place where it had been processed within him and was large, so they drained this stone through a tube of the bladder, and thus the homey substance expired in three days.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	When you call upon that (a substance or entity), and because of the greatness of the stone and the disposition of the bladder, it comes undernethy where death will occur.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another doctor took his salary from our landlord as payment for surgery; and came with a black instrument that was used because there was a fracture in the patient'dict leg, which he set without looking at it (breathing deeply into the wound), on dirt, pillows, or chairs of strong structure.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here you return the ligaments according to your wishes, and fix them in place with straps during certain days as directed by us; this is when the thigh and buttock are outside of the socket joint, leading to dislocation.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you called upon him (the doctor), and provided instruments to remove the ligaments, achieving relief and easing of your pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even though decay has been confirmed in the limb, so it cannot be restrained and will not stop roaming within while under the malady'supreme condition (presence of illness).
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	Here comes another doctor who pierced an ulceration, and it became inflamed within days; meanwhile, the cunning of him grew towards becoming his lord (or master).
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the skull needs to be treated for melancholalgy; not because it comes into contact with everything around them, but rather, it's the member where they have been held throughout their life.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For this sentence in the medieval medical treatise, here is an attempt at translation into English line by line with consideration for its somewhat archaic language structure:
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take up your weapons for solicitude and protection from God, and let your illness suffer defeat and cessation of pain.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Here comes the translation of each line into English:
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When gouty pains occur in some of its manifestations," or "When signs of gout appear in some forms:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Not a physician suffers from melancholy, for such doctors cannot be named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already read this book for the second time three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of free space, and first from the primary section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the body weight, in terms of instruments and iron tools for caustics, what is required therein.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	La division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The Second Chapter on cautery and perforation, as well as pills, poultices, extraction of herbs and similars for those purposes, has been arranged and ordered according to the forms of these instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the pure portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third part of restoration and displacement, as well as treatment for twisting and appearance to these individuals; the table ordered within their bodies under the feet, and forms established by instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery (foc) and acute medicine and recall of suffering.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all parts free (or "tractate" in Latin suggests starting or treating something comprehensively
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	At that point begins the assessment of how well those treatments and herbs affect his body's health (or "cauterize" in Latin refers to heating or burning something as a form of treatment), focusing on their quality, with explicit restrictions placed upon such cauterizations.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Thus the conversation about the quality of health for those treatments and herbs is lengthy and detailed (suggesting an in-depth discussion on their effects), subtle according to knowledge, yet secretly guarded; they speak greatly among themselves about it, but there's disagreement within them. To me enough has been communicated—the prolongation of this dialogue would not benefit my understanding due to these internal disputes and secrecy surrounding the information (implying that despite hearing some parts of their discussions, I don’t fully grasp everything because they are reluctant or selective in sharing what is known among them).
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Thus it is said that the treatment applies universally throughout all components of matter or substance (indicating a broad application), with exceptions to two complexes—these are parts at the base/end of his body's structure. It implies these particular areas might require different attention due to their foundational and terminal roles in bodily composition, which could influence how treatment is applied there versus other regions where it’s universally effective (pointing out that while a general approach works for many parts, special consider
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail and dry parts of matter there is disagreement; some argue that treatments are beneficial for those areas due to their quality and lack of moisture, while others counter this viewpoint because it's unsuitable in cases where these properties—quality being goodness or excellence, combined with a state of desiccation (dryness) —are present. It leads them to believe that if the wet part associated with those areas is cauterized and dried as treatment, this would be inconvenient for maintaining health since it's against nature: quality implies refinement or purity while dryness suggests a lack of something necessary (usually moisture). Thus any artificial attempt to correct the wet part by means such as heating might not align with natural conditions and could prove detrimental rather than beneficial. Here, there's recognition that treatments must be appropriate for each specific situation; what works or is advisable in one case (the tail/dry parts) may contradict another approach necessary when addressing different symptoms associated elsewhere due to opposing natural conditions—highlighting the
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Through his speech, it has been told me that at times I have already discovered some things myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Even though there is no way to excise the one already assessed and subjected to cautery exergy in today's exercise of instruments, we understand the complexity of human composition and how diseases manifest within them, as well as their causes and accidents; also acknowledging the time span for these occurrences.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May also in other complexities there is not fear, and mostly in the chilly phlegmatic humors where doctors are already agreed upon these matters, without concern for bleeding while performing cauterization on those very things.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine ignite for that which has lain in his body and bring it to life thereof; strengthen also its ill member with difficulty of healing, and drive outwardly from within him as well.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the focus, due to its sublimity and nourishing substance, does not make it excessive; already we understand by experimentation and long-term service in studying this art about truth of causes—and thus you are excused from lengthy discourse here during our pause. And now that I am at your leisseon within these moments to share my secret knowledge on the focus, which demonstrates through surgical intervention for removing diseases and its philosophic elucsion demonstrated in speech will strengthen your bones (or teeth).
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And wise men understand that it is best in early spring for performing cauterizations and intervals of rest.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Even says that cautery is convenient at all times, in such a way that the harm caused by water retained within it after application of the cautery disappears, and mainly if for pains or necessary painful sensations, which do not suffer delays due to fears about what comes out during its expulsion; this greater potential damage entering over time is worse than smaller immediate injury.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	So do not sit on your thighs or feet; ordinary people and simple physicians only estimate them in relation to this illness that heals through caustics but cannot be completely removed at once, resulting in these consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not due to what they eat for water (possibly referring to fluid intake or a dietary imbalance), and cauterization is only done in the place of medicine that changes complexity and dries out the humours which are causing pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Even though there may be excessive use of the lancet in medicine due to its necessity and grandeur commanded by one'thy lord, it is essential for treatment with caution.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Even though vulgar speech may be the remedy used in medicine and is directly related to healing without involving external sources that I do not understand, as they are beyond medical knowledge or any other cause for which caution must be exercised with these instruments of treatment.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	E the cause is contrary to water; and I understand that cautery (medicine) for some illnesses is only used when administered by a physician's hand at the last resort, and this intervention addresses the root of the problem directly where it originates.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And when it comes time for the last application of medicine as understood by common sense and various doctors' practices, then:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	Here are the translated lines from the medieval medical treatise:
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through this we apply pointed forceful instruments (likely some form of metal tool), placing them along the course of operation, and with proper positioning in accordance to our procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in the case of cautery (as ordered herein), they have arranged it according to this text within their instruments for use inside the feet, thereby allowing them when requested by him/her what he/she needs from you.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	From "coldness and moisture" for headaches using cautery instruments:
Le capitol primier.	The primary one. (This translation is literal; contextually it might
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 The cauterization will confer humidity and coldness on the accident wound of which you suffer due to sodium chloride (salt) in excessive amounts along with body fluid accumulation, caused by lying down too much time causing edema, constipation or similar issues. This leads to pain such as joint discomfort, gout from urine retention and dental/gum problems; these are common maladies associated with coldness in the body which can also result in paralysis (paresis), hardening of limbs (sclerosis) or stroke-like conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the patient to expel what must be removed through medicine via vomiting for three or four days, according to the intensity of the prolapse and the age of the individual and their customs.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre les tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	When you rest your hand on the back of your palm, place it over the bridge of your nose between their nostrdictions (ears), as directed by them.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Whenever the patient'thy comes to rest at this place due to heat (possibly from exposure or other factors), signs indicate that it is trying there, and appropriate fire should be applied using the aforementioned cautery tool.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And apply a small amount of salt and dissolve that on the location, leaving it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand over his wound site at its edge, and place it there where the skin has been torn open by the focus of pain.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Return care is given where there's snake venom inside so that it may be healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when the patient expels phlegm through coughing, they take it in by means of a breath to better and more healthfully.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And for those who are burned inside the bone and have had their tools inserted within it, place your instruments there where some division of the bone has been hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	1. Return its moisture that is lacking from bone and provide for its healing care.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Here come others with the lancets to arrive at the bone, entering before it hardens and upon which point they pierce when the bone becomes rigid – this is how small punctures are made.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	E from that place exhales the breath of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	When the swelling has been present for a long time, and it is cured within that period when solidification occurs.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see these pains of all kinds of cautery instruments here, but in wise men according to the fear; and such a one must be better for my salvation when my head is lifted by reason of continuity during sex as we have testified among other members, especially when from the malady'dict thigh it swells naturally.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The special thing about initial caustics is that it may save and be better for my health, as well as being beneficial to this work of healing.
Capitol segon.	Capital Second. (Assuming this line refers to an ordinal
Del cauteri del cap.	Of or concerning the point of caution, second. This translation assumes that 
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When there is chronic and long-lasting pain throughout the body, using swords and scrapes along with chairs and cupping devices, as well as electrical currents (possibly referencing various forms of traditional therapies), primarily if any such treatment has already been conducted on that portion; moreover, consider it only when there is a strong calcification in the nature of this swelling—do not harm greatly or cruelly. Should you have previously cauterized with an instrument upon which some form of these treatments was applied (implying perhaps using similar tools for different therape extraneous causes), now apply another such treatment to that specific spot, holding their hands in the process as a precautionary measure against unintended consequences.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that above the patient's head for cauterization, within which the intestine is cut apart.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the tongue and expose its quantity as we have counted and sealed it with a cauterizing tool at the back part of the head wherein lies that which is being called upon by you, namely, this location in which suction (aspiration) takes place—this is where.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand so high, and do not touch the abdomen, for it inflicts great pain different from that of other caustic procedures on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Here, apply the cautery in its place, whereby that which is cauterized there are those corns on the head and back under subtle cauteries, which belongs to this treatment method.
Capitol ters.	Capital (hard): The term "capital" here refers to
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	From your given Latin text, the English translation would be as follows:
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the head or when it is protruded outwardly at the neck, extract remedies with the physician' extricating tool and administer another treatment as described for diseases; otherwise, cauterization will be performed here using two tools: acute combustion medicine or iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Maycuracies are used in medicine to apply pressure with a leather pouch and remove the limbs of both patients from it.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Return and apply pressure at the location of pain on one'thy hand with a sharp lance inserted within that place where you can no longer see beneath it down to the coccyx (tailbone).
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Returning care for that which is inside so it may heal.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you come, take some of the burning remedies that you have written about in the section on hot medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	As for this method of cauterization, it is with iron as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a lock with the shape of a key in which some curvilinearity occurs at its head (on the patient), and where there's an outstanding small spot on their body.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Return the pause over the location of pain, and hold your hand—so that it is not dragged out (which has already happened), turning slowly with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that is extracted through the speculum inserted into the vein prevents your hand from being hurt, hold it there to ensure that the artery does not get cut and bleeding occurs, thus preventing bile flow outwardly.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line-by-line translation of each sentence into English:
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you go, then perform a lancet on the part of the scalpel according to lancing procedures, and watch out for incision into this blood vessel properly as it is not ancient.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quart.: This phrase could be referring to one
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Caute irremovibile": The term "cautery" relates to a medical treatment used in ancient times, particularly for conditions like gout
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When treating ancient migra the poultice that we have discussed for healing, and what has been mentioned about its treatment of diseases; without properly applying these treatments or failing to administer them as prescribed by traditional medicine (either external cautery or internal caustic), occasionally leaving a residue from previous cauterizations. Place this poultice over the area where pain is present, along which long line it dictates its extent; and rest your hand upon that spot for some time within these strikes of iron—meaning you are applying pressure directly to the site causing discomfort or ailment:
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuous movement of the jaw joint which grinds teeth (bruxism), and that the looseness does not tighten up nor affect those nerves involved in causing this condition, so as not to provoke spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of the flow from where the artery begins, there is fear in its origin, mostly to that which does not know what makes it happen and does not study it; perform the operation at once.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When you come for memory of the flow of sickness caused by excessive urine according to their habitual manner here in this place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you feel this illness from which the caustic cannot suffice and touches the parts of the body affected by it (malady), cauterize there in the place where we have mentioned before, taking care that within be healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you come, administer the tool for which we have mentioned in the chapter on metal treatments of instruments meant as a two-cottle lancet, and hereby provide better treatment than before.
Capitol .v.	In this translation task, it appears that we are dealing with an arch
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	For "Capitol v.", the context suggests you might be referring to treatment or addressing pain in joints (as mentioned earlier). However, without additional text it
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the finger there is pain due to congestion and it'suply its own treatment as stated earlier, so that there is no recurrence of pain; herein lies the method mentioned previously—the cautery. This is where we are referring to for treating such pains: specifically a form or type described before which involves direct application of heat (ignis) through cautioning methods like pinpoint heated instruments, also known as "puncta.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place points with the cautery herein, and carry it throughout all of the patient'thy body area where pain may be present in any joint or limb movement if necessary; using a spinning wheel for this purpose as needed when traversing various parts of the body to locate sources of discomfort.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long you have held onto the cautery of your finger, scarcely more than just enough to keep it in place where you attempt.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points made with cautery on this person are complete and care is taken for the places that have healed,
Capitol .vi.	Capture VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cupping therapy.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Treatment that is healed and through cautery involves only spices brought in by the artery, as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Evae cautearice potionis quae non necessario est ut siccus aut tremulus nervus distruaere.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that particular kind of torture and cleaning away urine and stone passages, without discomfort in your care, then when curing the patient's bloated abdomen with three cauterizations: take iron from the hairpin, use a small piece for its temple as needed, and lime joints between two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply pressure with the hot cautery where the ill-conditioned parts are located; there it will only soothe when that sick area appears healthy again.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you apply the instrument for cauterizing directly on the tip of the sharp knife at the end of the extremity of the right hand, and in the temple; its length corresponds to the height of your arm, holding it inside until enough has been applied to burn out what was extracted from the bone hole.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how it's done with a pointed cautery, and this form belongs specifically to the practitioner of cupping (chuan pao). Here they sit nowad0to perform their art.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Mayhaps I subtly place that which has scarcely come upward, and remove from the body what is excessive growth.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the place where that which proceeds within it is being treated now.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII. (The "C" in Roman numerals represents four
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	From ancient bleeding stop or cauterization of a hemorrhage: This line refers to an old medical technique used for controlling severe ble
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy (stroke or brain hemorrhage) is ancient and the remedies we have previously discussed do not apply to you as your physician does not believe there'thy fever, then four kinds of cauterizations are required: on all head skin; for treatment at ear level where applied before; in addition also when applying it to the back (occiput). Here comes a translation line by line from Latin-influenced medical treatise text into English with an understanding that some interpretive assumptions had to be made due to archaic terms:
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The translation of this medieval medical treatise line by line into English would be as follows:
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And there is already been cauterized on the stomach'dictum, and it may be worse; yet its treatment with water that flows hereabouts will heal it.
Capitol .viii.	The provided text seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	When referring to the procedure of burning as treatment for numbness caused by cold (frost). Here, "cauterizes" means using heat or a hot instrument to burn and seal a
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The cure that is given for excessive warmth in the stomach, through large and pills with a cleaning effect when swallowed. Here "cauterizes" refers to treating or addressing an issue (excessive heat) possibly using direct methods like burning; however, this sentence seems less clear due to
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Apply pressure at the head of the womb and place your hand on it, as described in this treatise regarding medical applications (possibly a manual technique). Here "cauterizes" could metap0horically refer to applying treatment or relief through touch rather than heat; again context is key for accurate interpretation. The use of pressure at specific body points suggests an early form of therapese that involved physical manip
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then there are certain intervals when it is necessary to perform such treatment (which could be interpreted as applying hot substances or using heat for medical purposes). Here "cauterizes" likely means administering a form of thermal therapy, possibly involving the use
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And apply such remedy in accordance with that weather condition already described by me (likely referring to environmental factors which influence health conditions). Here "cauterizes" suggests applying a treatment methodology specific to the
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	So if for their health it is necessary; but otherwise, there will be three cauterizations in the forehead portion above and below that dividing line within the skull's crown (likely referring to specific head areas associated with healing or ailment). Here "cauterizes" suggests using heat treatment on designated spots along their heads. It appears as though this medieval approach involves targeted thermal applications, perhaps for curing diseases perceived in that era through the manipulation of body temperature and localized bodily response to such interventions. The specificity with which different head sections are addressed indicates an understanding (or presumption) about their roles or properties concerning health within
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And there is space between each of these instruments, and pay close attention to this instrument'dict water that flows from it.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you increase and the thigh is tolerating heat well, then apply burn wax to the warm spot; if it'se greater expansion, then causticize that over both corn areas.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for that which has been healed; and use those olive-shaped instruments as provided above.
Capitol .ix.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating medieval medical Latin-
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	For the first source sentence "Capitol .ix.", a direct translation into English might be challenging due to its cryptic nature and potential lack of contextual information; however, it could imply an instruction related to
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Translating the source sentence "Capitol .ix." yields:
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the sickness of softening of the legs for those suffering and who are enduring hardship, then apply four cauterizations to the vertebrae of the back, and with these caustic substances inside them ensure that they rest on their chestbone, raising their aching body.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which is inside has been healed, and this shall be olive oil for treatment.
Capitol .x.	Given that "Capitol" in this context is not immediately
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	The term "Cauterization of seizures" refers to the historical medical practice where lancets or heated instruments
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	In this context, it seems that "Cauterization of seizures" was not the chosen treatment for those experiens with epilepsy; instead, they were treated by bleeding out (phlebotomy), possibly as a misguided attempt
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	So, we must clear the mind of this person with regard both to past and present remedies that have been prescribed during times when melancholy was considered grand (significant) or tolerable in terms of medical practices before addressing excesses beyond accepted cures as outlined at its division. This suggests a holistic approach where historical understanding, psychological factors like lethargy ("melancholy"), and current remedies are all taken into account to treat conditions considered outside the standard scope or deemed too extreme for conventional medicine of that era (phrenology is hinted here). The text indicates an integration of
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If it is an infant who does not suffer from the medicines administered, apply liniments and poultices to maintain mindfulness for a day or so at least by careful feeding of good foods (indicating that dietary adjustments can be as crucial in healing as direct treatments). This advice emphasizes attentiveness not just towards the application of remedies, but also their timing and quality—significantly acknowledging nutrition' extraction from a medical text for holistic care. The use of liniments (topical applications
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Apply pressure to the head of melancholy (indicating a belief in physical methods for treating psychological conditions), and apply that which is already burning as a lancet at its place on top of the head according to previous indications, another cauterizing tool upon their forehead. Also burn wicks over each point thereupon formed above any part (top) of this person's skull where it has been previously suggested for treatment with heat or burning agents—a clear reference in medieval texts that certain parts of the body are targeted specifically to treat various ailments, here likely indicating an understanding and manipulation of symptoms through localized thermal interventions. The
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the humour is strong and tolerant, then apply that which has been applied to it, resulting in paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the back and those of the two (i.m., pelvis), holding hands with them.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is necessary for a second time using an olive-infused cautery instrument as previously indicated (or mentioned).
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	May if the humors are excessive within (the patient), then use delicate caution as per this mannerism.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (This line appears incomplete or lacks
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	The phrase "cauterizes melancholy" suggests an action taken to treat sadness, which in a medieval medical context would
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and sluggish humors within us, then we apply these same caustics that have been used in immobilizing pains to treat it.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excessive decline leading to melancholy, and the limbs are cold due to phlegm, then drink what purifies the brain after whatever was consumed during division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	1. Return your head under the hood (patient's garment), and bring down or adjust it on his crown gently; apply pressure to that spot where heat is felt in the patient's head area.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The above text is a translation from an archaic or historical medical language that borrows elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish and French vocabulthy into English:
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Return your pace of poultice; it is worthy of an old sheep' extrusion, as used by shepherds for its properties in treating pain or inflammation. (Here 'aprop' likely means to apply/place properly,
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Apply it over the area for warmth measured by temperature; which relieves suffering when applied as needed in that place. (Here 'escalfa' likely means to heat or warmed up locally with a gentle touch, and this would be done carefully considering both timing ('mes en lu')—when necessary within that location—and
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Place it where the head of your body lies down at night; and wrap him within so that he is warmed up effectively without getting overheated ('enfargad'). (Here 'loc' refers to a specific location for warmth, likely under blankets or near heat sources during sleep. The phrase implies wrapping someone with care in preparation for rest when they
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Apply it to the abdomen throughout the week as a dietary regimen, or introduce his body internally within those limits so that he is made well; if you wish, anesthetize small points on the flesh according to what feels appropriate for your patient using this specific cautery tool: such treatment wets brain evenly. (Here 'vegada' means regularly throughout a week as part of dietary management—suggesting rest and possibly medication through food or drink habits; in parallel, there is mention of another regiment involving internal care with anesthetizing small points using cautery that has the specific quality to moisten brain tissue evenly.)
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Return that stitch or bandage into its place at the edge of the wound or in areas where linen is used, holding it with one hand.
Capitol .xii.	In translating this medieval medical text into English line by line while attempting to understand
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The provided Latin-like phrase can be translated as: "For the drainage of water from the wound." This sentence suggests a medical treatment or procedure for addressing fluid
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you declare the presence of water in the wound as stated by your senses during division, it begins and gives relief to the patient'dictio through a poultice applied atop which ensures that all moisture is contained within its bounds for healing purposes. Here "aygua" refers to bodily fluids typically found exuding from wounds (likely serous or pus-like fluid), and addressing this condition would have been essential in medieval medicine as well, emphasizing containment ("guardar") of the moisture within a controlled area for proper healing. This line indicates an understanding that managing drainage is critical to prevent further complications such as infection or excessive loss of bodily
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	This phrase translates into English as "And it acts softening for a day and night bath." This indicates the use of certain medicinal preparations or substances that were believed to soothe irritation
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	This line translates to: "And it orders the patient's head, and cauterizes that area with a caustic applied where there is dampness in the skull; additionally, if both drains of water are present at two places on the head or just one place (a tongue), then apply as many times necessary to each respective spot." Here "cauterize" refers to using heat or chemical agents directly over affected areas such as skin lesions that contain moisture. This reflects an era when cauterization was a common treatment for wounds and infections, aiming at drying out the offending area (in this case involving dampness potentially indicative of abscesses or other fluid accumulations). The specificity with which different draining conditions are treated underlines medieval medicine's attempt to tailor treatments according to observable symptoms. This treatment undersc0ns
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Here comes the line for translation into English: "We apply all veins and arteries where we recently cut with a lancet; these are our cautions in that particular region, located within the temple'dictions.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Guard your thigh when you are being cauterized; and if there is flow of blood from the wound, apply some medicine to it—this may be within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	When you come in with knowledge that is outside of the arcane arts and away from the abdomen, and caution for fluid flows,
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases, they are cauterized at the joint of two bones with these instruments.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (This line appears incomplete or potentially out of
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas" translates to English as the caustic treatment of ancient tears
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When ancient tears (or old runny eyes) are severely congested in the veins and arteries located within the skull's crown area where it has been noted that fluid accumulation is excessive, as mentioned previously at the chapter on water drainage from below head hair growth areas:
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If it is an ingestion of excess (referring to overeating or consuming too much), then burn that part throughout the entire section above and below, using a small caustic instrument at the tip of the thigh' extricate on both sides for which you have prepared.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The text is incomplete here; assuming this might
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Cauterization of the foul breath from the nose." This line refers to a historical medical practice wherein doctors
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that water which we have discussed in the division and do not further your medical practice of it, then apply ointment to the nose mucosa for three days; and rub down its head (presumably here referring back to 'the patient's chest'), cauterizing any bleeding wounds with a caustic.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And return that which is meant for caustic knives of two upon the top hairpins on both sides, a small amount each:
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Guard thy blade so that it does not cut into that which thou holdeth.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	From this instrument of cautery is this form.
Capitol .xv.	Given that this medieval medical text is written in an archaic form of
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Here the phrase translates to English as: "With respect to softening pills for eyelids." This refers likely to a practice or treatment related to soothing issues
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of a patient becomes softened due to illness or moisture, that same eyelid is gently treated here with what can be described as 'lunar caustic'. This substance represents this specific treatment approach. Here's an English translation:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you (medical practitioners), cauterize that area on the two foreheads with a small pair of lancets throughout the entire body, and they extend from the nostrishapes.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	According to the length of each cautery as per its surface area.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery, as much as the moistest part of the eyelid is desired.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (The text appears incomplete here without additional context
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	From the razor of the eye when hairs transform into tiny particles and fingers pick up the patient's head. (This translation is an attempt to capture the essence of what seems like an old or non-standard medical practice described in a fragmented manner, possibly referring to plucking out lashes which have
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the patient's hair transform into tiny particles and I pick up their head (presumably for examination), in these cases two kinds of razors are used: one to cut or remove them directly, another as medicine is applied burnfully. This suggests a historical practice where some form of medical treatment may involve burning with medicinal applications when dealing specifically with hairs that have become particulates within the body (possibly from an illness affecting metabolism). It reflects outdated and possibly dangerous procedures not in line with modern medicine'dicty or tool used to perform such actions are raz
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If I use the razors of my tool (razor), it commands that dark urine to take away their hairs along with those they bring from outside, within where are prolonged and inflamed; if picking up this yellow substance is necessary because of patient' refusal or negation, then tighten a bandage around the head so no filth enters inside when these outwardly brought-in nails (hair) have been born. This passage describes an old medical practice where urine was considered to contain harmful elements like hairs from outside that needed removal—likely in preparation for some form of treatment or cleansing, potentially related to syphilis with its characteristic chancre and accompanying symptoms including hyperemic sores (inflamed areas) around the nails. The instructions appear outlandish by modern standards but reflect a historical attempt at treating infectious diseases like STIs before antibiotics were available, using rudimentary tools for extractive procedures or as
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when women are pregnant and wearing a gown, they pause the head of the humerus at the level of their chest, placing hand over the eye lid as if trying to touch it, which is according to its form similar to that of a shield'dictated by Medieval medicine.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Return your pace or touch lightly on the surface of his belly, either with bread dipped in water (or poultice made from fine flour/paste), as per tradition here:
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return the cautery of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Return the cautery over the body shape that their face takes, gradually and carefully applied in movements, so that the surface of the penis becomes burnt as if with juniper berry ash; all appears naturally properly healed.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of sanity in a patient'dict is that you will gently press their eye lid, and have their hair lifted considerably due to needle pricks.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	So raise your hand and lay it there for three days until the shield is erected within which boundaries you are contained.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is ill within it into its cure; apply care for what has been healed inside wherein lies stillness and recovery are maintained.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	May it return due to their own actions and with moistened eyes, they shall also use these instruments on that very same day as the first treatment.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eye socket (palpebra), then:
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery be of medicine that commands the malady to look inside where there are extended and inflamed hairs, and its fate shall take on the shape of wool fleece.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E pause le dit sobre le medicine and apply that small one without it entering where malady dwells; for such a prick is felt in the hands like those of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the cutting instrument (atrobo) is grasped, apply medicine to it and rub that part; then when the grasping ceases, wash away the blood with water from above or incision site if you see your patient's eyelid raised due to being cleaned at this moment of operation. If not yet returned over there where no medicinal application has occurred before (and thus it is untouched by medicine and hasn't been engulfed in the operational field), keep returning until all aspects are covered under these conditions for safe operations without harming your patient’s flesh due to surgery or wound cleanlin extrication.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Return the pressure over it to where its border is healed and take care of that wax or other material inside there which has been cured as well.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one applies mullein leaves' remedy.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	E know that men'se (or human) humors are diverse according to their size and smallness, hence your contraction will be caused by these factors.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If it has not been injured along its way towards that individual whom we study in this work,
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii.: This line does not provide content for translation as it
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	The process of cauterizing the tear duct chalazion:  
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula caused by the waters we have discussed in the divisions of illnesses and do not administer your treatment, then when you cauterize that following this manner: order the malady to stop its head at one' extramundary minister between the two thighs so it is neither mad nor agitated for its own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your hand pressure in an oil lamp or poultice of lint on his body, over him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the burning cautery with which this is formed.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The provided text is a translation into English line by line from what seems to be an archaic medical language:
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go, it will enter into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to come out as an attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Mayhap that person who rests is better for recovery of work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Return (or tighten) the fistula if it is opened, and from there cleanse that which has been extracted by means of sudation or purging.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not unbound, then work that part and extract (the) prolapsed organ from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your touch above it with that which is ignited in the cauterizer, so that neither you nor malady shall be agitated; and when applying pressure on the cauterizers of the throat at birth'se division point, this will prevent them from moving.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the caution needles enter into the mouth of one'dictor; and otherwise repeat the use of those same instruments for a week, or two weeks according to medical practice, resting over that border until such time as it becomes healed by external ointments applied.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	May it be that they have passed x days and are not healed yet? If so, then a harsh curative medicine must enter until the bone is discovered and adjusted according to what seems appropriate in their chest (capitol).
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of applying cautery for a fistula that they initially perform is as follows: At the location of the fistula, place there some lead shot; and with your hand underneile (or "beneath"), prevent the lead from reaching the hilt ("hand") of that tool where it was inserted. Furthermore, when pauses are placed on the bite mark in a lambskin or water vessel, the lead adheres to the fistula location and heals it marvelously through curative magic (healing power).
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have applied from cautery and treatment, then all is well; but if not, it is necessary to administer pus removal and reduce the fistula on the nose as soon as possible in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (The original text does not provide a complete sentence
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	For the treatment of an open wound on the finger/hand:
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motions habitually cause cracks in the lips, mostly in children'thy mouths experience regular motions that lead to cracking of the corners and often around them as infants or young ones frequently suck on their fingers or pacifiers causing discomfort through repeated movement. (The sentence describes
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So you tend to the cracks that we mentioned in our divisions and do not improve your treatment with this small caustic lancet as per these instructions. (The sentence advises using a specific type of cautery, possibly for treating cracked lips resulting from excessive movement or friction during speech.)
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And according to its subtlety of small bowls (small instruments or containers used for various purposes), so it is done accordingly.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Return that which has entered particularly into those cracks where the pointed instrument for treating them comes to rest.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is injured with care so it may heal.
Capitol .xix.	Certainly! Here is the translation of each line from Latin-Medieval
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	From Latin or a medieval medical context, this translates to: "On treating an ulcer in the mouth." The term 'cauterize' refers
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	The text seems to describe an ancient practice for treating oral ulcers, potentially involving cauterization with fire as the method of choice:
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the illness is removed and healed, be well; otherwise, it's necessary to discover where it resides and hold back the deteriorated bone as it comes forth in its section (head).
Capitol .xx.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Regarding the treatment of teeth and softening of gums,
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth become enlarged, treat those with medicine without applying pressure; then pause at the head of the malady in the thighs so that you can apply fire to the cautery shaped for it as quickly as possible. This ensures that when you press on the swelling over the tooth and insert into this caustic instrument, the mouth' extruding abscess is brought by its heat from the focus of the dental infection back up through the cheek tissue where treatment can occur effectively.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Return your hand (and return), and apply the points of the cautery as many times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here is the line by line translation:
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	From "cauteriza" (to burn with caustic substance for treatment) and "-zione," a term
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or infection (fever), if the treatment does not comfort as per medicine's care instructions, then cautioning measures are taken twice: either burning at cow borders ('borders of a mouth') with cautery tools, or on the spot where discomfort occurs.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterize the border that you grip on cows and flasks within the hearth of iron, and grasp and wrap it over the extremity of the torch being consumed by fire; hold onto this border as well as any other at bay with a cord or rope to prevent its ignition.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding until the heat of the focus reaches the state of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, submerge wool or cloth below it there, and place that above the sore tooth, and over that which is already lit within the cavity of the affected tooth until the metal reaches it.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May the cauterization performed on the focus be that you attend to either iron ore or steel (the materials used for cautery), and if any swelling occurs in the chest, it should not reach the mouth of the malady.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Return the cautery to its shape, and place it on your teeth so that the cautery is heated up; let there be a few uses when the pain returns in your mouth or today or tomorrow.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When that instrument of the cautery moves and widens (the patient'sin mouth), holding it there for an hour, this is how the use of the cauterization proceeds.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if you can perform it as directed by what is necessary for cautioning (cauterizing), do so accordingly with your ability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the cannula looks like:
Capitol .xxii.	From the given text snippet in this pseudo-medieval language blending elements of
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	The phrase "Capitol .xxii." appears to be a reference or annotation, possibly from an index (like
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	Translation: Concerning the cauterization of external ulcers and unbound humors which do not submit to medicine as they are at present; thus you will ignite one part with fire for healing, holding that portion by both extremities so it does not burn due to flame. Should you wish further treatment within this area where the application has been made, then light a new wick there and hold burning until arrival in front of (or above) the ulceration marking; another may be used for continued healing if needed at that point.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the ulcer is small, then stop cutting with the lancet according to the size of the ulcer, and apply pressure for three days until such time that the applied heat has completely burned off the fever source.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside with wax and bandages within so that it may heal.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The translation of this line from medieval medical Latin (which has elements similar across mentioned languages) would be as follows in English, maintaining an interpretation faithful to the original context given:
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.: (The translation for this line is not clear
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Translation: The treatment of the ulceration and obstruction in joints, often referred to as "cauterization" or using a pointed instrument for intervention (possibly cauterizing). In historical medical context, especially
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity enters the lungs and mostly when there is inflammation of completeness (likely indicating pleurisy or some form of lung swelling), then it's necessary that phlegm be expelled to medical treatments using laxatives, while simultaneously cauterizing any ulcer in its original place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Guard your hand that does not reach for the cautery of gout or burns from the patient'se nose, but a few inches at most.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And treat that joint with another lancet for its connection at the lower back vertebra, where it belongs (the translation is a bit ambiguous due to archaic language structures). Here's an attempt:
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	El pointed cautery of him is cut with a saw-like manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which has entered before so it may heal.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The provided medieval medical text seems to describe procedures related to treating joint pain (possibly
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	For the cautery of lung disease and cough." The phrase suggests a treatment method involving some form of intervention, likely with heat or a substance meant for burning (ca
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When a cold humidity causes lung disease and there is no fever or chills (an ancient illness), then two cauterizations are applied to the collarbone at pressure points, another on body warmth between breasts; place these cauterisms according to their form. The text outlines an old treatment method for a respiratory condition where cold moisture is believed to be affecting lung health without fever or chills – suggesting that heat (from the fire) should be applied at specific body sites through burning procedures, likely with metal instruments as indicated by "claviell.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, your caustic application will be with pointed instruments similar to those you call for when experiencing joint pain in the fingers (auricularis). The form of this follows what is already established at the point of finger pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And there are points entered into them, and take care of that which was introduced previously so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now, with three lances used for cautery, you can perform the following treatment in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol xxv.: (This line does not provide enough context for translation
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Caustic treatment of the tip that is part of the assistant's aid: This phrase likely pertains to a medical procedure where a caustic (a substance with the ability to
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the assistant's head is dislocated due to lubricating fluids and it does not return in time for its expected recovery period, then immediately after reducing the displacement, as we have witnessed (with our own testimonies), by a slight movement you can realign the spine over your shoulders or under them; furthermore elevate the collarbone which is located at the joints of this head and belongs to those sections above it in your left side if that particular juncture has dislocated downward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the cautery has two heads; this is how it looks like:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return and apply caustic within which it has entered, and there will come forth a figure of caustization from those burns; that is, after applying the treatment internally where it has penetrated, one can observe an external manifestation (or 'figure') resulting from the application or action ('cauteriazio').
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus according to the amount of effort; this is how it should be done:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some adjustments are made according to this count (count referring to medical procedures or techniques), and these relate specifically to the number of lancets used for cautery (presumably in their treatment). Here's a line-by extralinguistic translation:
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And place your hand on the points of the cautery made of salt and metal, so that the humors can settle down to tranquility, ensuring that the body part will not be weakened for any time while being comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If dislocation occurs above and below the area in question, then apply caustic substances to muscle or motz cauteries at points, whereby the joint is confirmed as affected with excess moisture (a condition known as edema), leading to healing of inflammation.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi. (The exact meaning of "Capitol
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Based on your provided fragments and the context, here is a possible translation for "Capitol .xxvi.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there's friction and moisture within the stomach that multiplies in space, if you continue with your healing practices without interruption, it leads to bloating of one’thy backside post full reclining positioning; extend out those parts and appendages for cauterization. Here are three specific caustic treatments: a single curative instrument shaped like an awl (used as per the required quantity), two instruments each designed specifically for addressing both sides of one treatment, within which friction is expelled in its entirety; elongate between those not yet adjusted that will undertake prolapse.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery corresponds to the quantity of both sides of the lower jaw'dictum, it means that when performing a treatment with heated instruments (cauterization), one should adjust its intensity according to the size or extent of two parts at the bottom of the ch
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you follow this design for the instrument's form, and wish to proceed with a large cautery at the stomach area in this manner—meaning that it should be shaped like a circle according to these guidelines. Here "this" refers back to the recommended shape of the cauterization tool as previously discussed or illustrated (though not provided here). The instruction implies conformity with an established methodology for creating such medical instruments, emphasizing precision in both form and application site within the stomach region.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if you have applied the caustic substance to this specific point within your stomach, and wish for additional points as desired—apply cauterization here too; also ensure that whatever treatment has been previously administered is concluded before proceeding with further healing. This passage advises a sequential approach where any pre-existing caustic application on the abdomen must first be neutralized, after which additional localized points can undergo cauterization following your preference for quantity and extent of treatment within that specific area (stomach). It highlights not just an individualistic or case-by-case methodology but also a layered approach to caustic application where timing between procedures is crucial. The patient must remain mindful about the balance needed when adding additional treatments post initial cauterization, with care taken so that previous interventions are fully resolved (healed) before introducing
Capitol .xxvii.	It appears you've provided a historical reference which is "Capitol" along with
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of foot wound cauterization.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	Whenever in the foot pain occurs due to dryness or humidity excessively entering where the body' extruded its normal composition and is treated with water that we have given it not causing discomfort; when the swelling of the uterus rises above its neck, onto the cervix, and three cauterizations according to this manner and amount are applied immediately on the belly under home's bed.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Whereas it is both the space between each instrument according to their size, and where these instruments are placed along the length of the body for four times.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not use your pointed instrument for cutting with it (the cautery).
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of phlegm that has accumulated in the distended part of the intestine is not reduced; and if the humidity remains on their feet, they will swell upwards, having already extended their limbs, lifting their breasts high.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And when you are skilled and careful in the art of cautery with these instruments for cutting wounds, it is possible for you to cauterize these tools under your skillful touch.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	When you do not process in the cauterization and apply pressure with your instrument on all of the spinal cord so that it is hardened throughout the body and enters into the coffers, where the spinal cord herein resides thinly; know this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Based on the fragments of Latin-like phrases and medical terminology you've given, here is a possible translation for "Capitol .xxviii. De
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the infection arises within the leg and you wish to know if that abscess is located in the flesh of the limb or underneve (underwear), when it's found in the flesh, a heavy burden causes inflammation and intensified pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the breeches (trousers) of the patient, and the pain is intense and occurs frequently during their treatment by the doctors,
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then cover the patient' extricated from his throat due to an abscess, apply pressure on the site of the ulcer with restraint rods made up previously mentioned in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply a hot brand where it touches the spine so that throughout its entire course until healthy inflammation arrives.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Return that for its own healing as care is provided by other applications within it.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Not that this form of cauterization is not the one studied in medicine and from which various illnesses have been known; however, it may be tried on this operation as well, but leave such decisions to us, for we know best how.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (The exact meaning of "Capitol
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From scalding for ulcers. (This translation suggests that the text is discussing a treatment method involving heat,
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Hereby the ancient cauters of medicine are made for ulcers as per this methodology; and it is when you grasp a hard skin lesion that has been found (longstanding), using instruments from medical aristotelian practice, composed of robust material like bone or metal. This implies an old approach where specific tools fashioned typically with durable materials were employed to treat long-lasting ulcers on the body by firmly clamping them down for cauterization purposes according to traditional medicine techniques derived from Aristotle's teachings and similar medical philosophies of that era.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	When you purchase your hand for the purpose of using a pointed cautery, it will appear in the sign or symptom on the neck during work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And when these same tools that are used by men as cauterizing pliers and tongs like a ray or fire come to the location between the ribs where they have been placed, so long as they arrive there at this place of wound healing, it is administered just as we do in foot ulcers.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May not fear in this puncture with the points of safety; for even if it hurts here at once within the opening of the abscess where there is no healing, immediately apply treatment without delay.
Capitol .xxx.	The provided text seems like an interpretation of medieval medical practices translated into what
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	From salpingotomy (removal or incision in the fallop each other, as if discussing a surgical procedure). The
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the malady of the fallopian tubes (which could refer to an inflammation or blockage), do not perform care as previously discussed; instead, three cuts with a linen strip according to where necessary in line with figures shown for such cuts on surgical gauze—figures that have preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Between every two caustic (cauterizing tools), and their handle, is also either a larger tool or a smaller one used in those same instruments for cutting during foot surgery.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply your hand with the cautery; and gout is over its two parts, which are below in this manner:
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of cauterization is that you ignite both limbs' caulters, which causes contraction in the head joint leading away from muscle center where bone ends meet at ligament junctures beneath thighs and sternum. 
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if it is your lifting that you are referring to, which raises the belly button according to the length of the body part, so that they become branded marks as dictated by the laws of the cosmos.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	When you join together the two garments with thread and needle inside where others enter into each other'nocular', here is the translation line by line:
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return the points of the cautery; hence they perform four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you come, then apply three kinds of cautery as needed.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And apply your applied treatments that have been laid down for three days straight, which may be more effective than the other causes preceding in healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	The given text is from an ancient medical treatise that uses archaic language
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	In this line, "Capitol .xxxi.," it appears there may be a typographical error or mis
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	It seems that the original Latin text has been corrupted with potential misspellings and unclear words, making direct translation challenging. However, based on contextual clues from your provided translations
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you care for the wound and do not assign proper treatment to it yourself, then that person who does perform a four-fold procedure within the abdomen (possibly referring to some kind of internal examination or intervention), with another cauterizer on the stomach; yet there is one more overseeing the chest. Additionally, two lancets are used between the spinal vertebrae in pairs and a single lancing tool at the backbone's midpoint (potentially indicating an anal or rectal examination). Another cauterizer on top of this suggests further treatment there as well possibly for bleeding control after such procedures.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is proposed for the sharpness of the penis.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Return the points of the caustic that have burst for you know they will heal through long-term use. (Translation based on understanding medieval medical terminology and context)
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And ensure the malady of urine is drained using the cups that collect it for so they may be added to his intentions on food and drinking, which in turn provide aid in healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what it was before being used to burn the abdomen, and this is that which has been burnt on both sides following its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	The provided text is indeed difficult due to its mixture of languages with Latin influence (
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	From what can be discerned, the line "Capitol .xxxii." appears to refer back to a specific part or page number in another source material regarding
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are soaked in water and full of moisture (presumably as part of treatment or preparation), cauterize them on both sides over where your hand is between the earlobe and ring finger; lift up that same position with your hands, without turning it around. Then elevate this lifted area again but do not return to its original place because the water has become sticky (presumably due to some reaction or process).
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the sentence to translate line by line into English:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: E sia le cauteri segnola longitud de la cojxa: i denolhe el un dolc del junctura, l'altre jo loc de la cojxa; e sobre quauna cojxa dues cauteris.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lay there subdued his urge for a long time, so that any remaining water does not come out of him.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes which have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" is not followed by text in English or
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de cos de ventre," which seems to be Latin, translates into English as
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When digestive and retaining purges enter due to moisture within the body (which affects both stomach and intestines), they are considered as part of gastrointestzal care—without confessory, which is remedy-based healing. Sometimes these purge manifestations require treatments including large cauterizations on one's stomach according to what preceded in the previous treatment for the patient’s belly (potentially referring to surgical intervention), as well as small caustic applications involving various refined tools, and also specific handling of acute conditions with larger or two types of cauterizations under precise control.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you notice excessive humidities and the malady' extruding them, then apply a caustic upon the penis area and on the hernias, thoroughly adjusting those cauterisms over the stomach and around the inguinas, so that health will be effectively restored without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Given that there is no text provided for translation beyond what was transcribed in
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	The line "Capitol .xxxiv." as presented does not provide enough context or content to accurately translate into English, especially considering the mixture of languages and medieval
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature old hemorrhoids are caused by thick humors or corrupt moisture, and healing is not provided as usual medicine within the division of spaces—then three cauterizations will be done on the pus spots near topside joints (spondiol) between two small ones below them, with branding instruments underneze above.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food has not been digested properly, causing facial swelling; then perform this treatment on the large ulcer above as preceded by another cautery on the abdomen, a third one on the chest containing cauterizing materials (branding irons), apply them for some time until improvement is seen. Then ensure that the patient recovers and returns to health.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual content from
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	In treating the ulcer to reinstate its cavity: apply pressure therein with an instrument designed for such purpose (cauterization). Here, "Capitol" seems like it could be referring to
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise the ulcer, then apply the instruments that were assembled for burning (cauterization). The mention of "Capitol" in this context appears to be instructional about what steps should follow after an initial treatment or during surgical intervention; it indicates using a cauter
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Within that burned area in the ulcer, and lastly place your hand inside to ensure that the instruments reach the opening of the vessel from which blood flows (the portal), where venous drainage occurs. Here "Capitol" seems like it could be instructing on a specific technique within an esoteric or highly specialized medical practice; placing one'thyself in such intimate proximity to treat internal bleeding suggests advanced understanding and handling of bodily lesions, which may align with medieval practices where
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Employ wax or linen dressings for them if necessary and after such application cauterize each one sequentially as discussed (perhaps referring to the treatment steps mentioned previously), with care given by those who provide these materials, ensuring they are available while healing takes place. Here "Capitol" might be a reference point or location related to obtaining dressings and wax—or linen in this case—which indicates its role as possibly being associated not just with treatment but also the provision of necessary medical supplies during recovery from ulcers, perhaps suggesting some sort of communal resource for patient care. The context implies "Capitol" has a broader scope encompassing
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you apply a large cautery above it (likely referring to an injury or part of the body), this may restore vigor and strengthen health.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance languages
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	In the natural occurrence of ulcers, they are treated with caustics.  
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended for its place and the patient is frightened by it, they are healed with caution (using instruments like needles or other tools).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when any one comes with a fistula in nature and it is ancient, sickness of the body occurs due to moist corruption disturbed humors, hence only then that which deserves intervention should attempt subtly undernethy's guidance at its previously indicated depth.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Apply heat to the pointed cautery that seems like fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Return that burning cautery there and adjust according to how much it enters the wound.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Iterate while the cautery is inside until they have been consumed for a meal or two or three, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Return care for where it has been healed inside.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the place is sealed and materials are removed from it, then for a long time you know that the patient has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not kept dry, then you understand that they rot or decay in front of it (the patient), due to those causes for which memory returns when here.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Given that this text is in an archaic language resembling a mix of
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The phrase "cortesía de los bordos" refers to the act or process involving lancets, which
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the hollows occurs due to dryness or heavy breathing, and thus a lancet is applied therein for cauterization of each one of these cavities, it's done with caution so as not to forget which has been treated; this serves both for remembering past treatments and promoting healing.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And when I apply caustic on the second joint quickly, three small burns will be made, and thus they may heal better in time.
Capitol .xxxviii.	The provided text appears as an attempt at translating from Medieval Latin-influenced
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Regarding bladder cautery, it seems like a historical medical practice possibly aimed to treat certain conditions by
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When acute pain is experienced in the bladder due to inflammation and excess moisture that prevents urination of the malady (possibly a severe UTI or similar condition), then cauterize it at the pus's location on the bladder, using animal hair from around its penile area for one part, dehydrated tissue possibly referring to dried skin graft taken carefully without tools specified in Medieval language ("deyta"), and another preparation or item (possibly a second form of cautery) on the patient'se left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E each lancet according to the quantity of needles for the foot; and insert it into the lower part of the back or both if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And when it is necessary for the pointed cautery (or lancet) used in this procedure to proceed further, so happens according to plan.
Capitol .xxxix.	It seems there might have been a misunderstanding or confusion about your request as well
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And during the treatment of hernia, so occurs accordingly with this procedure. Here 'cauterizes' refers to
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the hernia brings in friction and moisture, it is forbidden to perform an incision herein (indicating that invasive surgical intervention should not take place), as this corrupts their menstrual periods; hence they are delayed causing pain when trying to detach them. Here the location where three lancets have been used within the abdominal area, according to what has previously occurred with these instruments in cauterizing (burning and sealing off) wounds – possibly referring to a previous procedure for managing conditions like varicose veins or hemorrhoids. At this spot where two lancets have been placed recently or at the location of three, employing them as previously done with these instruments in cauterizing (once again suggesting treatment related procedures).
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears to be referencing a
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	The translation for "Cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua" into English would likely refer to the process of burning or destroying tissue (c
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates in the joints and causes pains within one's locale (body), leading to a protrusion of the groin, it is referred to as inguinal swelling or hernia when compared between them.  
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	When the location of the dislocation is in painful spots (quays boats), it means that there has been a displacement or misalignment, which causes significant discomfort and needs attention from
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, you will cauterize the wound over the area of dislocation as if curling a curl back towards your hand (semblant), place it there where it has been twisted or turned upon itself so that its position becomes fixed in this new order within the circle's boundary. This method ensures not only to stop bleeding but also helps realign what was out of place, essentially correcting the dislocation and securing the area as intended by traditional healing techniques focused on restoring structural integrity while managing pain through targeted intervention such as cauterization within a controlled space or 'circle.'
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And it is said that this form came before using these instruments for stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not with you now, then take three large cauterous tools made of olive wood for the cauterization.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply the points according to the amount of pain throughout the entire spine, and take care that whatever enters therein be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or information for
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The phrase you've provided, "Cauterizacio de la vena sciatica," appears to be related to a medical procedure
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is in the joint of the ankle, and it's caused by excessive moisture and filthiness within the humors, doctors treat with what they have mentioned before, which isn’t effective; thus, you must address the accumulation of thick or artificial pills. Therefore, cauterize that area as well.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The translation of each line is as follows:
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Either space between each incision, wherein lies the quantity of its bulk and either incisions themselves (cauterizations), large or small.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May there be some rests with the cautions on the warm place above the head for that they are four cautions.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, burn at the circle where it was previously prayed for in the circumcision of the ankle, so that this same circle remains intact and ignites all along the spine.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how it happens when, due to the use of caustics on flesh that sticks to the joint and does not extend into the hip area.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends into the thigh, then two points of cautery are applied to that area where you injected the humidity causing pain; and one lancet is used four times for each section of their exterior body parts.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If there are pointed instruments of cautery and their depth follows the quantity indicated by the penis,
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the malady spreads causing pain within these areas of the feet, then here you must perform cautery at this place where it has entered, doing so for three points or four if necessary according to that which enters therefrom.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the malady causes pain deep within when it wanes near the thighs, then apply herein an applied pointed caustic lancet for treatment.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Here comes the first source sentence: E guarda te en tota cauterizacio che non ultimes am il calore nelle nervi o nella grande arteria, e per questo è sopra al male crudo o alla contrazione.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquells les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha (cavity) e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe (the body), and the flame perforated and corrupted it all over.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When severe constipation occurs in the abdomen, apply water internally (which refers to internal treatments such as drinking fluids or other remedies).
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts of a wound as per this method, then do one-by extrication each time with caution.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line into English:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Return it is lit within the fire wherein it darkens and sparks are made, and placed over the division of the waistband, with malady covering its lap.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Thus burns that joint three times heated in a single session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that for three days, apply this bandage to the border and return it within ten days or until healed inside where applied.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh, children, of this particular type of cautery tools we have used for fearing (or observing) you, and so only a few times have we encountered what watches over you.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who suffer from them use it here (referring to points or instruments on the foot), and deprive that person of their place here.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cautery tools be held by physicians that you make two holes in the perforated instrument wherein flows the blood of the gate of iron; their length is like two seeds or pieces these for them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between them contains as much of their body'se size; and are loose above and below, containing themselves in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	When you lift your hand and wipe away all the water down from inside, related to this watery liquid of abundance within.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Return that item for three days and rest on it within which the blackness of inflammation has subsided, apply it again today with caution using poultice movement; this will improve condition gradually.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When that wax (which is used for healing) enters where it should be cared for,
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends within the coccyx or inguinal region (thighs), it shall be established in that area which contains water, as done at the entrance of the anal canal.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how gout manifests itself, and I have already written about it in the treatise on medical correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and cause not extinguible between both parts separated one, thrust the cautery into a new wave wherein previously already divided part is pierced by a small tool as much as enters in sight.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Pause briefly the flow of another or alternate water source, and place it on that alkaline area where life-giving waters rise up (this is often found just above), applying these with good compression to compress them there for beneficial healing purposes through this technique involving alternating hot/cold applications.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E so de las medicinas alcunas am les quals es cauterizat anch, assis cum teczezi i mela anacrat e caus ai nun che sean miscelaz.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	E Gualia recounts of an old man the operation and care in which he was cured for joint pain in the knee and sciatic nerve discomfort, a magnificent method to be used by him himself; moreover, there is no need for other treatment as he has been healed through regular bathing following recommendations, strengthening of that area furthermore.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is pressed by certain bile that does not flow outwardly, then a stone fresh from the gallbladder; and its pain spreads to one or two joints (knee, thigh, or groin), where there is also swelling.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When it is laid down for three hours or until the accumulation of black bile ceases due to deflation, as in this case.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Return that item into bath and then when the limb of your patient is washed, place it on the ground, whereupon the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you understand that with these treatments it is not about covering wounds caused by caustics, but rather the expulsion from the body (evacuation).
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Socrates say that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it refills its blood; and these are the methods for applying such cautery: wool and ointment made from anti-inflammatory oil, applied between the toes and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Return the dry hollow of the sheep'sear to where there is charcoal within, and pause it over wool and linen that has been stretched out; hold those hands inside.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return water into circulation and do not cease until the vengefulness of the needle reaches the spleen, then rest the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this kind of cautioning is called "cautery of faucets.
Capitol .xlii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	It seems like you're providing the beginning of another line or sentence in Latin related to treatment, possibly for pain involving
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Translation: Occasionally pain occurs in both legs due to causes such as bleeding or injury from swordplay or impacts, and for reasons akin to these, through the intake of moist, effused material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And with this very same tool that causes pain due to effusion of fluid, apply it not elsewhere but here only for the purpose at hand.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, apply the evacuation of the malady through inserted pillules and with their appearance that are three lines according to its latitude, placing fingers in any one line where possible using cautery as per the tolerance of the malady and the patient'dict disposition.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	That is also meant for puncturing with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, then apply three or four cupping marks made with a pointed lancet on this manner.
Capitol .xliii.	In translating this line from medieval Latin-influenced text into English while trying to
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The provided phrase "Capitol .xliii." does not appear to be a coherent sentence in any known language or context, and the mixture of Latin
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	It seems there's a mix of languages and possibly an unclear concept in the provided text, which may not directly translate into coherent English sentences due to structural issues or typographical errors from translation attempts:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And in the lower back and neck vertebrae of him/her that already begins to overtop the others,
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	So when you press and attempt to prevent it from spreading, then apply that same pointed cautery in a circle according to this shape.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	That they bleed out or use the cautery over the entire backbone region of the patient' extricatedly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, apply cautery along the vertebral column with points for two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are the points made between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for where it has been healed with water that we have mentioned.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May you ensure that the cautery is not applied in a gloomy condition but for muscle spasm relief.
Capitol .xliv.	In this translation of the medieval medical treatise text line by line into English:
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of gout and joint pain treatment.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And when gout due to cold excess is healed without further attacks of pain, the applied poultices are not renewed.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you are treating that particular excretion in the circulation of the knee joint, it involves using caustics within and outside the treatment area for therape extrusion control.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is where such a tool of this kind exists:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed instrument for puncture.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If pain enters the joints or other conjoints, and motion causes them movement inside, it is necessary that we burn this over any one of three or four points with our caustic at these places for treatment.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you have the necessary lancets for these lancets, then apply them to that required one without pressing your hand on it beforehand; simply send forth with the instrument of the catheter.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters both shoulders, then administer the points for which we have previously mentioned in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the waist and thighs alone, then it's called sourness; when it comes into circulation like a rolling flame, make points along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there are residual pains in the joints, then points will be made on the circumference of each node and around the nipple.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If pain reaches down into the hips or muscles on certain days, then you will burn all of their joints with cautery.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	No removes the swelling from the patient'dictly if there is a good regimen and reception of medicine; for God helps when this tool (cauterizer) works well.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv. (This line appears to be referencing a specific
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	The translation for "Cauterizacio de rompedures" into English, focusing on the context of medieval
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is an opening in the joints and points are directed downwards towards the navel, it begins with applying pressure as you instructed for your patient to eat locally available materials on their own body today using gentle causes so that the fissure inside of them does not worsen. Here "rompuredura" refers to a tear or opening in this context; hence cauterizing such breaks is necessary, particularly when directed toward sensitive areas like joints and possibly hernias (implied by mentioning 'belly'). The text suggests that the practitioner should apply pressure with specific directions ('layssart' – likely refers to a type of bandage or support) made from what’s available locally. This approach is intended as immediate self-care, presumably following traditional home remedies consistent in medieval times for dealing with such injuries before any form of surgical inter
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Follow the intestine within your body along its path towards your chest and command it to hold itself in place where there is an opening or a hernia appears, using tape as needed for support (referring possibly to applying a bandage). Here "malaute" again refers to the patient's intestines; thus following them internally with care. The practitioner suggests that if further intervention beyond pressure and observation is required due to an opening or hernia, they should use tape as necessary for support —
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Return that to the legs and attempt repair over there at these spots where it's split like circular sections of wheel parts, likely referring back to joint issues or possibly ligament tears ("pentenilh am senhal" might be a misunderstood reference due to translation complexity). Here "extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle..." suggests that the affected area resembles something circular like a wheel's spoke, which could indicate joint issues where ligaments are concerned. The practitioner advises returning any removed material or used objects back to these leg areas and attempting
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the ignited points of this instrument/tool that we are using now:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When it is necessary for there to be a request and signs must be gathered.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity and place your hand over the area to ensure that it does not protrude again.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' extraneous thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant has been put on their legs, while another is upon their chest holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And apply pressure with the cautery on that spot as firmly fixed, and insert until you feel continuation of movements in the patient' extraneous parts (possibly indicating internal organs), proceeding to do so each time if not already achieved during the first attempt into their extremities.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the fire of the intestine at the time of your cautery, to ensure that it does not spill out onto the thighs or cause a greater harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you understand that when using a lancet (cauter), you do not touch the patient's eyes, nor will you perform your operation on them.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it is necessary for children' extricators (cauterists) to be subtle according to their greatness and measure, here comes the first source sentence in English translation:
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the wound of the cauterization within three days before it becomes inflamed at the focus (the point where the fire was applied).
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that healing agent within it so as it may be cured.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joint pain is set on its two sides for forty days until the place and the patient are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When the nourishment of him is pondered according to the length of time needed for his recovery and ensuring that the intestine does not protrude outside again, it must be done diligently in healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When applied for up to forty days, administer the ligaments with medication properly and hold that area using one' extrankele (cushion) each day for another fourteen days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	If it is caused by overwork and excess of food and drinks, and vigorous use when employing this entire healing regimen, then you are ill (likely with rheumatic fever or some form of arthritis).
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And when the initial incision has been properly sealed with a triconvex (triangular) lancet according to this shape, place it so that it is tightly secured.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlvi.	The provided text appears as an attempt at translating old medical terminology related to
De cauterizacio de torcio.	For "Caute ratione tumoris," which can be translated line by line into English, we
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in the upper body for a long time and does not relieve itself with care from physicians, it is said that caustic treatment at points on the skin will provide relief through deliberate scarring or burning (cauterization). Here "Capitol .xlvi." likely refers to an ancient Roman medical text where this remedy for tumors might be discussed.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	Both large and small members (body parts) should undergo caustic treatments according to their size and developmental stage; areas of the body affected by tumors are treated accordingly with cauterization techniques for local pain relief or removal. Here "Capitol .xlvi." likely continues as a reference in ancient Roman texts, where such medical procedures might be described more extensively.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if the first caustic treatment is sufficient (bo es), but otherwise repetition of such treatments may be necessary; according to custom for these pains, points are made on a limb that approaches its cavity so that subsequent cauterizations can occur within it. Here "Capitol .xlvi." likely continues with further details or instructions from an ancient medical text about the procedure and principles of repeated caustic treatment as part of holistic pain management in Roman medicine.
Capitol .xlvii.	Continuing to 'Capitol .xlviii.' implies we are moving on
De cauterizacio de lepra.	When referring to "Caute ratione tumoris," the text likely discusses a method of treating various skin
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Those limbs have been subjected to caustic treatment for a great force, and lightly if the species of leprosy is caused by rotting flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	So when you intend to cauterize that one (the affected area), consider whether the leprosy is mixed and has been treated with the water we have discussed in Section C, without any remaining or current issues, nor this condition; fear for corruption spreading throughout all of the body'thy limbs and complexion. Then cauterize that spot on your head (the top part), immediately afterward at both ends of thy chest hairs (before pubic growth begins); also over two calluses each—one behind, upon either nape or servant;
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Ultimately place the cautery inside until it is imbedded in the bone, and thus are the displaced scars moved away from there so that thick vapors can exit out of them; then caulk over the wound as prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and shows signs of manifestation, then cover it with those cauterises you have in your head; apply them to the extremity of the nose, two on each leg (where worm infestations occur), two on both lumbar vertebrae, one large for thoracic vertebrae, another over the shoulder blade and a second covering various ankles—two per ankle with cauterises at hand; cover all joints of legs/feet entirely as well as any toe present therein.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Guard your nerves that are above the ankle so they do not burn these.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some treatments involve applying a pointed cautery to the bones of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, as well as one for the womb (uterus).
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Here's the line-bymediate translation:
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	Whenever the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, as directed by the properties of their tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the cautions made with barley flour mixed with honey and other remedies within which it shall be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii. (The given phrase "Capitol .xl
De cauterizacio de stupor.	From your provided text and the additional source sentence, it appears you are referring to a method of treatment in medieval
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or put to sleep and does not heal by itself; for such parts, they employ medicine men, emplisters (possibly referring to apothecaries), and it will still require cauterization according to the severity of that part.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And when a pointed cautery enters into the hollow of the neck with few instruments (or tools), it means that only a small number or quantity has been used for this purpose, indicating careful and precise application in medieval medical
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And carefully apply that which is within to heal the wound indicates mindful treatment of an applied remedy or medicinal substance with caution, likely following some ancient
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And occasionally the wound is cauterized causing numbness in both legs and feet as well as back pain along with inflammation of nerves; after this treatment, sensitivity returns to that part of the body. This description refers to a medical procedure where extreme heat (cauterization) may have been used historically on wounds or surgical sites associated with numbness in limbs and spinal region due to potential damage or inflammation of nerves; following this, normal sensation is restored as part of the healing process.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not press on it, but rather that person who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body and exit of nerves throughout its movement.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlix. (The provided text does not contain enough information for
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	For the phrase "Cauterizacio de albaras that is wart." here's a line-by-line translation into English:
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ancient balms do not comfort the patient and you need to cauterize that which is already prepared as a precaution on one of those wounds before it becomes inflamed due to purity (whiteness) or discoloration, perform this action according to the quantity indicated by the size of the swelling within where the moisture has become abundant.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .l.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided as part of
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The phrase "de cauterizacio di crusc." seems to be an attempt at translating the concept from
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When pain is caused by exacerbation of the liver or spleen and it turns around internally with its motion, then one must perform a circling form of cauterization on that area as it moves within itself.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is a pointed instrument that has been used in the patient's body cavity either within this circle here or on one of these points/candles we have mentioned before.
Capitol .li.	Capital (assuming this refers to "the head" or an
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And for caustic treatment of humors imbalanced, meaning that they are unregulated fluids within the body causing
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any humors are delayed in their turn, and this is due to excessive bone marrow (faysen), or because of the state of imbalance within them [the humors], they become few and weak; also depending on time – it's essential to hasten the maturation process thereof. At such times one must perform cauterization in their circulatory circuit through small punctures made with a needle (cauterism); furthermore, apply restraint so that once they have been healed or ripened out of imbalance – those humors will satisfy the required maturation process internally.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	May you wish to perform the procedure of this instrument for cauterization, and thus heat it here where nourishment enters through the intestine: keep that away from there until needed.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the caustic placed there washes away in time, take care that the leg' extruded by it be healed; and attend to its cure if needed.
Capitol .lii.	Given that "Capitol .liii." does not provide enough context
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	From the provided text, it seems like we are discussing methods of treating certain medical conditions in medieval times. Here
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Translation: The 'corrodent' is like decay within the limb that consumes you as one would at a fire pit with dry wood; it rots or erodes away, presumably referring to some type of infection or deterioration inside the body part mentioned. This suggests medieval practitioners understood certain bodily functions and conditions but might not have
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Translation: Therefore if that place where the 'corrodent' suffers from treatment akin to focusing on dry wood at a fireplace; you would apply cauterization with small splinters of bone, and large ones as necessary in that location which contains or is affected by the corrodents. This implies ancient medical practitioners used various forms of heat application for healing purposes possibly aiming to destroy harmful agents causing decay within a body part while promoting recovery through controlled cauterization using different sizes of bone splinters, likely as an attempt at decontamination
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Translation: And then you would also perform the complete cauterization of it, removing entirely all traces of decay and not leaving any cause for further illness behind at that spot within which full removal is desired to eraddict (meaning completely remove) every trace of corrosion. Here, medieval doctors were advised or instructed on thoroughly cleansing
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Translation: And allow it three days of rest on the cauterized locations, with oil mixed within which all scars shall be entirely removed and decay fully eliminated from thereafter at those places where complete healing is sought after. This suggests a treatment regimen in medieval times that included not just immediate intervention like cauterization but also allowed for recovery time coupled possibly with the use of ointments or poultices designed to aid wound repair and eliminate decay over multiple days, indicating an understanding of post-treatthy healing processes.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Return that which is causing it in wax for care; take into account what has produced this condition within your body'thy substance of flesh and blood, wherein disorder arises
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Return what causes it in wax for care – three times a day if the flesh and blood are healthy without decay, but otherwise, apply caution; if there is damage, perform treatments on that which has been broken within those places where deterioration occurs.  
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	The given medieval medical text is a blend of languages that incorporate elements similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French with some archaic forms or idiomatic expressions specific to the time period:
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	May you carefully use a focused flame (cauterization) for cleaning away putrid blood,
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you already have taken care of him with immediate medicine at this division, so take it when he shows signs of coming out (of action or symptoms).
Capitol .liii.	The provided text seems like an extract from medieval medical literature where terms related to health
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Regarding the treatment of this kind, here is a possible translation for "Capitol .liii." considering it might refer back to procedures mentioned earlier:
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	This translation attempts to maintain the context of medieval medical practices as mentioned in your provided text:
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the pointed cautery be placed where it appears as if fire is coming out of them, which serves both for pain relief and healing purpose according to the size determined by the key that contains all parts; also suitable for delicate areas.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Apply heat thereon upon your hand, and turn it around on the therape extrémity of the instrument whereby the instrument reaches within the depths of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Lay it within for three days until the poultice begins taking effect.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here the cautery is applied to that affected limb with salt pus (likely referring to inflamed or infected tissue), and it's done over a period of time until that very thing has been removed from their reasons/causes.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Return care is given where flesh has been generated within which it shall be healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it is not converted (converted to treatment), and you continue with repeated applications on the surface of the body, particularly in the thighs and feet where your hands are applied during these cauterizations using water, iron or a needle-like device's tip, holding that amount as little quantity. Then place your hand therein (on it) to compress; rotate this compression with you until done throughout all of its surface. Before doing so tighten the capillary whereby applying less fluid through which channel is connected at the hilt/head of the needle-like instrument, leading water from that point towards the pointed end attached on the tool's head by means to prevent fluids (possibly blood or other bodily juices) pushing outward. Wait for a short time after such compression with the applied pressure due to moisture coming off until you notice it retracted back into place, indicating that its position has been corrected/restored if previously displaced erroneously by misapplication of this treatment method (moist compress).
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	When it is necessary for them (the patient) to enter their other, we place cushions on all those parts where they are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And for these pus that are removed from the cavities through which the flesh is stuffed, take care of them with this liquid in their place within those same cavities wherein the body'supremes'.
Capitol .liiii.	The provided text appears fragmented with some understandable Latin-derived phrases
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Based on your given phrase "Capitol .liiii." and the context of medieval medical treatises
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs in the nerves or due to fever as a result of inflammation, it is believed that one should apply four types of caustic treatment: two on each vertebra between any spondylosis present there are hot cauterizations; and additional ones above the chest area and over the stomach with an olive oil-based application.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the shaking of him stops and hastens his recovery from illness,
Capitol .lv.	The provided text appears to be written in an archaic form of
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	In this line, it seems that the speaker is referring to a treatment or procedure involving some sort of chemical intervention on wounds at the joints
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When pus is expelled from the joints due to decayed body matter (implying an infection or abscess), it becomes necessary for treatment, which involves covering up with myrtle wood fistulae—the process of lancing and draining these purulent exudates. The extremity where this occurs is extended towards focus using a pointed cautery; alternatively, when the area has extensive erosion or if it's necessary to target long-standing lesions carefully with lancet (cauterization), which indicates an intricate and methodical approach for treating such infections.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Mayhap when this fluid is discharged by means of phlebotomy (bloodletting).
Capitol lvi.	The provided text appears to be an attempt at translating or interpreting
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	This phrase is Latin, and it can be translated into English as follows: "Cauterization of the flow of blood from a sanctioned wound by incision with an arrow." Here's the translation broken down line by
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	This translation attempts to convey the original Latin text into English: "Guarded troops flowing from an arrow wound that either defiles or incises a limb part; thereafter seem as if it is difficult to restore such." Here's the breakdown of this complex sentence:
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when you puncture the water of wine (inducing bleeding or drawing out phlegm), hold onto your own body over there where it rests inside that which is called arterial chest, and prevent fluid from coming out until such time as he stops breathing.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Return breath (or heat) slowly in the focus with few but powerful caulters made of olive wood, by name means torches or sparks, blowing over them to purify those inside that are filled with fire/ignition.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return that limb and its contents where it was broken open by arterial rupture, placing above it a vein festering which has caused blood discharge, ensuring cautery within so as to ablate and restrict this vessel.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move it and extract the cautions, take another lashing coated with substances prepared for that purpose immediately; thus, do not cease to inflict one upon each within which it has been restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	When you do not burn up the nerves here and expel them from undernethy or other misfortune,
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	When the flushing artery is blocked here, it'thy not possible to relieve in these places without four main methods: or with a hot iron where we apply heat and restrict blood flow as necessary; when extracted if they are drawn out quickly so that extremities remain burning and bleeding while constricting veins, using either chain mail (mail armor) for strong external restraint, or keeping them in place on the body according to medicinal measures whose virtue is to further tighten blood vessels; with straps firmly attached at backrest.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer proper restriction (likely referring to treatment or bandaging) of the patient with linen and tightness at their bedding position due to burns or resembling conditions only provide relief without causing further discomfort.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it be that even if no doctor or medicine is present, attend to the indicated spot on this vessel where blood has accumulated since we have not been here, understanding its great congestion within which part of the body (likely referring to a limb) was divided from life force due to labor; and upon the area affected by arsenic mercury fumes with severe irritation inside so that it is swollen and inflamed – now may cautery or medical treatment be necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second division/part of this work or discussion.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and blows and of bloodletting and pox and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Al-Bukhari.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Ja have we written the whole illness in which this focus and medicine-burn are necessary, as well as occasions and causes for it, and tools needed for these cauterizations; let'thy commandments be about raising the head within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When this process is carried out in this place for the sake of bringing what they desire to them, provided that it asks for something from you.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you come in with blood (suggesting a patient arriving), cover/hold the wound that is currently being treated here, as it'dictates the first stage of cauterization treatment.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	Through careful observation during the operation where this evacuation occurs, which contains life essence within its vessel or incision site (where blood flows and is essential to life), as well as extraction of vermin or maggots, their presence must be addressed with swift action. Here'thy source sentence translated into English line by line:
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	From all of these things he must accompany fear and trembling, in their chests where death resides.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E yeu amonesti voci (or you command them) that they not fall into where it is situated, for some occasions may need using hands or stones beating illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Of them that are his sick and their lifelessness is to be feared, for the swift water of his illness which means death, prolonged by the length of his illness—so fear it greatly!
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	Of these are what gives you health and said, hoping for their wellness; the disease is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so that you consent to this disease which comes from there where they are coming; your caution must be greater than concealment and your greedlessness not presumed for any cause without certain scientific knowledge that purifies them, through whence the praiseworthy will proceed.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E usatz in la curacio di tutti i nostri malati per prognosi ed indicazione al quale è saluta, nel quale ci aiutano nella ricerca della fama e memoria; dei lodosi e gloria.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, God implant in you understanding and guide your bones without restriction, for here it is within their own bodies that they reside.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And order this chapter distinctly by sections as outlined in the previous chapters on cauterization and treatment of the head within the feet, so that you may be directed what is requested from you and what it requires for your needs.
Capitol primier.	Capital First.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the water cure that is contained within the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness moves steadily in children, and when the newborn takes its first breaths.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Translation line by line into English:
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May you not see this sickness in children but among all those whom you have observed to be suffocating and dying from hernias; I perceive my work laid out for these individuals here.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Here comes the medieval medical treatise translated into English line by line:
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is added between the navel and the bone or undernethythe ribs:
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation takes place in that case where moisture is between the vertebrae and bone and swelling occurs slightly, then you cut at one point on the head under a crack located at the back of the skull, and this fissure's length extends two fingers deep while fluid flows through it; thus, this forms an abscess:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture increases and ulcers become more severe according to this mannerism, here are two cracks as per these guidelfalliances.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is inside you, it's your body that allows you to open up the spaces between the joints and squeeze out the water from there when compressing this area with force; this isn't something for yourself to handle directly.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut into the head area at this location and create three openings as per these guideliners.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And draw out the moisture from inside; and tighten the cracks in clothes and ointments, insert water and oil into it by daybreak, apply wax to tendons and bandages, strengthen the head for equality; eat dry food with little moisture within until the body is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the vein and blood vessels of sanctus (the aorta) and vena mercurialis (the inferior vena cava), for through these channels flows the outflow of moisture, which is evacuation.
Capitol .ii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the vessels through which you supply blood to your hands, they are called pulsing veins/arteries (capillaries or larger vessels like venules and arterioles). Here it seems that medical professionals would refer to these as "pulsating" because of their continuous flowing nature
Capitol segon.	Secondly, focusing on the pulsation in those
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a clog or swelling occurs within the hips or chest and it is considered ancient/old-f s remedy cannot be applied to these locations, rather treatment begins at this point of those two vessels. Here, doctors would recognize that traditional treatments are ineffective for such conditions where blockages occur internally (indicating arterial plaque which can cause heart disease or localized issues like edema), and the focus shifts towards more specialist interventions possibly related to vascthy procedures due to these obstructions.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	So when you intend to insert those into the patient'sup', and apply friction at the spot covered by the rough cloth for it to appear as if they were untying straps, also secure their collarbone under that same coarse fabric; consider where the vein is located. And in such cases only sober individuals can observe them without being distracted.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Return the tongue to its place on the arch of the foot where each tendon passes through for a joint affected inside the mouth and held by the force of the head'dictation from the skull:
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the screw late into the vein and divide that flow into segments below those parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	When the length of the intestine is two furlongs adjusted, and when any vessel enters it for excretion, causing a rise in pulse frequency rapidly.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May it be that if you do not appear at the joint, then I shall measure the length of the auricle three fingers deep and apply pressure therein to attempt entry into the ear canal.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When the quantity of blood drawn from a sick person is considered, do not take more than what appears as vitality in their malady and humors' accumulation within the liver; this amount dictates how much should be taken according to its measure.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And examine the patient'se humors thoroughly, and if there is any cause for bone inflammation present on the bones themselves, divide these off as necessary to prevent apendicitis from developing.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return strength to the child with wool and silk cloths, and take care of that which is inside where it should be healed.
Capitol .iii.	The text provided is indeed reminiscent of older European languages with
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	When extracting the arches which are within the temples, it means that a medical procedure or examination involves removing something from the small bony structures in the temple area of the skull.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or old cataracts due to moisture and the quality of bones in the temple areas are present, when they seem hard like stone and we as healers aim at relieving these ailments, it means that there may be an urgent need for extraction from within those temples (bony structures), or cauterization with our instruments to manage such conditions.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The operation and removal of those humors that reside in the joints; understand arterial circulation within them as shown by one'supulsions, hidden from sight unless seen briefly through a sudden movement caused by friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden from you, then the hollow of the thigh must be tightly covered with cloth; and fumigate that location or immerse in water down to where your chancre becomes apparent.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take hold of this object (the scabbard), it is thus shaped as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence: Return your sight (or glance) to that which facilitates entry into the artery; place shoes on it and extract from there what is below in the parts belonging to above while you discover those things within the tunics, taking everything as they come.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is subtle, then enclose it with that part belonging to its extremity, and insert into that portion according as required for their limbs' lengths and contractions not to cause a flow of blood; provided they are inserted properly, there will be no pain in the entire body.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Return (make) the urine from the bladder into three parts within.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then place it in two locations on either side of double strength from steel or cords to prevent decay during convalescence and flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Return the excess that is between two ligaments, and apply it at this time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish to, use the pointed cautery inside the mouth of another already used for cutting (the lithotomy tools), and keep it in that location where this surgical operation was performed by them.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line-by end translation into English:
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working you encounter an outflow of bad blood from the artery, then immediately try to constrict that flow of bad blood with a compressed ligature or bandage at the wound site and tighten your hand within so as to restrict the bleeding.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If there is a cause of that which is not present with you now, then pause over the place where his sanctity has contracted (likely referring to an illness or condition within him), and envelop it in water containing vigorous heat until inflammation subsides, at which point apply pressure as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When you have pushed the ligament out of its place for this cautery that has two pillows under it, having prepared both places to attempt extraction, wait until they come back into contact with the bone so that the part can be elongated by what is taken out through this procedure, and thus are not consolidated in their entirety at any place of said cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the pointed cautery should be used:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	E is the sharpness of both cloaks examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Even if the wound is inflamed and two cushions are better than one for any sharp bone protrusion present in any part of the body, we will not cut away the flesh by speed alone.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is any thickening in them and heat accumulates at the focus of those places where flesh has detached itself loosely, it implies a localized inflammation or swelling due to excessive warmth (potentially indicating an issue such as cellulitis).
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety and has been made more understandable.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	When it is about the space between two cottons wherein lies the quantity of the said body'dict.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter (This line appears to be an instruction or
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	From treating sharp and acute pains in the joints of horses' hooves:
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acid is retained, and it rests on those veins which are above the patient's chest bone, where no external cause interferes with its healing process in medicine, and their face swells up like a wasp flying around while ambulating as if they were ants carrying loads; their hairs become frizzy due to humidity from tears, ancient apothecaries attend this procedure for the treatment of such cases, which is why it's referred to here.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	You command the malady to draw out the hairs in their own face, and insert into it three mouth-like openings on the forehead according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the fissure lengthens two fingers: one is above the nose's midline in the forehead area where tears are produced (lacrimal), and another according to a small movement of the eyes that belong there;
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Guard your jaw where the lips meet each other and extend your tongue'se continuous motion between both lower jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If there is an excess of three days in any joint' extrication, then so it shall be treated accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have an applied sponge or dry clothes on which ashes are placed, it will serve for the sanction (cleansing).
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Return (turn back) the shoulder blade between two acute limbs of him/her; this is how his connection looks like.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That it is from within those walls into the second interior chamber.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excising completely the part of the spine between two interspaces where it is above the bone which supports the skull, and allowing the humidity from that section to flow into the second interspace.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Return the splint so it does not protrude into the first cavity and use another tool called a cutting one (cutting cautery), which has been partially used from both sides without fully using either side yet.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	E pause the flesh of that gout must be cut away from the accompanying carcass and the bone's edge sharpens the jaw, ensuring it enters into the hernial orifice, cutting off all veins descending from the head to this point.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May continued flow of urine from the cleft of the urethra be directed into another opening within its passageways.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Put pressure on the vein as much as possible until you open up the spots in the varicose veins of the leg with a cuneiform instrument.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	In the third day he unties the ligament and administers great pouring of warm water or oil on it, taking care that some are dipped in rosemary oil and others inside them to cure the diseases.
Capitol .v.	In this medieval medical text translation from Latin-influenced language into
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the treatment of ulcers and their healing derived by means of pressure points on the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the old man comes carrying catharsis and continues doing so, and at times the humors of the malady expand, causing their face ulcerations and hair loss due to wounds from inside vessels stemming from various parts of the body they have departed; moreover, here is wisdom for these accidents that materials and catharsis do not come solethy except through blood flow in those veins.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is: to command the humors that constitute its nature, and inscribe on that spot where it lies in the forehead'se location a small crack; thus insertion occurs within bone (and entrance into right temple by left jawbone; entry into bone itself), until the bone is revealed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all phlegm or moisture that has collected between the patient'thy lips, in their small cracks at the corners of the mouth or on their linens (clothes).
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Once applied under pressure on the breast and belly, it prevents from becoming an ulcerous sore (apostema).
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the applied medicine has reduced the apopura and begun to enter into it where flesh is torn by cutting meat with two parts of flour (presumably wheat flour) and four parts of honey, apply that which serves as an extractor for removing excess fatty substances from the body; when you take this mixture along with its own remedies applied on these diseases.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI.: (The sixth chapter or section of the treat
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	This phrase appears to be written in an archaic form of Latin, which may resemble medieval medical texts where local language dialects and older forms of languages like Class
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The phrase in question translates into English as follows:  
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when blood flows out of the ear or appears like these causes that do not fit in the ear, hold the ear towards the sunlight and if you see blood coming out, administer its removal and perform cauterization for healing wounds once they have been stitched up.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not expelled internally, then apply external removal using the subtle instruments referred to here.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If there is a bump (probably referring to an abscess or localized swelling), be it so; otherwise, administer its removal gently over time using small and repeated applications of pus extraction.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	So if there is not an opening (forum-getada), then make and insert a reed into the hollow of the artery, seal it tightly with wax and oil that has been softened by heat so that only the reed remains intact.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	When drained with cold air from above and below it is gathered strongly due to what we have collected together today.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If there is no treatment for this condition (the term 'foro-getada' might refer to some form of therapy or intervention), then take half the lamp oil or parts from that which are pressed by leather straps, pause it at the end of the limb and cover it carefully.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Return that into the obstruction of the artery and remove thence any excess moisture from it.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is the cause of all things we have mentioned before, then take care to treat that which comes forth immediately with caution or restraint measures for inflammation or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "When the figure of Venus penetrates down into the stone (the patient'thy chest), and if that stone is bruised by you with an appropriate instrument at this time, close that crack within such speed, so as healing it may occur.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is fat that you believe in and inflate it, then administer its cure and removal; but if not heeding to your advice, take a gentle thrust according to this manner.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer that which is taken from him who was extracted through his artery, in the wound.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you think it has become moistened by the breath of ardor and pause that moment in pains, preventing those under its liquid or gestures from coming out; for then extrusion occurs therefrom.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May enter the water where the malady enters through the anus for cleansing, and fill this vessel with cold water up to their waist; if they have become foul-tempered because of the fluid, beat them therein—if not, take stones or small boulders as per length desired, throw these into the cauldron containing the water where it enters through the anus, and place one stone at adict intervals in the vessel. The patient then inserts their hand dipped in this chilled mixture into the part of their genitalia corresponding to that area with stones or small boulders above them; they jump onto these placed objects for treatment.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Thus cease your touch upon the rock where all water has been drawn out, which means that one should stop applying pressure or handling on a specific spot (likely referring to an area of discharge) until all the fluid has drained away from it. Here is the translation line by
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And let the water drawn out (likely referring to a discharge or effusion) be collected in your hand, using either paper or cloth; place one end of it inside and stretch the other outside where you will ignite the wound with care. Here is what this means when translated into English: And allow the fluid that has come out to be caught between your hands (using a piece of material like paper), placing one extremity within each hand, while burning or applying heat carefully at the site of injury in order to evaporate and cleanse it effectively.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When an animal is dragged out of that hole, if it's a small beast and tries to pull with its appearance, take care at the time when you divide; but if it's from a large creature whose cause causes pain in the throat, then administer its extraction by force and instruments, removing all other possible causes present therein.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Mayhem originates from the extraction of evil spirits in the artery, when you treat that water which we have mentioned earlier in division and flow during distillation processes without accompanying your treatment with sunlight attention; thus, watch over the artery to ensure healing.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Therefore if there appears any cause of worms here, extract that with gentle hands or small tools, may it not appear; otherwise take a catheter drawn up and inserted below the area for this is its form.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate extremity into the artery according to the quantity that suffering may cause in the malady; and draw out blood from it with great suction, doing so repeatedly until all parasites are expelled within their holes (or wormholes).
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	May if you do not obey my instruction, then you will swell and close in the circuit of the catheter with wax used during our session; administer these remedies that have already been applied to ancient parasites in their treatment, thus removing them from the tract of distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is your effusion that you are addressing, through which the remedies enter in this instrument of yours, here they take form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot with silver or lead quickly in that which serves under his hand (the pointed cautery), do so accordingly.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Thus is when they press in that it is necessary for them to be at the state of continence within the catheter here below, where there may arise needs.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the sponge and wrap it around the patient's limb gently, placing oil or honey (or any of these substances from those medicines in the canula) into the cavity of the joint, which is held by your finger at the backside and express out with your hand what has been compressed inside as quickly as possible.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When it is encapsulated in the auricle (the outer ear), it has already been slightly cut at its base by this light flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	When you realize what causes it that which will be extracted in the fever, remember that the remedies for fever do not endure excessive friction;
Capitol .vii.	The text provided appears as if it is written in medieval Latin with some linguistic
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of care for bones of the elb0r." (Note: The original sentence seems to be an attempt at translating into
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some childbearing women experience bleeding within the womb or from underbelly flesh; this discharge may occur in pregnant individuals due to placental blood not fully entering maternal circulation, and it can also happen post-delivery during cesarean sections. (Note: The provided text is a rough translation into English with some interpretative liberty taken as the original Latin phrases are complex medical terminology that requires precise knowledge in medieval medicine for accurate interpretation.)
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And if you cause pain in the belly of it (the patient), which does not comprehend clothing or garments, this is considered to be one of the major difficulties for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you pause the arrow of the malady under the umbrella and look at that place:
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obvious swelling, grasp that subtle part of it which is its form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the limb in which it is small has one sharp and the other not, and the sinews are of two lengths each to prevent harming the neck.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	So if the impurity is due to flesh born in the armpit or under it (the patient'thy body), then cut that part subtly and injure it forcefully while keeping the entirety of the flesh intact.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the stone is in the groin of the armpit, then insert it gently undernethy (the fine lance) and heat that very sharp point until only a little remains at its tip; place that residual part into the flesh of the armpit.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the bladder is pressed by water which comes from urination due to coughing forcefully, its pressure will be relieved; and make sure that it does not harm the nerves of the arm.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you cool the flow of blood if it occurs, submerge sponge or cloth in water and pause over the navel area, using another remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the text on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	The provided text appears as if it were taken from an old medical manuscript using arch
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	When caring for the illness that has come upon the eyelids, you should take appropriate measures:
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When some cold dampness enters into the lower limbs of the patients, occasionally there are also dry ones.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore when you hold those hands together and separate their joints from the flesh as directed in these three places, place your hand over them to ensure stability.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain due to a flow of phlegm within, then you will apply the pointed heating tools (lenticulars) internally subtly.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And the best caustic is that flesh and guided troops return when any remaining cause of their diseases has been burned away at the focus; and once they have been cauterized there, those causes do not come back.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" in this context does not form
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	When it comes to the care of large eyes, here is your translation: When dealing with very big eyelids (eyes). It appears you are seeking guidance on how best to take care
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 When it comes to the regular maintenance of large eyelids (eyes), here is your translation: Regarding the routine care for very big eyes, which may lead them to appear larger and stronger in their fortitude, thus when they become significantly so, this issue calls out explicitly. Here'dictates a sense that with size often comes heightened concerns or attributes requiring additional attention—in keeping with how large physical features might demand specific health considerations during self-care routines within
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 It involves the accumulation of excess moisture above and below the eyes (eyelids). The translation suggests that such a condition is related to an increase in water content within these specific areas, which may require attention as part of overall
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Therefore, the action is that you should consider whether this significant growth in moisture originates from within beneath your eye and affects all parts—and its cause appears humid or damp (likely relating to fluid imbalance). Here we see a call for reflection on potential internal causes such as water retention leading not just locally, but systemically. It seems the treatise is emphasizing an understanding of underlying issues rather than merely addressing symptoms at face value—an approach that encourages deeper consideration beyond immediate observation in line with medical wisdom from byg
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Therefore with regard to that division between the loins (the waistline), and which selection will best assist you in preventing escape within those parts—and also suspend for an instant while removing, and hold up temporarily as it detaches itself: Herein lies advice aimed at controlling any potential leakage or discharge from a fissure around the area of your waistline. The guidance is quite practical; choosing appropriate methods to manage secretion (likely urine) in cases where an individual may have involuntary release due to weak
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not dressed with the entrance of it (the eye), and if you do not pierce through its thin opening at the corner close to here, then none will notice in any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and take care that it heals properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little (or scarce), you will not suffer from that illness within the next four days because the remaining blood of him/her restores and revives them.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the greatness is declining at the edges of the eye lid surfaces, then lift up and suspend it for an hour or so as you decide upon initiation, another to press that entire area, if the eyelid through inspection becomes elongated, in no way should there be a cause noted.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And apply clean water from sea salt for washing it out and care for the location where the body is healing inside that contains its essence in this water.
Capitol .x.	Capital Chapter (assuming "Capitol" refers to an
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From Latin, this phrase seems related to eye care specifically under the eyebrow or above it ("palpebra"). The term could be translated as:
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	When the grays that are produced under the eyelids, mainly in children, exacerbate these humors and acidify them; they cannot bear looking at sunlight because those pools of moisture move to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	When you increase those groans on the face all night long, and over their closed eyes which are already inflamed (already have a reddened or swolthy appearance), it seems there is an urge to cough; as soon as you perceive these spots near the tonsils, ten thousand times of coughing occurs inside those areas.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May enter the groin where you have cut through the belly button until reaching the arcs of Venus, in which during menstruation, women's veins are broken according to the shape of a white line.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those clothes which you have wrapped around the limbs below and above, between the right and left side where it is spread out that they may be untied.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure it does not reach the joints and kneecaps, for they should remain in place to prevent them from moving out of position.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May you not see your artery in the fissure during examination, but if so, adjust it with a gentle instrument inside where the blood flows; and extract that amount of fluid we have here; place those pills under their leg wraps into the water to settle them down. Then pause above the location and start anew these small pillules.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	When moisture and rest are applied in the state of that opening within the crack, it is to remove the excess moisture from there which arises from that fluidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that which needs healing within.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May you apply an astringent in the affected area; thereupon healing will begin as those treated within fall into place.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (The specific content of this line is
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Translation for "Capitol .xi." could be context-dependent as it appears to reference a section or chapter in the
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the patient's eyelashes natural hair is adjusted with quick motions, and when these become a cause of harm due to touching them offensively or rubbing excessively (which may lead to damage), remedies are employed through four methods as mentioned: by focal cauterization; acute medicine treatment according to what has been stated in the section on surgical interventions for burns and injuries, which I presume you're referring to with "capitol of cauters"; lancet insertion done intentionally (incising) or by suturing techniques; alternatively using thread as directed.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	So that you press the head of the malady in your thigh; convert with your left hand on their eye socket (palpebra), and if converted, be satisfied; otherwise insert a needle into where they have placed it underneath the eyelid, penetrate through the hair therein to reach beneath—that is at the margin of the palpebrae where fur grows—and pull back this thread from below upward along their eye socket (palpebra), and convert that part.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Return the eye's parted fingers of skin within the upper tear duct to its cavity immediately; and then remove the fleece or drape from undernethyears quickly, placing it over their eyelids as if holding a mitten:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Even though it depends on the amount of eye elevation, even among men, those who have a significant portion ascended according to how much their eyelids are softened by such an extent can vary in form and size.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Return the sinew above the joint lines that you have pierced, and begin from the greater tear duct to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair split is similar in size to that of a king' extricating oneself, it suggests an imbalance or excess within the body that requires attention from medical professionals according to medieval understanding. Here 'natural hair splits', could refer met
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	If you lubricate one corner of the pus with honey or mild wax to alleviate excess fluid from underneveled eyes (possibly a metaphor for sinuses), and cleanse it thoroughly while holding your fingers over both corners, this may help if desired. However, without treatment ("non cures"), there is no resolution suggested in the text:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return the stitches of the fields within three or four days, and take care accordingly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, stitch the wound and care for that which exsiccates and constricts, as when removing pus is necessary from the eye'dictions of the patient; thus healing may proceed better with sutures.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	When it is applied upon him in his thighs, and this action benefits them without fear or concern for the patient's part – meaning that applying pressure on a person'se thigh through massage can be beneficial to their health:
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Here comes another symptom in the head region, and it is that they have their eyelids raised with three fingers hooked together and arranged according to this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	May it not be possible that they remain open, for then take an iron in which there is fire and place this iron on the figure's heat source; also insert one of your pins into the larger tear gland, another into the smaller tear duct (lachrymal), adjusting these two needles to maintain equality among them. Raise both hands above eye level together with those who have received advice from us today.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the wounds of the patient' extramundane mouth using stitches, and heal whatever is inside that has been injured.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	Might you treat an abscess or a crack in your intellect or body, but do so gently and with appearance care, applying ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And sometimes in that measure where their hairs are observed on the eyelids, which tool you use for when we have discussed about blindness; it may even be a surgical suture therein now or then.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxiny is taken in this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And when you turn the eyelid and dissect the figure as I have described, apply forceps or fine tweezers to them according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their lower jawbone (temporal bone), correspondingly for a duration that is proportional to these measurements.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the limbs of several parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then break through the tendons with force, and take care that the wound heals properly inside where it should be repaified.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when secured, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you make according to this method: foot splints (bracelets).
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e there is neither length nor breadth that may be measured.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.: (Note: The provided text doesn'thy
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hair of the wound stings when touched, it is said to be inflamed or angry in that area (in English). Here "elevacio" likely refers to a raised and possibly painful reaction at the site of
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When non-natural hairs are hard and sharp, causing the wound to sting when touched; at that time, it is necessary for you gently lift up underneath them very carefully until a slight depression occurs in that spot (in English). Then adjust your limbs delicately without excessive force or movement.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When the length of the fields is as much as a thumb'dictated by medieval medical texts and practices. Here 'thumb'-length measurement ('longitud') was
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Place another subtle thread under it briefly, and then gently hold the extremities of that if you wish to do so. This instruction suggests a delicate handling required in medical treatment during medieval times, possibly referring to positioning or supporting body parts with precision using threads (possibly catgut suture material) for healing purposes without causing
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Hold the hernia under your chest and place it there so that your work can be declared complete; this is a small and subtle operation conducted beneath one'sin clothing for reasons of modesty or practicality in patient treatment, as inferred from these medieval medical practices. The text here underscores not only the physical but also possibly cultural sensitivities around surgical procedures during that time period—perhaps pointing to a need for
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Insert the needle into positioned skin adjusting with care that it has required to proceed and make sure your hand goes through there until you remove from underneath naturally; here, precision is emphasized in making an incision for surgical procedures as one would use a delicate approach—likely referring to ophthalmic or facial surgeries where natural retraction of skin was desired post-intervention. The meticulous detailing required by the practitioner aligns with historical accounts, indicating that even then, precise anatomical knowledge and skill were critical for medical intervent
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Pull the skin into place underneath while placing that therein—the fur should be only two or three strands thick; this guidance speaks to maintaining a certain standard of care in terms of exposure and coverage, possibly referencing treatments for wounds where one would gently remove excessive hair before closing with sutures. It indicates an attention not just
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Return your hand inside where the pus has come out through the eyelid naturally, at the eye socket (or orbit).
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	May it be that if the patient does not sit on his pelvis, you will draw back their iliacus (or possibly "ilia," referring to a muscle group), which is where your work has been done upon him herein; until he sits there with his iliacus.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When you have that vision of fever and when your hand rubs it gently and clutches tightly, let them rest for two or three days until adhesion forms at their location and rises above that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If there is too much hair on the body, adjust one of its natural ones and lift it up here, so that it reaches as far within these spaces; then raise that part.
Capitol .xiii.	The provided text appears as if it were composed in an archaic form of
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	From the given medieval medical treatise, and interpreting your translation request for "Capitol .xiii.", we can attempt to translate this line into English while acknowledging that without further context or a complete
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When veering occurs in the eye lid and it contracts upon contraction above or below (referring to one's forehead or chin), due to instability of worms or segments, or because leporine is applied either intentionally for therapese purposes related to these creatures’ curatives properties—or accidentally through contact with them. This event can be attributed not just directly but also by similarity in appearance (resemblance) to the ailments they treat:
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the reason for operating in him be that you cut through that solidification and separate his lips, pause between them where there is a piece of cloth lying on him, and bind those parts together while they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	When it comes to healing with the tools of care for these causes that expel putrid humors which have nowhere in our times where they can focus, constrict them; even if you do so, there is still nothing focused here today.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use that which moistifies as fenugreek does in its cause and the water wherein their knees and joints are immersed; or ointment of diatomaceous earth dissolved with alkaline waters from our wellsprings, immerse therein this body part, and cure it within.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	When it is your treasure of care, that you pierce through all means to prevent the body from taking shape contrary to common opinion (or custom).
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not any correction of humoral imbalance which does not restore the shape of the location after it has been directed by fire (foc).
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (Note: Without additional context or a specific translation
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	When it comes to treating the chalazia found on the outer edge of the eye, this line suggests that there is an existing method or treatment recommended for such a condition in the medical text being analyzed. Here's a
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	Regarding the chalazia found on the outer edge of the eye (eyelid), this line indicates that there is a specific name or term for it which has not been provided here and asserts two critical points: firstly, no natural remedy exists; secondly, nothing accidentally caused leads to its formation. This could imply either an intentional exclusion of homeopathic treatments in the discussion (if they were previously mentioned) or a genuine lack thereof based on contemporary
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	In terms of its cause, it may happen due to external factors like bugs (pestilence) or cuts/wounds; additionally through medical interventions such as lancets (incisions), surgical instruments used for cauterization, and other comparable objects
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The operation method involves taking a needle with double-threaded sutures and securing it within the flesh (skin). You keep one end of this thread inside each eye's tear duct—one on your left side, another on your right side—until the filament reaches down to touch both extremities at which point they meet. This description likely refers to a specific suture technique used for closing wounds or perhaps securing medical devices within close proximity of each other without further detail given here about its application context and purpose:
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Return (or lift) the flesh to the parts above and below the belly button, where it has been pulled outward like an expanding disk at this place in the abdomen; here cut through the widened spleen area with a sharp instrument.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the shape of the eyeball returns as it was before covering (the eye), then take a ray and pause at that point in the divided part of the eyelid, and turn that place into the eyelid, opening up cracks in the skin of the eyelid immediately.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "They are the extremities of the diseased joints' cracks at two angles of the inscizia, which you have made happen where they come together and there their shape becomes.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is written in Greek letters: this refers to "landa" (land). Here's a line-by extralinguistic translation for
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Return the meat to its place according to how much has been taken away from it; this is determined by counting the amount that was pulled out of sight with one's fingers over the eyes. Here 'returning' means restoring or replenishing what has been used up, as indicated by physical measurement using hands (fingers) and visual cues (eyes). The
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Adjust the separated parts and knit those together with wool, and take care of them using the mentioned softening agents (mollifying medicines) within which they are healed. In this line, 'adjusting' refers to mending or reconstructive actions possibly related to medical treatment during that time period; these would have been done carefully while incorporating specific remedies for their curative properties as understood by medieval practitioners of medicine—the term "mollifying medicines" could refer historically to substances believed to soothe and heal body t
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If you are performing an incision or stitching/cauterization procedure, cut those where the crack is and create a straight line over the skin of the eyelid as previously done. Here 'cutting' indicates making incisions for medical intervention—a standard practice during medieval times when treating injuries such as fissures on body parts like the eye lids with surgical or healing tools possibly made from bone, metal (like wires), and other available materials of that era. The instruction unders
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Separate the cloth between her lips as instructed beforehand—this implies carefully handling or positioning sterile fabric (likely to cover and protect an incision site) within close body areas, such as under a patient'
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the discussion on treating mercury withdrawal during operation, as it is prepared in various forms (mercurial pills/tablets), when removed or taken out from use at a moment'dictated by its formulation and operational needs:
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The skilled artisan prepares for any necessary action in each manner that is possible to him, or even more according to what he decides during surgery and with tools in major operations.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV. (Note: "XIV" instead of "XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men as they age above the book of health and is hindered from natural movement and work, so that you insert beyond the margin below the eye lid, raising it up or extending it out with a unit:
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: And if your eye is also hurting due to that sticking on, return it to its natural shape and heal the entire stuckness completely with care.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	When you put your hand in the salt water, or when it is distilled into hot water with juniper dissolved in it, then do so for cleansing purposes at that time; whether using pure saltwater, or diluted water containing juniper essence (distillation of juniper steeped in hot water).
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Return the space between the eyelid and the cheek to where it should be (presumably under or aligned properly), rest on the wet hair beneath their cheeks, and use eye ointment for three days until healing is consolidated within that period of time.
Capitol .xvi.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discuss
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Translating the phrase "De inscizio de ungla et de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals" into English, while considering it comes from a medieval context which often involved complex and out
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	The phrase "De inscizio de ungla et de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals" appears in a context of medieval medical understanding which often utilized metaphorical and symbolic language, particularly given the influence of Galenic medicine at that time. Here's an attempt to translate this line by considering its possible meanings:
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter but from the greater tear within that gradually covers the sight and prevents light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Mighty is the action in his eyes that makes the humors stop their flow at the head'thy mouth and oversees them, raising your hand to hold onto one lancet for each eyeful of pus taken out twice per dose from a single pair; extend this tool towards those upper regions beyond.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the translation:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And when you lift that leg up within yourself (or raise it), here is what happens in translation line by line:
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in some cases the joint may be extended or fixed by this thing: and it is pushed out from the shoulder blade of which this is its form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	E safeguard yourself so that you do not touch the transparent skin and cause it further breakage; ensure that the pupil is pierced through.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Put salt or quick-firing charcoal in the foot's sole and let it stay there for another day; take care that what goes inside is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the bloodletting needle is not sharp and you cannot insert it into that vein, nor has been fixed in place there, then regular this kind of bleeding tool will be cured by medicine, and healed when taken as directed within each division (or course).
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that part of the malady (the humoral imbalance affecting a specific joint or area), then use the tool sharply, like a delicate lion' extruded from bellows.
am subtilitat.	am delicacy.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that which is rare and confined suddenly begins to move within it, take the warmth of your hour from sinister night or morning twilight (dawn), pour into its cavity today.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Once you have completed your operation within which healing occurs, then continue with that action on said reason/cause for recovery.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The semen of the tear gland, if present in large quantities herein, is suspended for an hour; and examine that portion examined without causing a flowback of humors.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Return tears in the teary eye and apply salve internally so that it heals within there.
Capitol .xvii.	The given line appears incomplete or possibly incorrectly transcribed as it only includes "Capitol
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Based on the fragment provided and understanding that this is likely to be from an old or medieval medical context, it appears we are dealing with descriptions related to bodily humors (as was commonly believed in pre-modern medicine), dietary considerations for health, and perhaps a specific illness
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	This line seems to discuss the excessive intake of certain meats that are red, and how it may affect one's pupils or necessitate an intervention with blinking motions over the lids (and possibly some form of application related therapy using elements like "balaustra," which could mean a decorative element in architecture but here might be metapthyically referring to something used for treatment). The text implies that there is too much red meat, and it can lead to physical symptoms such as affecting the pupils. Further intervention may involve blinking or possibly using an alternative remedy involving elements of balustrade-like structures (perhaps a symbolic gesture towards some form of protective barrier for health).
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Might the operation be that the swelling in his thigh subsides at the waist; and with the oils of that person, collect all the cut flesh conveniently for it, using either a forceps or tweezers; and bind the meat together until you have finished everything within your power. 
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Either your knowledge is in that which you insert therein within the ulcer of the tongue, or it pertains to small forks with which one collects secretions as they come forth from our guidance here at this place.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your understanding and the body is cleansed entirely of flesh, then fill up the wound with salt paste or drippings from crushed herbs and similars used in corrosive medicines; pause over it above a layer of albumen to securely bandage for abscess treatment. 
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If any cause of inflammation and swelling occurs, apply heat cautery immediately, fearing ulcer development; treat that which yields to treatment with the same applied healing agent while performing this intervention until it is cured, so that even in the corrected flesh you will find relief.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even if you remove the entire cure of hernia through natural means or accidental ways using iron tools, do not insert your hand into any part of these operations while observing that this body member is suffering from it.
Capitol .xviii.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .xviii." as
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	The phrase "Colleccio de sabel en le huel" translates into English as: Collection of salt in the
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The translation provided here appears to attempt a rendering of the original Latin-influenced text into modern English; however, it's essential to clarify that this phrase seems semantically and grammatically unusual or potentially incorrect as written:
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary for the treatment that you must consider whether he has strength here and not any other illness in him; then collect that which belongs to him.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	When you command the malady to pause its head at the belly button and place your hand over those veins, according to your discretion. And that inch or two of these vessels should be very finely doubled as per this method:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	o such that in this way they are cutting into a limb (or body part):
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Here is the line by line translation:
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not touch the humors in the extremities of the spine; and if your operation takes place during daylight, ensure that nothing is inserted except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed the procedure, then draw it out into the head cool or hot water for so that your condition becomes strengthened by what has been drained from within.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	May it not be within your power to collect all of this at once, and if so, then apply the fluid that exudes from him for as many days as necessary until his pain is numbed and he has been secured with an application of cautery.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	When you repeat over him as his mother' extricates that he is cured,
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how they are called:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. (The provided text does not give enough context
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	To reduce swelling by applying pressure." Here, the translator has converted an imperative Latin phrase into English that
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat burns acutely as described and not healed yet, they are in no way cured here but rather divided over the ulceration to be matured; remove completely all the moisture where it is trapped inside so that bone may emerge." This translation attempts to convey a complex medical procedure from medieval Latin into modern English. Here's an attempt at translating each segment:
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover the bone and it is in decay or ruin, then this becomes its form of a support for which these are.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is hard in nature, and its iron-like substance can be drawn out by fine points such as a file or finely ground flint. It may come back to the head with drawing it out through small punctures using these tools (as you will follow herewith).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When the cautery is placed on the site where bone has been crushed, turn it between the thighs and gradually press your small hand inside until you know that this fracture (crushing) has become smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When there are some drops (indicating fluid loss), and restore the place as it pertains to drying out causes being expelled or stoppable here,
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So that the place is consolidated and good flesh has been born there from illness and decay for forty days, without renewal of disease or puncturing it again, once you know this, you understand that healing has occurred.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then the wound is in your body and must be reduced to its natural shape; according to this method: as soon as you find bones or sharp objects within it, take them by their form accordingly.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Its metal armor is three-sided and its shield'dictly compressed into the limb end with such frequency.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Here is the line by line translation into English:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Thus restores the place with dry, prescriptive medicines as soon as you take them to swallow.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and place are in duress, at that time return what was flowing into parts to the groin, so put on bandages over there.
Capitol .xx.	The provided text appears as if it is from an old medical document in
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	This line translates into English roughly as follows: "Now reduction of the swelling." Here's a more detailed translation that attempts to
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	The line provided from the medieval medical treatise appears to be an instruction for managing swelling (emphysema) and pain of some kind related possibly to respiratoire or digestive issues, as inferred by context:
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Return those who are between each other according to the quantity that they need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	When strength is applied to those hard and contracted bands, repeat the use of suction cups for scraping them out; apply the suction cups and massage with heat throughout the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If during ligament stretching it is softened, then that which causes pain will ease off.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Return or fasten the bandage today as we have discussed.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already been reduced, then that is good; otherwise, repeat the plaster on the knee and joint stiffness using pills inside where it will heal.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line appears to be referencing an item or
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the unenlightened state of the uveal tract (tonica uveia). Translation and interpretation: The phrase you've provided seems to be in Latin, which is a
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the disruption occurs in the uveal tract (tunica uveae), it becomes prominent and proceeds outwards like a grain of sand under an eye lid, with water flowing into its place; if you intervene now, position one needle at the junction point above where tears originate from within your eyes' structure. Here lies twofold purpose: to penetrate firstly through this lower double thread (possibly referring to a drainage pathway associated with tear production), and then seize upwards in the circuit of that same needle, tightening it therein; apply pressure atop where both threads converge.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Extract and apply pressure on the swolthy nodule, placing it over where humors are inundated with wine from gourd extracts; let them enter therein to be absorbed by its body (the patient's).
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	When care is provided for the sick with this water that comforts them inside,
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Here is the line by line translation:
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength within so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxii.	In this translation attempt from an archaic medical text that blends elements of
De curacio de alconati.	The phrase "de curacio de alconati" in Latin can be translated into English
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This phrase translates to: "That illness, which is called waterlogging in the body's resemblance to being washed away and not that." In this context from medieval medical literature, it appears they were describing a condition similar to what modern medicine might refer to as edema or swelling due to fluid accumulation. The term 'alconati' indicates an understanding of excess water in the body affecting health ("malaut
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	This complex Latin medical phrase can be translated into English as follows: "It is the action of letting outward whereby a seeping humoral excess occurs on an applied device (likely referring to some form of diagnostic or therapeutic apparatus), and you should lay your hand upon its head, taking hold at those two extremities that show signs whenever illness comes near through these portals. You must dry it thoroughly with the hands left therein; do not let any moisture remain—let no water enter from outside (presumably into this device or area being addressed). Hereby you are to eliminate the external light, and thereby expel humoral excess as soon as possible once detected inside.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not fall into its place (likely referring to a body part returning or descending as expected), you understand that there is water involved (possibly indicating fluid accumulation). Here
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it does not descend as directed, you understand that there is water involved; thus, take care to press gently and firmly on the spot where fluid accumulation has been detected above (inside) the cornea within the eye socket ('orbital cavity'), ensuring removal of the ailment. Hereby explained in English line by line:
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Thus when you are taken out (presumably from bed), there will be a mixture of water and honey in the tailwater where you have already mixed honey or simply added honey, together with fenugreek that is being held by your hands.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return is necessary for its treatment of other causes within which it has healed itself.
Capitol .xxii.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing conditions related
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Based on the fragmented phrases and their similarity with languages such as Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, it seems that we are dealing with an
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	The text provided appears to be from historical or medieval medical texts and includes terminology that suggests it is discussing the properties of water in division (possibly related to its purity) and conditions under which holes must be made, following health standards ("la sanetat"). Here's a possible translation:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	And when you place a pillow between your legs on a mattress and hold the patient'thy chest with their spit (saliva), it becomes stricter/tighter in its positioning.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply pressure above your left eye lid if that is where water (tears) come out; or apply it on top of your right cheek if that is there.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take your right hand (if the humerus is on the left) or else your left hand (if the humerus is on the right), so that they hold it firmly in place.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Return the limb' extrémity as far from the crown as possible due to the heavy head of reason in their mind chamber and place your hand on it accordingly with virtue, ensuring control over yourself at that moment.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Return it into the abdomen's cavity, and feel that already has entered due to some cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And if rest is needed for one part (or limb), then when water descends, do not let that other period elapse before providing the necessary respite.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	So when it is secured and does not descend, then take out the softened part easily with your hand, twist that portion gently around itself a few times, and dissolve in water a small piece of clear crystal salt and place therein some lava from within the wound; furthermore, pause outside where the clot or stop is saturated with rose oil and albumen (egg white) mixed with alcohol.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May those of our time take a break over that which has been washed on this sheet (album).
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your master in the interior of the belly due to its hardness—for it is among men who are hard that this occurs (the form being as follows):
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that area of the joint pain with your instrument, and do not leave it in the wound site; rather direct a path towards an even more subtle location undernethyre.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then return (the intestine or hernia) back into its cavity; place your hand over it here, so that the intestine does not
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And then praise the work of your bedroom furniture crafted with care to be a place where you can rest on top of it (your body), in this dark chamber, and that all movements are forbidden.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And when his body' extrinsic fluid is at its proper balance, and it does not weaken the head to turn left or right in all directions.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Whenever its thread follows its disposition into the third day,
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which is in the dark and gloomy mist of night to daytime again; let it see some causes thereof (and) return its ligaments within by evening seventh hour.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Whenever you make an application of water during healing or so soon after, then provide the infusion immediately.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	When you expel water from it by force, through a great and vigorous gaze of observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you lance an abscess today and correct that which flows away from it in water, do so immediately.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Absorb the patient'dict vision and place your hand over their face for several days until they are present in this dark illness again.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return its growth from that bile greatly, and discuss about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	When you understand that during surgery it is not permissible for the student to observe some times, and if you are skilled in performing operations,
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has reached us from those of them who said that there is a focus in the Aryan chest through which water enters and causes pain, according to what they have declared.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Even though no one has seen such water here on our land before, nor have any of the free ones brought it from distant lands; and it is possible that this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of medicinal herbs for that which he overlooks on those,
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These pains are from earth or iron by nature themselves and their extensions go beyond this subtlety of the triangle shape; that sharp end is like its form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol XXIV. (Note: "XXIV" is not Latin
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From flesh nothing enters the nose. (This translates to a statement that perhaps all matter from food must first pass through other bod
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various forms of flesh are nascent from which no cause arises that assembles into scorpion or polyps, and this illness is likened to these pains represented by such beings; it is called polypus—this condition named for its resemblance. (This translation attempts to convey the medieval understanding of a nose-related inflammation potentially leading to growths like nasopharyngeal polyps, drawing an analogy with scorpions possibly due to their painful and prickly nature.)
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it flesh is blackened or putrid in hue; and from the same there emerges a yellowish substance that makes its way out into places where meat does not reside, which means outside (or beyond) normal tissues—a discoloration signifying decay. Herein lies contrast: within these regions of affliction no ordinary flesh
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Thus in these places where no deceitful flesh or blackness exists within them (suggesting an absence of cancerous growth), make the womb move between your legs and expose it to sunlight, while you draw blood from those regions—this indicates a treatment approach using light exposure possibly for detoxification purposes as per medieval medical theory. Herein lies contrast: outside these affected areas no harmful flesh exists that requires such intervention (indicating the belief in cleansing or curative power of sunlight on purifying afflicted tissues).
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Extract that from the main parts of the body where you understand all flesh is suspended; if there's a cause in your patient for which abscission (separation) may be possible, then extract what you have understood from these causes using one of the delicate instruments available to facilitate this action within them.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the scabbard or accident of ulceration occurs quickly and you catch it; that is when for malignant ulcers, return your hand to where the sanction has detached from its seat and all cavities are exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	When it is necessary for his breath or moisture inhaled and exhaled, return (or restore) its flow within the nose wherein lies the nostril'dictum, and another through water or air which he uses to breathe
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	When his nose is opened up and moisture goes through the mouth passage, you know that healing has already begun.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May it not enter further if humidity does so soon after covering, then you know that the flesh under your feet will be consumed by bones where moisture has not yet arrived.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you encounter an obstruction faithful to the patient, and there is swelling in their navel or bellybutton area where contractions occur at intervals of days or months, engage the malady (disease) with its amount/quantity for that time period by inserting one extremity of a tool into it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	When the smell of pain comes into their nostrthy channels and causes suffering in their joints, this is why people who desire to make it suffer come here for help.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Return the two parts of the thigh to their cavity and administer a knife for cutting flesh therein; this is where you know that meat already resides in the thigh, which comprises both extremities over the nose and below it.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	In the day of healing, pause in the nose with a bronze tube for as many days until it is cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If there is a need for care that extracts (or suctions), use it accordingly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how the tool for extracting pus works, in which oils and medicines are distilled.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which is similar in appearance to a small torch), with its handle and body together, it looks like this tool.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make use of a closed clay pipe with the instrument maker'setup and its flat surface exposed; hold it in your hand at the back where these fingers will cover when squeezing or releasing fluids/causes from their sources as desired.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv. (The specific content of this line cannot be
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	It appears you've provided a phrase in what seems to be an archaic or non-standard form of language, possibly combining elements from different
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Translation: "They lay their heads in the spaces beyond the nose area; it is magnified and observed on days when they rest under its supervision." (Note that this translation involves a degree of interpretation, as the original text's syntax and vocabul018. Here are translations line by line with interpretive notes:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which vessel you have introduced that into his common body and inherited all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand or caustic/medicine over the location, which is within it, thus extinggying what was in that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	May it be too late for your insight to enter, if that is so, consider whether it has become hardened, dark in color, and with little feeling; do not touch the iron set embedded within this skull's cavity as they persistently gravitate towards you out of malice concerning what lies upon them.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling is from a red inflammation and not of cold color, when insight becomes possible in all that area, then evacuate the purple discharge and inspect it with care; treat what comes out to constrict its entrance so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxvi.	The given text appears to be in Middle English or Old French with Medieval Latin
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	When the seam of the nose and lips, as well as the earlobe (auricle), lose their continuity due to thread or make-up application:
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You understand that when you break continuity in one of these joints, little communication will occur during this operation unless with skilled men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So that when any of these causes comes about and you consider it as cold moisture within the body (sylt sic: le sieu sanc), then adjust the lips of your patient with bandages tied tightly, and take care to ensure what is inside becomes healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of suction for continuity are already separated and there is one who feels pain in any portion of their tongue that appears within, then it's time to cleanse each divided section of the tongue wherein they feel discomfort with water or vinegar until healing occurs.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the reason for sewing be that you add continuity stitches or needles with which we have treated in the abdominal suture, or attach continuity threads to the foot and know how to use them.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: This line appears to be an annotation or reference mark
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From that extraction, the causes of pain in the lips appearing during fights can be deduced.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Movements frequently in the parts of their lips distended with hardened pus-like substances formed by errors, and some are even smaller while others larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then when you turn the lips and openings of each of those hard stones present throughout the body, apply pressure with your fingers to where it is constricted inside him/her so that he/she can be restrained therein; also wash (and treat) this location as per what water they drink, in order for them to become healthy again.
Capitol .xxviii.	The provided medieval medical text seems to be in an archaic or regional variation of Latin
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Based on the words and context, it appears that this phrase is attempting to describe something related to dentistry or jaw function using old Italian terminology which may not be immediately understandable
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	The text provided seems to convey a medieval medical perspective involving the tongue and possibly dental health issues related to adjusted or misaligned jawbones (cheeks). However, as this is not entirely clear English combined with old Italian-like language, here's an attempt at translating it while respecting its archaic structure:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return your hand position over the area where sediment has settled or other dry, abrasive powders are present.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then immediately incise it and cauterize it; thereafter the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	The provided text appears as if it is from an old medical treatise possibly written
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Based on your fragment "Capitol .xxix.", which seems like a citation or reference line
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of both incisor and molar teeth, there are sharp points or ridges; along these edges, yellow (citrine) or green stains can appear due to decay that reaches up into the gums. These discolorations occur when dental plaque progresses beyond what is visible within the mouth cavity, leading to deterioration and subsequent pigmented lesions on the teeth where they come in contact with inflamed gingiva (gums).
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So that you can separate the patient's buttocks and pause their head in its place, resting it on their chest; clench your teeth where those sharp edges appear, caused by blackness inside them and citrition outside of what has been sanctified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if you are not in the state of digestion now, repeat the process on those other days and until they return to this state when you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You understand that teeth require different types of forceps and shapes according to how you prepare for the operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Through which the razor is applied to where teeth are removed from other parts of their bodies; these forms of rasoring must be prepared beforehand so that they may arrive soonest.
Capitol .xxx.	The provided text appears to be in Old French or early Modern French influenced
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth." The phrase "d'eradicacio de dentz" can roughly
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Treatment of the tooth's pain throughout its entire elimination process; there is no reason that it will interfere with the patient’s recovery, for within this treatment lies a sublime substance which serves as an excuse during the removal." The text details concerns regarding dental procedures wherein not only must care be taken to remove the affected teeth without causing additional pain ("dolor"), but also ensuring that any accompanying discomfort does not hinder recovery. It underscores a holistic approach within these treatments, suggesting an underlying principle of restoring balance or sublime substances for healing purposes during dental extractions (eradicacio de lu).
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the thigh is inflamed to eliminate that which must be eliminated because it causes pain in the sore and healthy teeth; you remove this cause of pain until the inflamed and sore thigh has been eradicated, at which point we have witnessed such an operation by barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So that you can verify which is the painful tooth and what it hurts when touched in the nerve circuit where there may be any movement, until such time as it dissolves from all parts of the gum tissue, and place your finger or fine knife (used for gentle probing) on them little by little within while they become numb.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	So if there is no exit (forum-getat), then take one of those instruments, and use it hereafter for the ease and removal of him who has suffered pain as quickly as possible to be at the table with us.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be that if the tooth is dislodged or corroded, then you must bind a cloth around it and tighten with delicate force so that it does not come loose during your compression on that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Here comes the sentence to translate: When you work extremely carefully with cauterization in the entire gum area and maintain your strength so that it does not weaken this part, and return over the thighs through their cleverness which is greater than the first pain of them.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Return or wash out its lesion with water from above (or rinsed clean) using caustic liquids, which are applied directly to the wound site for cleansing and treatment.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a flow of phlegm at once, continue with such movements accordingly; and if some quantity of pus or exudates accumulable on the ground occurs, sprinkle it with medicine and clean water repeatedly until you have cleared it away completely—if not, then cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers are those by which your tooth is numb at the edge during lengthy extraction from short or thick jawbone, ensuring they don'thy double when performing these tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When they are times of large movements inside that as soon as you begin to exercise them should not be folded and made thin outside, these exerthycises (or "ayssi") must occur when there is a significant internal movement without causing the external parts to become bent or thinned out.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here come the ferrous tools of India descentment joint pains are formed by sharp points from outside movements, and in those external movements there are teeth-like protrusions; some enter into each other while ascending rapidly through contraction force, others take the shape of a bird'dict beak', holding firmly.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVI. (Note: The Roman numeral "XXVI
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from fractured jaws. (Note: This translation attempts to convey a procedure related to oral surgery, likely addressing dental issues such as tooth loss ("extraction") and treatment for broken lower j
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the extraction of a tooth that has fractured requires stopping over its location at the jaw's border for one or two days until the site is mollified; and applying anesthesia or holding off pain extremities with what are assembled from beak of a ciconia (crow) or guanta (beak), using forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The external parts of them are his pains dilated with a reed or a knife.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my treatment with these forceps or tenalas (tongs), then immediately dig into the root and remove all flesh, inserting the tool used for this purpose as a small lever. The shape of this instrument is thus:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	E for a small appendage not meant to break apart and remain intact.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the razor is forged in a hole (presumably referring to an improperly made or flawed surgical tool), then it's defective. But, otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms include at least one thickness; their shape resembles that of a triangle without its interior:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second tool is that it's trilaterated and has a subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will help with this tool which has two slopes like follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments that we have prepared using the teeth for filing, it becomes useful when assembled into large pieces like this.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the twisted or shortened part of the limb, which is any large mass and not because it cannot bend (it does not break),
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you understand that these tools of teeth are similar in form and appearance to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisan know by what means their work reflects upon them according to how much they intend for it; these illnesses are of those which ancient doctors did not give attention nor pause with a proper instrument due to various forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are fractured, or if you pull them out (extract), care for that part where it is convenient to use our instruments and forceps previously mentioned for extracting teeth, which aids in this treatment.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And whether it is small or large in increments, and tightened with bands around its mouth so that no bone escapes from where they are set up; restore the location as needed by medicine.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small fracture in the bone, take care of that part which corresponds to and from where it came about (the blackness), and heal what has been injured inside.
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that "Capitol" likely refers to an official document or section
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	When treating teeth, other parts of the body are also considered important in care and treatment. (This sentence emphasizes a holistic approach where even though foc
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are considered prominent due to their shape and primarily in women's chests (where they were once thought to reside), it is clear that the consideration of a tooth as separate from its natural place, leading potentially to extraction or ligature without reason; nonetheless, if there is no connection with another part containing teeth—the latter being addressed by this instrument shaped like pork'dicts (possibly referring to dental instruments). This suggests using pointed iron tools made of high-quality steel from outside India for such procedures.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your finger is in the position where you insert it for those teeth that have become hard over time without being infected by other issues of the mouth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an outward expansion of inflammation, then apply the Indian steel from which this object (likely referring to some form of medical instrument or treatment) originates.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And whether it is all iron from India and returned here or small points made of bone used for cutting teeth incisions (which are sharp like needles), such that they can be ground down easily within a few days through easy action, so as not to create another dent with pain and bleeding.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	When lines are placed there in the foot, they touch upon each other and thus maintain proximity of their respective places.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is pain where one part breaks and the tongue goes limp due to that sharp dislocation of which I speak, then take care that it be restrained within its place, saturated enough so that neither the tongue nor speech may become impaized.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The text provided appears incomplete for translation as it abruptly ends with "Cap
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Based on the medieval medical context and considering that you've translated from a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French but are dealing specifically with restorative dentistry using gold or
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	The sentence provided seems to be about restoring teeth that have been weakened by grinding and removal due to percussion or scraping, with the treatment being done using gold-based dental cements which are rigid in nature unlike silver ones (silver does not harden). Silver might eventually change its form over time but gold remains unchanged. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in such subtlety and finesse according to how much can enter between the teeth; as for the form of recovery is that you clasp the foot and pull it twice over again through healthy teeth, or if there's one or more clefts (hernias), then so long as until the web reaches the healthy part in another section.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Return and apply the poultice to the area where you started, pressing firmly but gently so that it is not excessively moistened.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your stick is where you must hold onto his teeth that do not escape from it.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Return and insert the excess external parts of the tongue using forceps or tweezers into any location in the gesture, converting them along with those hidden between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, thus preventing damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And return (it) back into its cavity that it was taken out of, just like when returning something removed by force or as if brought down from Rome.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is torn or ruptured (dislocated), tightly hold that one (or those) with another faithful in such an action throughout all time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and straightness of healthy and diseased molars are linked together sometimes:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns the splinter or hardens it within any location at once and has them increase as we have instructed, they will grow back.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled craftsmen and wise people can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv. (The provided text does not contain enough information
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	From the ligament within which it is in the tongue and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament through which the tongue occasionally goes or is naturally attached to it, or an injury caused by a crawling worm that has already solidified:
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Here comes the sentence to translate: The operation in them is that you suck on the mouth of their malady, with its head existing within the throat; raise your tongue and inscribe upon that nervous thread according to where it lies when their tongue from prayer is released.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or swelling in that place, and it's for consolidation of pus within the wound you have cut open, then apply some oil and divide what has been formed by the ligature inside the limit you previously made with said bandage.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Guard yourself not from wound in flesh's part and divide here sharply iron and urine flow of sancus (blood).
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May you cool down the inflammation if there is discharge from a hot syrup-filled wound; may it occur that when pus comes out, apply heat with caustic substances to which they are drawn (i.dict).
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that heal for other causes within which it is sickened.
Capitol .xxxv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript discussing treatment methods for
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	When removing a ranula, especially after delay ("dejós"), the tongue is typically retracted or held aside as part of the
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some days ago, the tongue is tied down by wax (applied bandage), which restricts its movement as if it were a small child and prevents saliva from entering into the mouth naturally; until such time when this treatment inside the cheek enhances or magnifies its function.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in him is that he grinds his malady'sup calf before sunrise and considers the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see it as black or dark-colored and hard, which does not lack feeling due to the melancholy (malign humor), do not touch that stone in pain;
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it turns white, in which there is moisture, then insert the needle into that thin spot; and puncture all around it; if you feel wind coming at the time of your operation, stop piercing beneath you three times (so vinegar), until its scope is limited.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have treated him until he is clean and refreshed inside, and take care that the other cure also enters into his body for it will help in his recovery.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The provided text appears as if it is an excerpt from a medieval medical
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	When extracting the abscessed teeth and those that are nothing in the gums, as well as other such extractions.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gout attacks come on the joints, those are the swollen nodes that have been assembled as sweat-like things; these ones get sore and inflamed when you handle them in their division and they do not heal well – consider if the abscess is hard, dark, with little feeling inside it, avoid touching this one made of iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is of a red color and the flesh is thick, do not touch that area with iron to disturb the flow of blood; leave it inside so that it can mature therein, and if you must move it, then carry out for itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or blue hue, its quality is subtle, then that one must be inscribed upon it.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is of silver or gold, and subtle as a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you perceive that the tongue is affected and show it to me, place your tool over there, pressing for an instant and keep it in place until I can take hold of it. Then pull it out as far as you are able to do so.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another fluid that draws from the tunics (the outer garments or layers of clothing), and according to it affects this very tool you are using for such purpose.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and they are assembled with forceps, but the exterior parts of them are bent backward, so that their orifice is in the middle (of each other), sharply pointed, made of iron at one end.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this tool is not in your possession, then cut the bone from which it comes; and if made of one piece, do not make it of another piece.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Put in that cut, insert the other following this same method of incision, and apply pressure to stop bleeding from water stagnation.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is an outflow of blood due to wounds or injuries caused by stones and other objects that cause such flow, then provide clean water from the well for it, paying close attention so as not to let the bleeding continue unabated; attend to it carefully.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And some times other worms or such like come into those holes where there are already pinworms, and they enter according to how these parasites move within the anus externally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The given Latin-influenced text can be translated into English as follows, line by line:
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you fed my patient with fistularly and let him rest in one of their couches, then extracted that part, and pulled out the large portion thereof from it; moreover, examined another piece within its understanding from the other tract, sealed his mouth shut, clamped down his tongue, and made him rest on that spinal adjustment for that scoliosis.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return the large portion of it (referring presumably back into place), and there is only a small amount left that does not run away from us.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore it is the gout of that woman, and immediately begin to drink water, and provide food so she will not cease from that ailment' extraneous motion for long periods; until when such movement occurs in the place wherein said aility persists, at which time her suffering continues.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So then you engage and cauterize the wound of him/her there, thus removing impurity from it; and you walk around with me so that I am not ashamed before God for this action taken by mine hand.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation here, I
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the onset of humility when it is laid down or settled in.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the chest is coughing and it becomes deep, then that illness has no perpendse (or direction); if in a thickened and rounded section of the body, this condition is called "bubo".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When healed from the water you have described in division, do not hinder your treatment, and if necessary apply caustic externally; when it is long or red-tinted (indicating inflammation), then cover that which has been added roundly around him. And if directed towards his limb length, being sanguine with darker shades of brown or black color not at the center line, fear he who holds within your hand; for in this place there is concern over the malady (the hernia).
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you time that second movement as described by the patient'dict in terms of whiteness and length, separate the abdomen (maula) and press the tongue with an instrument used to shape its form and fix it at one-tenth in the new position; then pull out this element using one or two instruments mentioned herein during incision.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When something is not inserted into its natural place, but rather set upon it as arranged by nature itself; if you do insert from here may speak freely:
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Return the inflammation (or focus it within), using that which has been recommended for use in the knee joint of two thighs; care for that inside where healing occurs.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient's abdomen is frightened by its ignorance and uses cauterization out of fear, then applying restraint to the belly button area with their tongue (using a specific instrument), holding it in place using water from our previous description for cauterization (and ensuring this object remains wet or moist without being thick or subtle), completes its form—this is that living essence.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here the person applies their hand (their touch) on medicine, and express it through the space of myriad hours until that thing becomes blackened and numb due to medical biting.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, prick and wrap that over the extremity of the limb, immerse it in medicine, attach the limb to the tube within which the wound adheres through said dressing, introduce as much medication as desired for cauterization treatment, apply enough so that what is needed for healing with such procedure has been met.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you have indigestion and proceed with medicine, repeat that treatment, applying cauterization within the grain of the skin at its beginning in this border; cleanse away whatever is contained herein by water rinsing, wash it thoroughly with running water, treat open wounds outside of bandages using ipecacuanha (a medicinal herb), and insert gargarismes until healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This remedy for healing is placed with care and applied extensively out of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	1. Some days it is cured by water that has been subtly applied with caustic and incision, whereby the treatment takes place in this method: recipe for steam baths using yarrow, sage, rue, Arabian scars, chamomile, rosemary, broth, and similimum herbs to all of these causes or some of them. All are submerged into a vessel filled with water; there is bubbling over the top layer where an instrument made from rammed stone according to this treatment method rests on it for fomenting purposes. The poultice may be silver, or another metal.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And place it within the mouth of the malady until the breath rises to the palate and causes the uvula to become dimmed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here applies pressure on that moisture remaining within where it has become dry, and ensure you do not perform this treatment while the patient is consuming food or drinks; otherwise, adjustments will be needed for the application of stones (lithotripsy), which should only occur after obtaining consent from the stone itself.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be that you do not have this instrument with you? Then take a can and place the mouth of the malady outside its exterior boundary by making an enclosure using hay, so that the mouth of the malady is comfortably covered; for then the smoke from burning hay will prevent the mouth of the malady from being burned.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	In order to provide an accurate translation of this medieval medical treatise text with a line-
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the extraction of thorns and any other causes that are stuck in the gouty area (gout refers to joint pain often associated with uric acid crystal deposits). Here, "Capitol" appears as a heading or reference within this context which might denote page number
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Continuing regularly stuck in the gouty area, possibly due to thorns or nails on the foot, or any other cause. Here "Motas" could refer either to repeated irritations ("motions") like walking frequently with embedded objects such as splinter
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And therefore you remove the water that is obviously present from above it (the visible affected area), placing your tongue with an implement by the sunlight, to confirm if this fluid is indeed in the gouty condition ("gula"). Here "cove" means cover or concealment; removing layers such as skin blisters often seen together with severe joint pain associated with uric acid deposits. The use of sight and touch (via a tongue instrument) aligning with medieval medical practices for diagnosis where the doctor would observe symptoms directly to determine their cause, suggesting an early form of clinical exam
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if the water is not visible and it's concealed in the gouty area, then make a slurry with malady urine that arises when food decays in the stomach; or drainage of marsh mud (likely referring to some form of natural clay), rasped pea shell pieces, pebbles from loam soil—all applied forcefully and firmly. These are used as part of a treatment process that involves introducing these mixtures through the chest wall into where spines or thorns have been extracted; afterwards those same materials will be pushed back (transgussed) under them, so once they've come out at their location in relation to what was removed from your body. Here "foro-getada" implies a method of internal drainage possibly similar to cupping therapy or the use of enemas for purging; and this ancient practice would involve manipulating substances into one’thy chest cavity as part of an amputation's aftercare, suggesting that medieval medicine sometimes resorted to combining practical remedies with spiritual rites. The text describes a multi-step treatment which includes inducing vomiting (perhaps seen as necessary for cleansing), creating specific concoctions from natural materials gathered around the home or nearby environment—and then reapplying them therapeutically, indicative of holistic approaches to healing in that era.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	May take a snake and bind it with faithful rope, or may extract the intestine and cauterize therewith on tablet and spit as medicine; or use a pore and apply thereto also to remove things from their throat.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If not through examination of these causes have we ascertained them, then use a chisel according to this form.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a large mass that enters into its cavity, the one you insert therein for ease of drainage.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head up on their shoulders, and make sure that the touch of your hands is at the neck or backbone area, so he can breatde to you again with ease into breathing air and exhalation for what I have asleep him (the doctor).
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even though the malady enters therein and identifies its cause location with signs of pain in that place, by virtue of their knowledge it invokes them to draw out the instrument accordingly according to how much they have prepared within this threshold (preparedness).
Capitol .xxxix.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of sanquiguasuga (presumably referring to gallstones) attached to the gallblad0r:  
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the bloodletting fluid that we have discussed in the division of cure and medicine does not comfort you, consider then turning to the gallbladthy (a term possibly referring to bile or related organ) within the area where discomfort is felt on the side opposite the sunrise, provided you already possess a tool prepared for this purpose.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you find a splinter or small movements beneath carefully and gently extract it.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to remove that, take a concave cannula and insert it into the groin of the patient; place a heated iron pin in the concavity of the cannula, and expel as many drops (so long as the sycgenesis is dead and stays away from the inguinal region) to prevent the swelling for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If there is no water to wash away the medicine that we have prescribed, then cleanse (or purify) the abdomen with a cloth or naphtha as used in steam bathing for this purpose.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When it is necessary (If), points must be made over the surface of the foot with a pointed instrument (a sharp tool).
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And when it is necessary (If), performing an operation for absorption of that substance involves grasping the vessel containing hot air and its cover; insert your tool into this container trap; remove from underneath heating, placing above where gas enters through a small hole—this opening being sealed with another object. Then lift out beneath warming until you feel it has reached (reached) below wound's surface, at which point the patient lifts their mouth to bite on the end of the cannula; and hold tightly so that absorption through heating does not occur within what one knows as "the operation site," wherein now heat penetration has reached it.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not already done, then perform the subfumigation movements repeatedly, and prevent the malady from drinking, eat salty and alcoholic foods, and do not drink water, as it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool with which you take out when seen, and it seems like forceps used times upon times, but without any curve in them.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The provided text is in Old Spanish or Medieval Latin-influenced language similar to the ones mentioned (Latin, Italian, and others). Here's a translation:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears to be an identifier
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	The sentence fragment in Latin roughly translates to: "In the speech, at which point do they reach their section (part)." This suggests a discussion about dividing or reaching different parts within a discourse on gout ("apostema,
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The Latin text provided can be translated into English as follows: "These abscesses are specific signs of madness (humoral imbalance), and they arise in memory recall from each one herein." This appears to discuss the manifestation of joint pain, or what could possibly refer to gout symptoms within a medical context. The term 'abscess' indicates an accum
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	The text translates to English as: "Therefore various in piercing and section for their specific signs of madness (humoral imbalance), where one is due directly through abscesses themselves, from which we extract the moisture." Here a reference is made that gout or certain types of joint pain may present with 'abscess-like' manifestations requiring intervention. The term "perforacio" likely means piercing (as in surgical), and it seems to relate directly to obtaining fluid, possibly synovial fluid from an
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The Latin text translates to English as follows: "Secondly, these locations are where acids cause abscesses elsewhere in the body (with some specifics occurr0149 for head and limbs); each type of accidental scalding is different from one another - with scalding at joint areas being distinctively separate from general acid burn. Each kind herein requires surgical intervention." This passage outlines several scenarios where acids cause abscesses, differing by location (head vs extremities), and concludes that each type of injury necessitating urgent medical attention involving possible surgeries to manage the conditions described. The mention of 'scalding' suggests a discussion on burns possibly related to humoral imbalance or other pathologies in this medieval context, which may include
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	When there are some apendices that have not been pierced but belong to the progression of illness in those areas, or their complement.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other appliances that are thrown when they come together and do not mature according to their complement, similar to those applied at joints, which become a part of the body'0thin space as it moves within this fluid (the humors), damaging ligaments or nerves in that joint; if perforation occurs before full ripening here, injury will occur elsewhere towards the main member; and when dealing with appendices where maturity is lacking. If you pierce during immaturity at these places of originating pain within the body (the colon), it disrupts digestion instead – that which causes this localized inflammation or fistula, one not healing therein.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the hour of the puncture for the abscess, and so it is when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You understand that when the cessation of pain and fever occurs, along with the reduction in speech and heartbeat, and the hardening of the head due to apendicitis, as well as other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	When you know where the puncture entry site is, near recent or incoming infection spots for drainage purposes of abscess and swelling treatment.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforation occurs through the length of the flesh or body part and in places where muscles, nerves, ligaments are located, as well as areas that do not reflect; use puncture according to which member it is being reflected upon in these reflexive spots.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in the flesh, then we must perform its incision inside until it has been confirmed that digestion of the patient' extruded matter secondly completed; and if you pierce through this at that time, both legs will become hardened by dullness and painfully thick lips as well as deepening within.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May you pierce through according to the direction of flesh or bone as needed, or according to what part of the body needs it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When administering a small puncture, and for large or wide incisions according to the size of the apastmae, do as follows:
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who are seated and have three angles; they sit like the feathers of a pearl or with the shapes of joints' appendages:
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From them in which it is administered—round and crescent-shaped doses—and seem like these to the patients:
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May those who cannot be pierced with their surface-level spines (like lizards), have only a puncture made shallowly above the spot where it is possible to penetrate them.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has gathered pus already, do not attempt to extract it all at once from that hour; they take out part of it daily, return what was removed into another area today, remove a larger portion tomorrow, continuing in this way until extraction through fistula formation.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly if the malady is caused by overcooling or a female prenatal phase, or in infancy or old age when vitality declines and animal spirits move towards exit from disease, they depart for outside forcefully leaving sickness behind them; you must intervene to treat it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Guard with great care and place your instrument in the one through which you pierce these implants, making sure to avoid any impurities; consider if there is little or flat pus within it, then attend to him accordingly as directed by ancient remedies or contemporary treatments. If instead the abscess is large and cracks appear on the site of incision, cease all operations in each trauma where we may come into contact with you.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess it has detached a part of the colon or if that area has been concave within its circuit, then cover it with fine cloth or linen as soon as you have applied pans or gauze; and keep this moist until the third day. Then process both treatments to cure what comes out during treatment (i.dict from the wound dressings).
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you experience bleeding during your operation, then administer cold water and wring them into the places where bandages are applied; pause there over the location of the blood flow that continues spontaneously.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, then take care that you follow your regimen and medicines which I have recommended in these sections of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter time and the site of abscessation is a place where nerves are located, then you wrap them in oil and vinegar for treatment, applying those over these locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the locations are fleshy, then cover them with water and oil or vinegar and wine as we have said before; thus you protect what enters into their body until they heal according to our discussion today.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xli.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from medieval medical literature written in
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	When arthritis comes into the chest area, it refers to a situation where joint pain or inflammation is present around the sternum (breastbone). This term could
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the chest area joints are inflamed and contain special nodules that hold their substances; these substances act as causes for them (indicating what triggers or irritates the arthritis). Here, "nodules" might refer to granulomas formed in response to chronic inflammation typical of certain types of arthritis. The mentioning suggests a focus on underlying pathophysiological elements potentially involved in
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from these joints come pus (indicating the formation of purulent material), and those that contain moisture like lemon juice could be referring to synovial fluid, which is typically clear but can become cloudy or change in consistency when
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those joints that contain moisture like the pulse (likely referring to synovial fluid), and their assemblies are stone-like hard consistencies, indicating deposits of urate crystals typical in gouty arthritis where uric acid accumulthy. This description is indicative of a clinical observation that would be made by practitioners during an examination of someone with joint inflammation possibly caused
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the entire body and removal of those without fear; there is nothing to worry about when extracting them because they do not form fractures (arthritic deposits are soft compared to bone). Here, it seems that removing these pus-like substances or urate crystals from joints would be a relief for the patient as indicated by "no es temor," which translates loos
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it is that which counts for moisture, then divide that limb into segments according to its length on the surface as follows:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Here begins in the section of line B and ends at line G. Therefore, once the moisture is evacuated, scratch that layer containing said moisture without leaving any trace from its cause; if traces remain due to some reason or another, they will return afterward.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here is the line-byse translation of each part:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If an abscess of fatty nodes occurs, then proceed as follows in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	am section has the shape of a crescent moon, and I cut between the lips of this section and remove what is contained within it from its dress (the flesh). Here is my intention in extraction from that which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May it happen that if your cautery causes disruption, then you must return immediately for the first remedy.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May also occur in other points on the head; these are similar to those found at the heads of children and fingers' nails, but their entire layer is surface-level.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	Pause there, in the parts lower than those you have pushed down to prevent sickness from ascending to the higher parts of their body.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Return care for those waters that are needed there for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xliii. (Please note that ".xliii" is
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the section where they inflamed in my colon.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Movements recurently occur in the neck and shoulder joints, as well as in the knee joints; and some movements even affect other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The spices of these scrophulas are motions, some from those that contain stones within them, and others containing moisture, among which there are harmful ones not healed by care.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that position you are using for treatment, the color of which fluid is proper to the color of one's vein and mucus throughout the body without being attached at all with nerves or vessels nor arteries; it doesn' extruded from (the bladder), but rather secreted through small openings between the thigh bones upward toward, nearing into line 'G.' above said bladder opening down to a lower boundary marked by .B., and spot that of entire part separation with caution; exert pressure on those parts just below (the) belly button or at the navel if such is required for these purposes along which they guide, as mentioned in chapters.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	Es possible that a vein or nerve has not been pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanctum has detached.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation while you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if you wish to investigate whether there is any other small skull fractures indicated herein, then inspect those and clean them out.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the throat of great scrofulosis (a condition where there'thy a large swelling or abscess), then do not insert that scrofulus into its place within the chest.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Based on my understanding of Latin and other Romance languages, here is a possible translation for the medieval medical treatise:
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And fill completely with Egyptian ointment that which you have already immersed in it, and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that abscess entirely, make sure your fingers and thumbs press the wound surface so thoroughly there is no unnecessary flushing out.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May you find that there has been an excessive spread due to the greatness of the swelling/scrofulosis, and understand its cause, then apply appropriate treatment as directed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	That scrophulous one containing moisture, through superficial penetration here at your place of maturation for you, and a puncturing perforation stops what has been put below the chest, as we have mentioned.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And administer injections of oil and spirits to them accordingly, thus preventing the rot that bursts from decay.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you turn over the patient and it is time for care, then attend to that wound with fresh meat fat within which it will be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (Note: The original Latin text is not provided
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	The given phrase "De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro" appears to be a mix of archaic or regional language, possibly Italian with Latin
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The translation attempt reflects an amalgam of languages and dialectal expressions:
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the writing of those sayings.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May in men they have displacement, which is avoided the extraction of blood flow, when for this reason it's not painfully drawn through all veins and major arteries within.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have applied cauterization in the mouth or with tweezers/forceps when the illness is not in the throat, seek to escape the loss of blood that occurs due to sharp focus.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we intend to take water (possibly for medicinal purposes), and insert the sponge haphazzymly three or four small sections around the circumference of that which is between two circles, in such a way that each section lies along what you said was located therein – ensuring it's within cartilage rather than bone material; this spot remains free from flesh and sinew.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor fears gout, then extend one end of the caduceus (symbol often associated with healing and medicine) for an instant, and open the tendon within until it reaches the canal; this may prevent bleeding from those veins caused by any reason related to that.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Lay down patiently for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the time comes that I pierce through the gallbladder with my tool, add some of your lips from the neck of the patient's intestine and insert it into only that joint capsule alone.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Return medicine that makes flesh within it heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the medieval medical text to translate:
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	For water to command the evil out that is within it be consumed, and this malignity for three days, therefore we must order such sustenance to consume it so long as it heals inside.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you have seen through my eyes, it is that a servant holds a pillow and mattress on his chest, and has applied some part of the lung'dictum herein, calling for its healing power, rubbing away mucus as if it were secretions from moistened lungs.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So they admitted that she had not formed a vein or conduit within her and was suffering from the breath of worms, and treated her until the focus became healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not happen on the Sabbath, return to strengthen their dispositions for another day.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now you are told that there is no fear in the section of the ligamentum (ligament). Here's a possible translation for each line, considering Latin-influenced vocabul
Capitol .xliv.	The notation "Capitol XLIV" appears to reference Roman numerals
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	From the section about prolapse where pain occurs in the rectum (golayro), it is called a hernia of the same organ (rectal/anal). Here's an English translation:  
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This acute inguinal protrusion is an apoplectic abscess according to the color of the limb, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is either of two kinds, whether natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In nature there is not an engine for healing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental is the second of two manifestations in which one resembles nodes (swelling or lumps), and the other appears as an abscess caused by blood vessel obstruction, and this fearsome aspect.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	No cover should be fastened with iron until that which is small has been taken into consideration.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.: (The specific content of this line is unclear
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Sección del conjunto de especias/node." – This translation attempts to convey the meaning using modern English
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From these nodes, they place all of their spices in division/sort." – This translation interprets the original medieval Latin phrasing into English while attempting to capture both the literal and conceptual essence of organizing or categorizing various types of seasonings (spices) as
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Where you recommend so that there is no doubt about the difference between a node and an exits." – Here, I'm translating into English what appears to be asked: how one might clarify or distinguish nodes (in this context likely referring either botan
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that a fever is both warmth and acute pain within which the boiling excess subsides—and when this overabundance ceases to be heat (fever), painful sensation, and intense warmth." – This translation seeks to interpret medieval medical terminology into modern English. It suggests that a fever involves not only an increase in body temperature but also sharp pains or discomforts within the patient'thy symptoms are controlled once this "excess heat" diminishes, leading to relief from both pain and warmth associated with high temperatures – as understood by medieval pract
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Maybe it's not heat or fever nor pain at all; rather contains that lion cub which is within its own sacred place." – The translation here attempts to understand the original phrase in medieval Latin, indicating a situation where these three symptoms—fever (heat), pain, and possibly other unmentioned
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	According to the color of the body and its constitutions; they are like herbs taken in various amounts—either more or less—and contain fats as well as moisture within which colors occur, according to what has been divided into." – Here I am translating a statement that seems related to medical philosophy concerning diagnostics based on bodily appearance and constitution. The text implies the use of certain herbs (symbolized by 'vace' or possibly water) in varying quantities may help determine an individual’s health status, as it relates their physical condition ('color del cors')—possibly referring to complexion signs used for assessing illness during that time – and could be part of a broader discussion on humors (fluids within the body associated with temperaments or qualities) in medieval
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you reach the stage of treatment for this node, which rejects that and inquires into what strength it will assume in its form hereafter, insert yourself accordingly within as means to maintain good health (as pertained).
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical treatise:
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of moisture, regardless of its color, then you should inspect the surface immediately above as mentioned in other applications.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is not movement of moisture from the marks of insertion, you know that they are greasy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it is dry over him has a form of a crescent according as this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have learned, and having thus cut that piece off, clean the coccyx of all parts for ease (and if possible, cover it with a cloth to prevent urine leakage).
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	May it be that in the operation, there is not an option to remove such healthy individuals; and if necessary, always guide them back into their place so they do not get injured by anything from outside again.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If any cause from there arises again (either little or much), then return according to time.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find any small part of the patient' extricated (meaning a wound or injury), then complete it with some sharp corrosive powders and compress tightly on that which is already cauterized, and heal this other portion while in treatment.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is large, then you will apply pressure with your lips on him and heal that amount of water which carries his essence within.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May the pulse be toward you or away from you, if so your coach and hamstring are to bind together that is vinegar and leeks for two days or three inside where flies can deworm it and boil again; then return to separate what has been broken off.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The original text does not provide additional context
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Regarding the necessary tools for sectioning and puncturing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From these injections and their forms from three species, some are great and migrate within them (to other parts of the body), while others remain small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of insertion is thus this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of introduction for migration is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of insertion is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are made of iron, from hollowness, and the lowered limbs' bones descended intentionally, to feed into the marrow spaces within the joints.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experience, and they bear names; one of these is called Berido.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So with three spices, they are both great for removing (migere) and few in quantity (pauca).
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of healing journey, nature' extrication method.:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of practice is little or none; it's all about learning (or perhaps understanding):
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Convene that they are for those arising from apasts and exits, openings, and abscesses to ensure passage between these spaces of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	So they fasten the large stones or lions with great needles made of iron (or tin/copper), and these are types of rubies, or iron itself, or silver. The weights hold them down when they use these materials for treatment.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	So with three kinds of medicine from them [the sources], some taken directly from their roots and branches (and others also), according to the quantity required for the open wound or narrowing, as per its amount.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of the great experience mass:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the patient's experience with lead poisoning:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of small lead piece for treatment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the cautery are mixtures and simple ones alone as a curve, these three kinds being large, small, and pills.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	When they have applied oil (ointment) upon them, and with three kinds of spices.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those points you have arcs or three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From what they have (the patient), there are three curves, and from these three species come forth:
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Everything that is necessary in its place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single joint, shape of limb:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of one-time medicine:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single unit small, shape of life force (or energy):
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of large joint:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of anointing oil, form of lube (meaning): Here we discuss the suitable shape and composition for applying healing ointments used in
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of poultice small, shape of lubricant (translation interpretation): In this line, there is a reference to two different preparations - the
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of poultice large with two curves describes how some healing ointments or poultices are prepared. This particular description likely refers to
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of poultice for application has two curvatures details the physical characteristic of a specific type of poultice used in treatment, implying that its shape
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form or structure of this small-curvature poultice is highlighted. Here again there's an emphasis on the physical aspect relevant to
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of large poultice with three curves describes another preparation that differs from those previously mentioned by having not just two, but rather three cur
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form or structure of this small-curvature poultice is detailed further; it has been described as possessing three curves. This line may suggest
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	This focuses on the shape characteristics, emphasizing that despite its smaller size (paucity), this poultice possesses a distinctive trio of
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of surgical tools which have been cut and sharpened at the joints or teeth (nodes), belonging to three species; these refer to scalpels that come in different sizes—large for major operations ("gran"), small for less invasive procedures ("migier" implying smaller, perhaps more precise instruments akin to modern surgical tools) and even tinier ones possibly used by apothecaries or healers of the time (“pauc” indicating 'few'
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of scalpel few in number:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	Las external parts of these are the sharp pains and others not so acute, nor stopped in this manner; rather pain is alleviated during lancet puncture for fear of venous or nerve injury, and thus cures maulings (inflammation) and restful tranquility to which abrasion owes its healing.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of poultices, and they come in three kinds: large (gran), medium (migio), or small (pauco), as you wish them to be.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of large gout:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of marching sickness:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of maid (referring possibly to clothing): It appears that "forma de mag
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Forms are made from earth and have the appearance of certain herbs, which contain intoxicants (alcofols). This suggests that in this medieval context, they might be referring to pottery or other crafted items fashioned using natural materials like clay ("eram") shaped by
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	It is in the external bedding pierced with splinter and on that track where parts are torn off when you move around therein; as if one were to breat0x8547he or walk (possibly suggesting discomfort during movement). This line describes a situation likely related to footwear, hinting at shoes made from materials like wood ("spatum") that might have splinters in them and could cause parts of the
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of splinters (referring again to shoes or similar objects), which are not pierced by the needles and do not reveal illnesses, but rather consist of three types: large, medium-sized, small. This line is describing different sizes available for a particular product—likely footwear made from wood ("spatimis") that could potentially cause splinter injuries if they are pierced by sharp objects (needles). The reference to the "perforacio dels apostemas" implies concerns about
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are those forms, likely referring back to a specific subset of splinter footwear or similar items previously mentioned
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	These are the forms of winds (perhaps referring to materials used in shoes or other objects), which cause one's blood flow within their veins and bladder vessels to stop—consisting of three types: large, medium-small; these being those for this time. This line appears to discuss different kinds of footwear that might interfere with the body’s circulation when worn ("es abscind
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are pains of lemon acidity, round in some extent and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those instruments to descend entirely throughout the body; only in fleshy places like the areas of the cambiums and coysses, as well as the breast, belly (abdomen), engorged veins, and carnal humps which resemble their counterparts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Here are the translations line by line:
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some joint pains are round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	The provided text is not in a language that blends Latin with Italian, Spanish or French
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	This phrase appears to be written in medieval Catalan (or Occitan), which are Romance languages related to Old and Middle Latin like the provided examples, but with specific regional linguistic characteristics of those times and places.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	The translation of this medieval Catalan text into modern English is:
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who takes it in, cover that which is drawn from each segment of the lunar according to this manner, within and beyond these lines B and G respectively; excoriate entirely the growth therein, apply the living fleshly drug made of earth'thy substance thereto, adjust the lips of dress for body-wearing accordingly, and heal that which has entered thereby.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it happen if the nipple declines at the joints and is softened by its own heat, as in women'thy breasts, then their milk secretion will be divided into two streams down her breasts, like the crescent of the moon whose contents each holds within another; whereby B. and G., with greater line containing lesser following this shape of lines—herein lies the cleft between one lip (labium) of prey under which is placed a swelling or edema that needs to be drained, while holding onto its tongue, administering what has been discussed for sutures and powders as needed in healing until it gets well.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the washing of water that flows into it due to the excitement or inflammation (of bile), then pour boiled oil and lay upon what is corroded by this flow; take care for which part inside has been healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii. (The original text does not provide further context for
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When the suction cups, which come afterwards, make contact and stimulate.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When apices that come from spices of skrops (medical herbs), hard stones containing a seed within them arrive at the touch points on these parts, it means:
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	From those that contain moisture; and those containing moisture sealed within the course of the lunar month according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all fluid accumulated due to illness is expelled, fill it with poultice and insert into the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Return its covering or care with suitable oil until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the abscess of the glands and scleroses is here to be divided upon that very place where we have spoken about these last regarding scleroses, then divide them accordingly on that spot.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the child is stretched so much that it burns when touched, then apply treatment as soon as possible in water or similar medium where they feel discomfort now.
Capitol .xlix.	The text provided seems like it could be from an early form of European medical literature where Latin
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Translation: The section of tendons that you are experienpective with due to archery or venesection (bloodletting).  
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arrow is broken, and the bowstring has been solidified on it, which rests therein: where inflammation and suppuration have occurred along the artery or vein: when an infection through the arrow pierced occurs within the body part; and upon draining said abscess at those joints you will feel stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through the vein appears in the body'dictate its symptoms herewith.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Upon that who is of theirs for inflammation of the gallbladder, cut into the belly's length; and with sharp instruments sever the section and the gallbladder itself, unveiling what lies within it hidden by layers.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Return the location where it is between two ligaments and within which there has been an inflammation throughout that place, and apply pressure to dissolve the adhesion (apostema).
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an ulceration of the vein, then you take what strength at your disposal to address that which has already touched near its navel (the abdomen), and insert the needle there; make sure this inserted portion penetrates further—and while doing so, ensure another thread enters where necessary as mentioned previously in connection with the ligature of vines from two parts downstream.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May you fear that we extract the thread (possibly referring to blood loss or removal of a bodily substance), and thus immediately secure it with the first needle hook at all points where bleeding may occur, tightly binding in four locations.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Return the ulcer to its warm place within you until the fluid that is in it comes out; at that time, inspect the excess of the navel and let it go.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place the pause over him where you have immersed and bathed in wine and oil, applying the treatment which he is said to cure with pills and ointments while inside that state of being cleansed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital of apothema where pain is caused by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Ayssi when you have an abscess in the artery and vein, seemingly having an abscess in their nerves (percussion or due to excessive strain), and apparently so as well:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is painful in their hands or feet (the limbs), at the places of assistants' care or on the toes, wherever there are swollen joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	When there is severe swelling (aplasma), it appears as if the other limb'suprajected its color to them and when they are struck with violence, one feels pain in their groin resembling drunkenness.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And there is not an abscess in the belly of the body, and thus it does not move towards either side or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Thus water from those who are in joints and not covered by iron will come out forcefully to be contracted against it.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is in the head or forehead by a spine be suffering from discomfort, indicating possible sciatic issues according to medieval medical understanding.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	May it be a small ulceration (apostema), then take that one and cut off the affected area from its roots (razitz).
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, then suspend him on chains and scrub that part, apply bandages to the wound stitches, and take care of him until he recovers.
Capitol .li.	Capitalize here (implying that it is time or appropriate for
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The section of the treatise wherein you mention "whereby your lips ache and ache in your stomach," appears to be describing pain that radiates from somewhere near the mouth (the lips) down into the
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	The section describes a condition where one's mouth and tongue (fingers) are speaking or chattering internally while also causing pain in the stomach of these individuals along with other parts of their body that resemble fungi, which is subtle undernegy skin but prominent on top; moreover, this internal movement contributes to smallness among them.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes another sentence to translate: And there was seen one of them as if they were fungus-like structures and had absolutely no difference between these two white ones, small in size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned outward and parted, with moisture flowing throughout that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I have incised those and bound them in one of the feet seventeen units, and the other sixteen units.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you see the patient frightened and afraid of pain, hold them firmly with your iron grip; perhaps a fresh piece of iron will help as well, which is what we have described herein (or mentioned in this text); leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another sentence to translate: Adjust within the narrowness of the iron pipe so that it does not cease strengthening and repair itself by its own efforts.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If his thigh is of great size, there may be some cause for fear and sorrow in him, mostly when it's in the abdomen area.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you might divide the mass (of the patient), and properly apply cautery so as not to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return home heal that which is inside (the patient),
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Even though you do not assume that there is a blackened piece of flesh with little feeling and weak legs where cancer has grown.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When recalling memory as it arrives (or approaches).
Capitol .lii.	Given that "Capitol" likely refers to an ancient medical text or
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	The phrase "curacio di curazione dell'eminentia dell'umbilicus" in English can be translated as
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the umbilicus is pained by causes—either due to cracks in the navel that are on its surface (i.e., potentially related wounds or fissures), where leeches may lie if there have been other ruptures, or because blood vessels and arteries flushed from their place when it is contracted; also pain can occur due to constricted winds within the body as described hereinabove.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If there is a split in the cistern and of the skin layer, then the appearance of ulceration resembles that of the body' extraneous colors are like its own coloring, which can manifest as lemon-like pain; it varies depending on different situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the escape of the intestine, you have noted where that which we possess has recounted to us with great forcefulness, and once observed; return now—and when this situation occurs again, immediately provide baths and vigorous treatment.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then you are like a lion; and your condition will not be hidden when near me, nor constrained, nor weakened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanctity, at this time you appear (show signs) of black decay descending into these limbs.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is through flesh nothingness (perhaps meaning "no substance" or a lack thereof within the body), then severe and hard swelling occurs, which remains for a certain amount of time.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to wind movement, then this touch from him/her (the doctor) is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And when the operation on them is considered if the prominence of their navel is due to gallstone, vein or windiness; they fear and tremble as taught in the academy where I have previously explained about operations with cautery for stone and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the navel is due to the intestine or membrane, then order that which holds it tightens its grip on said area and remains extended; command at this time for your staff (doctor) to attempt throughout the entire circumference of the navel where you have touched with a touch, placing themselves between the patient'sin hands. Also position yourself above their stomach in relation to these hand positions within the circle of the navel that was previously touched; and encircle this area using spinal cord (or midline), over which your staff must be standing or seated as appropriate for each case, ensuring they maintain proper posture. Additionally position a guardian figure (possibly an assistant) in their circuit around unction areas above the navel with bowels; and place control under said hands of that individual to prevent slippage during procedure application.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the fabric (possibly referring to a wound or injury), take that one and apply it here; also inspect for any excess above it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	May it be contrary to your lance or vein, around that point, and return there for your operation again; take two needles and insert them into those strong fields you have opened by piercing the scab located in the knee joint area where penetration occurs with these fingers – firmly fastening the abscess within four parts on top of the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them into where it pierces and expands the flesh; once inserted, slide them in and take care that what is inside those linens goes down for cleansing purposes.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel prominence is of fleshlessness or due to wetness in him/her, then you must treat it with warmth and extract moisture from there, which causes this condition within them, and take care for that body fluid taken out.
Capitol .liii.	Given that this medieval medical text uses archaic Latin roots mixed with elements
De curacio de cranc.	The phrase "Capitol" seems out of context for a translation related to the previously
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the division of specialties in medicine and how it guides our approach to treatment, ensuring that care does not lead to sores or ulceration; we have discussed cases where joint pain (cranc) originates from internal factors like inflammation within body cavities. Here are further instructions with increased difficulty:
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and ill that you cannot treat this patient here, nor have I seen them cured by anyone else, or come upon their aid:
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation in him is that you have allocated days for it and cleansed some of his blood from blackness poison (likely referring to bleeding or purifying excess humors), if there's an overtly swolthy fullness, then take action immediately:
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Lay down the limb, and do not withdraw that which has been removed, express those places, and wash off the residue with what is in your hands or from any available tool.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May if you create counteraction of the thickened vein or artery within it, then burn that area until its blood flow ceases, and take care so that healing can occur inside where such treatment is applied.
Capitol .liv.	Capital (subject): Here it indicates that what follows is an important
De curacio de ydropici.	The provided text seems nonsensical and does not appear to contain coherent language
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Translation: "We already have recommendations in the division concerning the spices of ichy (water) and the properties of each herb used for its healing."  
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E agora que curada é somente o ferro solo, não se aproxima ao tímpano nem à espécie do ipocondro, pois aqui reside a morte.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herbal tympanic preparation and it does not cause discomfort to your medicine, then consider that if the malady in the belly or abdomen has been alleviated, it may also affect other parts like those above (thighs/legs) or below (chest), so be careful lest you medicate what should instead rest.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Might you again experience an excess of vitality from within yourself alone, and not another illness or disease that requires immediate attention; if so, then the reason for your visit is purely operational. In this case, lift upwards into their palms (or hands), applying pressure on the abdomen at its joints with a spiny cautery as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Such acute parts exist with a splint (splint), and they may also have some small length added piece by piece to ensure that during the operation nothing enters into the cavity, so as not to harm it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	May it be that if the generation of humors due to water is caused by ailment in the foot, then your section (likely referring to medical staff or practitioners) should attend with its left hand on the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of it is due to melancholy (suggesting a humoral imbalance where 'melancholy' refers here as one of the four temperaments associated with black bile), then your section should be at the core.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And only when your arm is resting on the chest so that there are no unnecessary movements to which this humour (disease) will run, let it flow towards its destination calmly and without disturbance.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here the following is translated line by line:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Through which I shall pierce the cyst within where the stone has entered and reached its location in water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that area and insert an instrument of which this is its form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it seems like a silver thin cannula under this; made of either silver or lion's tail, where I have inserted a small plug at the bottom here in him/her (the patient), and there are three plugs on his/her limbs - two from one source and one from another source; it is their sharp extremity as per the feather quill writing style, done so many times:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And when the armlet is worn outside of their body, and the instrument enters the water, then that portion will enter into the instrument at once; but if it does not exit from there within an hour, its excess causes harm to the womb due to resolution by one's spirit animal. Alternatively, apply five pills appropriate for death as needed hereinbelow:
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May it exit from that according to the quantity of his urine, and as much as your hands indicate for the state of his bladder health and well-beendoom.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Extract the instrument, and pour water which causes it to be retained by the throat wherein is tied up that twisted thing above the chest cavity; do so with your hand according to that mannerism of yours.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear about the abdomen (belly), and pour abundant water from the well, let it be buried in a tailor'dict sandpit for healing, sponge them thoroughly with bathwater, and wait under sunlight for a long time; thus cures that which is treated by dry medicines while being restored.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lv.	The given text is not in Latin or any language that blends elements
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	This sentence seems to be written in Catalan, a Romance language spoken in parts of Spain and France. The translation into English would be: "The care for children who have not perforated the bladder." Here's how I arrived at
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	This sentence from the medieval medical treatise, when translated into English, would read: "Some children suffer in their mother's womb and/or because there is a disruption or it isn’t located properly." Here are my translations line by line for context:
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore a cordial (likely meant for internal use) is made now that it has been punctured so delicately beneath the spine, according to this method.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Ensure rest in the abdomen with a subtle hammer of iron and wire that holds it together, which will be for three days or four-and-athy/three point two-thousand times (the repetition might indicate counting cycles).
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When one needs to urinate or defecate, return that as well.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not stop the flow of blood, then it is possible that urine will go over this place and soils this area.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that from which discomfort has been dispelled be healed with iron as we have said, within a few days until it is enhanced.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When they are out of their place, thus disturbed, causing them to be away from others who have urine issues due to the elevation of the uterus above its usual position in the body cavity; and this is not a birth phenomenon as it hinders sperm from reaching the womb through proper functioning. It's an illness with heavy consequences.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When performing your operation with bloodletting (sanguis), you will cause pain; pause there at which point you draw out the blood that has been sucked away, and cure within while it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	The provided medieval medical treatise text is already understandable as it's written
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The given line from the medieval medical treatise in Latin, which seems to discuss issues related to surgery or wound healing (given terms like "prepuci," referring perhaps to a foreskin), can be translated into English as follows:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Movements worsen this illness in my joints and above all, it is swelling of fatty flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	From that one is evil (or harmful), and from others are not evil or harmliminal:
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No malignantly (Not harmfully), where you suspend and separate the thin membrane under which that whole contains its moisture; place some over there submerged in Egyptian linseed oil, and another for healing within it while it is anointed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the gallbladdig is black in color and evil (malignant), then make it with pointed cautery for its liver and reason, respectively.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the foreskin is present on the head of the penis (circumcision not performed), and one part of it has been cut off while another remains intact; as long as you hold that which was cut, until solidification occurs within; then attend to what remained uncut at that moment. And when curing this fracture on the prepuce, there is no certainty that it will not break again.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And examine the testicles and foreskin blackness and swelling; therefore ensure that you clean up all of what has already darkened and is at risk to become corrupted or rotten, and apply liniments made from crushed fresh rye bread flour and berries pounded and ground. 
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that healing care for what has been inside is necessary now.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May it be necessary for fluid from the sanction (blood), then administer moonlight cupping according to this method.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Quarly cauterius juvat duas dispositiones incensa, est motus sancti et pulli quo corruptum sumtur.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the gallbladthy is corroded and destroyed in an instant, then place a lead pipe into the abdomen's flesh to allow bile through it via that channel.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuce at the base of the foreskin (and this adherence is not removed around circumcision; and when you have an adhesion due to dirt or scab) cover that hardened area within which the prepuice lies, dissolving its ligament completely and removing the cap of the foreskin entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to desire those exquisitely, then cover your spine and penis with some substance for a cause from the head of the pubis and the foreskin; so that when you delicately perforate through its subtlety, there will be no harm.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	When you separate the foreskin and head of hair (under it), which already has become entangled in humidity due to its proximity, thus preventing other urine from sticking as well.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Return his care with swift healing within which is secured that he be restored.
Capitol .lvii.	The text provided appears to be from an old medical treatise written in Middle Latin or a
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	In translating the given line into English, we get:
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for diarrhea: however, when it comes from our operation and of our willfulness, or in children, we must assign them to the better treatment course with light medicines as necessary.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So they say that ancient times did not practice castration among free men, nor do so today for legal reasons and only out of experiment, which causes the majority of artisans and barbarians to abandon circumcision using new razors and knives; thusly utilizing steel pliers (ligament) and scalpels made from iron.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already tried all these methods and found no better improvement with knife or thread in the mending of wounds, where bleeding comes from below (undernethy), beneath the scrotum when two tunics are worn together, and quickly rises to the surface (above genitals), leaving you vulnerable to other injuries and pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And in this cleansing process used by alchemists (am mundificacio), and of which they use digits (del qual usan les sabatiers), it is not secured that ignorance touches the extremity of a male member, but rather enters into his body.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	May occur during surgery when you use iron and cause damage to your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The natural tongue of the child is short by nature, and habitual movements in such a way that there was no need for cleansing it, and has been seen this very day.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the world-making that is done with nails and thread be of good quality, as I have experimented myself; for when these materials are proportionate in thickness, they match each other'dictly – thus having two sets of appropriate thicknesses allows me to sew according to a pattern within a certain timeframe. This results in the shape-containing part of the finger fitting snugly around the entire length of the thong (vambrace), without any error throughout its whole extent.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first reason for operation is that you must make the child mostly lie on their good side (their "verga"), and let them stay there until tomorrow.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And grant that joy throughout all of this action, which is within your power as the patient receives his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Here you prepare to ensure that the patient is not conscious and keep your fingers hidden from their eyes or face, so they do not see any of those tools used on them.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Here is the translation of each line:
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Return the designated spot on the foot with your hand and place an iron stool atop of that very small part where a second ligament lies, holding onto the toe joint between those two ligaments now in position for retention.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the translation line by line:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps is as follows, this is how it should be shaped.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	These are the bones outside of joints and others form a part that is not involved with the knee joint, which has equal length to that between two handles when grasped in hand.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Mistakes in understanding are greatly avoided within the internal essence entirely, or a portion of it must be studied intimately.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So, when you stretch that of your hour on the wound site and insert it according to its equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract that one and incise it therewith.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and the scab formed by the puncture begins to fall off, then apply what you have prepared as an antiseptic internally so that the scab can be softened and cleaned away; also prepare another remedy for application externally at your discretion.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Guard your head at the top of the veil; do not let water touch it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, care for that which water makes solid among the dusts with which we have recommended in the matter of these dusts.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is inserted into the neck in proper measure, and you obey its divisions below, then one will not notice it there.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he care for that which we have said is within it so that it may be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the care of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Hold urine in the bladder is considered a disease due to excess humors caused by stones or kidney congestion, and seem similar to those mentioned for hand treatments during division of care.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and remains for some time in the place where it already is at the lower part of the bladder, then when the ureter becomes inflamed on their sides (where they are lodged), we must cover them with a cloth to prevent further retention.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Return the legs of that person to their two and stretch his abdomen from undernethy thighs as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So when the bladder of the urinary tract is contracted and pushed out to the lower parts, so that the urine can be completely expelled.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If there is not enough water that we have to use forcefully as a tool for extraction, then take an instrument of silver or subtle lion capture (which has fine detail like the length of a pen and finger), with delicate wings similar in size to a palm and thumb. The handle of this device should be placed at the top of their head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	Here comes the translation:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When he applies the leg over the sole of his foot, and binds up its bladder with oil and anchovy sauce,
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	When you extend the iron gradually with wool thread by small increments until it is covered in wool fleece, as the urine also becomes like this (i.dict that which resembles or imitates the state of being completely wrapped
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Extract the urine gradually with wool thread by small increments until it is fully covered in wool fleece; do not cease to remove water and use a catheter within while ensuring that the bladder and hernias are relieved, alleviating their condition. (This translation suggests an old medical practice where urine extraction was done carefully with wool thread until it formed around the affected area for therapeutic reasons. It also indicates a delicate procedure involving catheterization to maintain bladder drain
Capitol .lix.	The text following your previous translation appears incomplete, and without additional context or clarification
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of catheterization related to water and instruments that resemble it, suggesting an emphasis on selecting appropriate tools for this medical procedure based on their similarity in function or form compared to natural elements like water within a historical Latin-influenced medicinal context. This line underscores the importance doctors placed upon choosing suitable catheters—perhaps
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When acute inflammation or ulcer is present in the bladder, or when it becomes congested and obstructed by a prostate enlargement (benign prostatic hyperplasia), where urine flow is impeded, one must distill waters and medicines therein; thus they call for an instrument resembling catheterization to address this issue. Here the medical practice involves using tools similar in purpose or design to natural processes like water filtration combined with remedies derived from those same elements—a treatment method that symbolizes a fusion of healing practices and practical application aiming at restoring normal urinary function while respecting traditional medicinal principles where intervention mimics the cleansing power associated with rainwater. This passage illustrates an approach in medieval medicine
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sino que in the outer part of it is silent, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way three troubles arise from one division, twice a time.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the feasting place is where it is summoned, and its second quantity that rises from there when any cause draws upon these humors, then they are drawn back here; and once expelled, more of them return to this place, as occurs with naphtha in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of the couch into the moisture, and draw it out towards that water which pushes against the parts below, where the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the couch.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here the translated text line by line is:
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the clyster under which the bladder is constricted is that very one.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is of silver or other material, I have placed some on the head as if they were small feathers and quickly inserted wax into them (likely referring to metal leafings for medical purposes).
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return (or restore) the limb of the corset into its cavity, and place your hand over it so that the intestine does not protrude outwardly from there.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Restore your hand over the bladder, wherein the moisture that has entered through the central channel of the corset is already present; ensure it doesn't protrude further within this space controlled by the placement of your hand.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If there is no bladder present, then take a lumbago pill and make of that circle; pierce the entirety of its circumference; and insert faithfully firm linen into those disruthy areas until it revolts; furthermore, place back also this fleshly fistula once connected, pausing only at what you wish from these humidities.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Here comes the translation:
Capitol .lx.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a historical medical document that bl
De extraccio de peyra.	From rock (extracting stone or mineral). The phrase "de extraccio de pey
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have here divided the stones and their curative properties for medicine purposes; distinguishing between those formed in rivers (fluvial) and those from urine bladder storage areas (vesicular), as well as understanding these differences concerning health benefits or medicinal uses of each type. This suggests an early comprehension by physicians that different environmental conditions, such as where a stone forms—whether it is carried downstream in water bodies like rivers ("fluvial") and deposited thereafter with sedimentary processes; or formed within the bladder due to mineral-rich urine (vesicular), have unique characteristics. These distin0
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We discuss hereabouts how this stone operates in the body and which part of it functions as a section or segment for medical purposes – potentially referring to its role within bodily systems when ingested (perhaps used historically
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone formed in the bladder is precisely that which remains therein – indicating a focus on stones or calculi (urinary sediments) retained within urine storage, like the bladder itself ('vesicula' being Latin for 'bladder'). This
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And this is what he presents as clear evidence and a concise exposition – suggesting that the author believes their description or study of urinary stones ('uric calculi') offers definitive proof
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore he states that the stone formed in the bladder mainly occurs in children ('infant'; 'lu' indicating his observation or knowledge); and from what exits of urine (the stream) looks like water upon its subtlety, appearing within those sands; hereupon it is dressed up for use – akin to making preparations with these stones found near the place where children expel them. This implies an understanding that such bladder-formed stones are common in pediatric patients ('enfantz'), and they might be collected or used after being washed (or 'dressed') by some method, possibly for medicinal reasons – with water playing a role as both the source of these formations inside urine storage areas like bladders ("vesica") and potentially also in their cleaning process before use. The term "malaute fregua la sua vergua" could mean that malevolent entities ('maleficiens') are chastised by water, while 'motas veguadas pen' suggests a cleansing or purifying act performed on the stone
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is when health recovery of those children within that have reached twelve years, and cure in the womb becomes difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May in young people move through these liquids herein flowing.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that which the stone is larger and for its cure a lesser measure is used; if it is scanty, contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we approach the treatment of that, cover it with a cloth from the crater where it exits through those holes which are at their joints; thereafter some days have been prohibited to prevent the poisoning of the patient'thy body.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return his bladder is in their feet and constipation or gouty pain for that reason so that the urethra descends into the pelvis of the bladder, or jumps from place to places at times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Return that clyster you prepared among yourselves, and the things of yours are now done quickly as they were here today; thus the bladder will be lowered downwards gradually at these times.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Return that part for it all (or restore everything back).
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Thus if you feel pain in the space, then touch it gently with your hand upon it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If not yet all of your touching is done as indicated on the left side, if there's a swelling in the patient due to an infantile malady or slight dislocation (if young and incomplete), then proceed by applying pressure with that object onto their belly.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through the entrance of bone where it was said before lies within now.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that small one is converted into something within the bladder neck,
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Return them on top of that which they hold dearly, and remove them from the parts beyond this place where your section resides.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	E command the servant to press on his bladder; and order another minister to extend their right arm above into the parts below them, holding back their left arm in the location where they make a cut.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return into its proper place is what this body part takes after being descended within it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	e splits in the abdomen between the belly and intestines (not at their location here), above the left hip bone; and its section is over that stone and does so as a transverse cut, ensuring that the section becomes wide and stitched according to how much of the stone's size there in the abdomen can be allowed without exceeding it. This may mean surgery will not take place due to lack of space or if they cannot remove what is already inside (presumably a blockage within the intestines).
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	E understand that there is any stone from which the patient' extrusion originates; it makes treatment difficult by water (presumably an excess of body fluids).
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid is likened to lion'thyng and it roundish; made of the body's humors for medicine extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that which you have turned or spread apart (especially referring back to joint pain mentioned earlier), adjust in the crack/gap.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not a cauterization tool available, or if you must use what little you have on that, which should be done gently over the area where it has been applied and without removing from sight; otherwise, immediately insert a delicate instrument for bending the extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do so over that one (referring to the aforementioned condition), then increase slightly the disruption of it and if you see fluid outflows around it, break apart those flows with concentrated sulfur dissolved in vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	May the stone be one of them (indicating that there is only one small stone present), then you will draw it to the mouth of the bladder and place your hand over it here; also, lead a little bit more of water towards it; as if they were mere drops of urine.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is much pain, it is ignorance that you have immersed the large section in, which causes harm to the bladder for one of two reasons: either because something stays within or continues to ascend from urine distillation, and thus the location is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May you administer the removal of it from within that has come out or in the case of a bone breakage inside where those instruments are placed to extract it, so they can be taken out through wounds.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So that when you have completed your task, then fill the womb of our bodies with the seed of aloe and dragon'supurellent (dragonwood), and strengthen it thusly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Pause over that cloth steeped in oil and vinegar or water with herbs, so that the applied poultice may soften its place.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the intestine or hernia on top of the bladder and do not release it into the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air escapes, apply water and oil to the area being treated and take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the soil you cauterize ulceration and decay, to make them heal and crust over (just as when your bladder is congelated by cold), then apply this remedy within the dirt where that sore has formed; if Roman action causes further corruption of both urine infection therein and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	In those hours of total care where you hold both thighs and adjust the given medicines that are applied on the location,
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder, where it lies within you, then urine extraction is prohibited; as a result of this treatment, patients who are said to have passed stones often complain that they continue passing them. At this point, you already extracted the fluid (urine), and now hold on tightly with one hand using a hollow iron tool (catheter). This instrument represents its form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From outside the womb, gout is in a pipe (or tube).
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Return your faith promptly and place it in that stone for as long as possible until it does not return to the bladder again.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert the iron into the wound quickly so that the puncture tool enters at that point.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Here you gradually insert the probe in your hand into that small stone, and as long as one from another part is entering it, then the urine flows out immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand over what has been broken off from the bone of the separated part, where it is fractured and there is a hole (likely for blood or pus), and thus the swelling subsides as the limpness leaves.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not within your reach for any reason that you are forbidden from using it, then apply immediately a glove to the stone (referring likely to kidney stones), and another one below or above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	When applying pressure over the bone in that space between the groins and thighs,
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return there they thrust (or expel), that which is outside of it/them
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Hereby straighten the ligament and purify the sanctioned joint with inflammation (or condition), which is done in the earth/ground or soil where you are located at this time. The phrase implies an action taken to correct a deformed, possibly dislocated limb by applying heat treatment
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	Not necessarily is the need for an iron screw immediately after carving it into stone (the bone), but rather to prevent its return back in urine; and another ligament above does not come until when you remove that specific metal from around the bone, then this tendon returns to place and reclaims earth/ground. The passage discusses treatment methods for a fractured or dislocated limb where surgical intervention might be needed (carving of an iron screw into stone), suggesting instead some form of at-home care that involves stabilization without immediate invasive procedures, using physical means to manage the condition until proper medical attention can take place. The concept implies a balance between immobilizing and allowing natural healing
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When you lift the iron screw above (away from), which elevates or supports the tendon in its regions thereafter; if necessary when taking it away—do so with care and completension, returning to earth/ground as we have discussed herewith together. This sentence further emphasizes a cautious approach towards handling any medical implement such as an iron screw that might be used for stabilizing the affected tendon or bone externally before professional treatment is provided—understanding when and how these items should potentially assist in temporary management of injury during healing, with consideration
Capitol .lxi.	In Roman law transcripts such as this one from Capitolius Liber
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Removal (or extraction) of bone/stone from the women's thighs, indicating a historical procedure likely conducted on
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pebble in the female breasts is rarely produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you find a stone among them, it becomes difficult to treat the patient, and such treatment is forbidden by excessive manual manipulation.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one of them is a strong woman with sharp genitals.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	When translating this text line by line from a language that blends Latin with Italian, Spanish and French elements into English:
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The clear woman does not have bravery without knowledge of this art, primarily in surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section above on the thighs has a longer distance than the location of the same in the legs; therefore, fear arises when inserting into it.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	May it be necessary for you to cause this going into water (perhaps referring to hydrotherapy or bathing), and if so, grasp a female medical student gently with your hands, being careful not to hurt them.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you lack it (the substance or treatment), seek a skilled midwife available at the time of birth for women, or find another woman who has experience in this area as per division within their skill set.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then apply that present to him and command him to compress all the humors you have sent, from inquiry about the stone in his anus until consumption at his navel; this causes concern if the woman is vaginal and wants what's inside of her down into her belly.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Thus if it causes pain, then strike that part quickly and command (the patient) to lie down on that spot.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not a vein that needs to be compressed in the sick person'thy bladder and placed on their back for pressure relief (with one hand over the patient's left side resting on the bladder), then command the matrona (nurse) to insert her tool into the area of the malady, apply pressure with it, using that good instrument.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if that hardens (the stone or calculus in the bladder), it gradually worsens until it reaches the parts where urine collects, especially when inside the body begins to accumulate due to its excessive movement into those areas of collection.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Return the instrument inscribed on that position of the coccyx where any hernia is located and center it in that division; do not let the instrument protrude from the pubic bone suddenly as you handle it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	Be aware that stones of the body are triggers: some few and large like a lion or an aspen, some long and round, they have ramparts.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many spices are needed for this that you're explaining about it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see the flow of bile rising and adjust it in its location within an hour after that such has been detoxified (cleared), return to your work thereafter until the patient' extricate themselves from this condition.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And prepare you for those tools used in extracting bone from men, so that your assistance may be there during their operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see a flow of phlegm and know that its expulsion is due to obstinate humors (which are obscure), then stop the dust over the location and start cleaning with these pills and tightening, do not continue; keep the skin intact and do not extract it, for this way they will soon recover from illness.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Return care for the worm (or vermin). This line suggests that after addressing
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the sickle is dulled by use over time, it bends back into shape, and you should return to your work while the blade remains in good condition (ready). Only then can you resume your labor with confidence that the tool has not yet been worn out. This line advises on when equipment like a sickle or cutting instrument is being used repeatedly until its edge becomes dull through constant use, and emphasizes maintaining vigilance over their state to ensure they are still fit for purpose before further usage without immediate repair or replacement
Capitol lxii.	The provided text appears incomplete as it stands alone with the label "Capitol
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	It seems you've shared fragmented parts of what could be medical advice or instructions, possibly in medieval Latin
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	This excerpt describes a hernia as an accumulation of moisture in the scrotum where semen (represented here by "humiditat") is contained within the testicles ("codena dels genetius"). The term 'cipa' seems to refer specifically to this area, hence it being called simply 'the cipa.' Here we understand a hernia in medieval medical thought as an issue related to fluid retention and its effects on male reproductive organs
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Some believe it occurs in the peritoneum where nature intervenes when there is already semen present (as mentioned earlier); and this area between the scrotal skin ('cipac blanc') contains what we've described as 'the cipa,' which they assert isn't simply moisture but something else, likely a solid or semi-solid substance. This line from medieval medical texts contemplates differing theories about hernias—specifically the notion that not just fluid is retained in this space between male genitalia and scrotal skin; instead of being merely wet matter (humor), it could be another form, possibly related to pathological solidification within a man
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The generation of this hernia is through debilitation which you cause in these areas (hips), causing them to become weakened, and some will be channeled outwards due to impact or striking upon these regions.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has movements of colors; whether it is turning to lemon yellow or scarlet like blood, black dungy clay, or white foam—this too I speak about now.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	When the joints for which this addition of water is needed are these: if it's in the clear white place we mentioned earlier (likely referring to a specific body area), then rheumatism starts receding during prolonged sitting with its shape resembling urine, and blood appears. 
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If there is moisture in the patient' extranodular region (referring to an area outside of their body), then let it be removed and as such, he/she considers this other humerus or limb unnecessary for his bodily composition.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the navel and the white line of the bellybutton (which may refer to a specific anatomical area), then apply pressure with your fingers on that spot.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to ascertain the color of humidity, look for the moisture that has entered and preceded its form; then observe what comes out in its appearance within the wound entrance.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the treatment of him who is ill with it (likely referring to gout), where you must consume what makes up his malady if possible for your tool, and sometimes apply pressure on his body as well.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When it is necessary for him to lie supine on his backs upon any cause or with few reasons at hand and pause quickly in applying cloth coverings (drapes).
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Return the pillow (or support) and divide the neckbone of the joint in that part for as much time within the bed' extrication period:
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And when pain reaches the second section retracted from the line that should be between the lips of the jawbone and where it will reach the whitest part (the chin), then comes to understand by reaching this point, grasping what is meant for understanding comprehension.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and observe it carefully so as not to re-insert it; your excision is where you perform part by part investigations under the skin if necessary and with subtlety according to what'dicts possible within yourself through examination of the excision site.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Through careful piercing of the bladder filled with water, and extracting all the water completely.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Here is the translation of each line from Latin-influenced medieval medical text into English:
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And it is inserted there in totality or between stones, mostly under his delicate skin; if you do not examine its insertion carefully, one cannot be sure that water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	May it happen if during the operation of that defect from your cleft in this hour, when you have completed the section of the chest-plate, return that item and adjust the lips of the tongue's opening on the cleft of the jawbone as sutured by genetics surgeons, with care for it like other living things until healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have corrupted the humors through another illness, then place those vessels which hold the ascending fluids there and extract the humor from it, applying care as we've discussed.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May if water is added to any of the body parts mentioned herein, then those are swellings (edema); therefore know that these are hernias. Inspect this part you have examined in another manner; and if it's an operation for you, perform it accordingly.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Here is the translation line by line:
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some treatments for this hernia are applied with fine needles inserted into the location where it protrudes through metal wire; and you hold delicate threading needles under your skin to which threads enter within its intestinal lining, and once discovered inside is a white capsule containing water. And then apply these in such manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is gathered in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When it is necessary to make an incision in that spot of flesh, and then all the moisture will be drained out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Here is the line by line translation:
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You understand that this operation is saving and extending life force circulation, better than an incision (cut).
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May it cause contrainddictions if you caulk in the hour of separation or during caulking, when there is an outflow of phlegm, as any such disruption necessitates treatment for which I am responsible according to what has been stated hereinabove.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	May the patient be fearful and not hope for a second operation due to its horror, administer an injection as I recommend; when you have verified it is necessary based on what we've discussed about signs, confirm that this hernia is painful (or "ayguosa" meaning causing sharp or severe pain).
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you make an incision in the spleen above any raised chest rib (thoracic vertebrae), puncture the apendicitis below its lower part of the abdomen, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	Where I have made a wide opening for the flow of water throughout the body.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return your pause over the place where it is fixed and hold that one there while holding that other here, to prevent him from rushing into water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which is within so that it may be healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	May it be that contrary to the water element at this time when you pierce through that: here no is not pain but due to white bone in the dirt'dicts, which causes opposition and prohibits treatment of the water, so long as you place anything or any instrument within these dirty waters from whence they extract water; adjust a small object within said filth.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol .lxiii.: This line appears incomplete or incorrectly formatted as it la
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	The provided text seems to discuss the topic of a cleft lip and its treatment, but instead you've asked about "hernia carnosa" (which is likely
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	The text appears to be discussing the fear of complications, particularly death ("peric" likely referring to "pérdida," or loss), associated with hernia treatment in a particular section (possibly medical literature). It implies that there is concern about these risks leading individuals to seek alternative remedies. The phrase suggests reassessment and trusting the better option, although it's unclear from this line alone what "aquella milhor" refers to—it could mean 'that which is superior,' implying a preferred
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	This sentence reflects memory and concern about the operation related to hernia treatment, as well as specific tools or materials ("species") used for stitching (possibly referring to suture material). It could
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	This line elaborates on the reasons why hernias might occur or require attention in areas where muscles attach ("genitii"), which could be due to acute overtightening (hypertonicity) of these tissues leading them backward into the spaces they occupy, or because of a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And as for the ulcer' extrinsic nature according to its own kind and not causing pain in it, and severe is the ulcer itself.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And when it is an apoplectic discoloration where there's neither center nor margins present,
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May it be known that when such inflammation of the joints occurs due to a swelling (arthritis), its breakdown is achieved through dissection at these points, and one should not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May not one who suffers from inflammation of a vein be dispersed anywhere by these means, and require compression here in the district.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that this specific phenomenon occurs in the other bones; and you insert your finger into the uterus of the genitals, place them at the divisions below (probably referring to female reproductive anatomy), extract the white cervix (the upper part of the vagina or possibly representing a different structure depending on contextual knowledge about medieval medical terminology and practices), dissect those ligaments supporting the vessels, cut through these suspensory structures you will release throughout all divisions above.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the humors are already thickened in those meats (referring to food consumed), then when you extract them and introduce that substance into it, do so accordingly.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is adhesion within any cause of the chest or between the breasts, then you must release all that adhesion and insert it back in using a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the nature of flesh in the place behind is what lies therein (what you have inserted), and extract it with whatever liquid we drink together.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, fill it with wine and oil, and carefully ensure that the other remedy goes inside where it can heal.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv. (The ".lxiv." is likely an
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This line appears to be in medieval medical terminology, possibly Italian or a similar Romance language influenced by Latin terms commonly used during that era for surg
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	This line translates to:
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness there is fear due to which it was remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However much time it takes for you to apply pressure in that second area where I applied force, after finishing with the first one.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	E tell that you shall place the male organ above an elevated cushion; and position your scrotums at the joints of those parts immediately below it; hold on to any other servants who are there with their hands, stretch them strongly as directed.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Now make incisions on the sole of the foot along its cross-section at the top where the vessels have been discovered, within which they lie hidden.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	When it is necessary to extract from all parts where you have removed them, the instruments used in lithotomy are applied again within their respective areas of removal (in the stones).
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And place it in that location where two pins are faithful (securely fixed), and insert one into the parts of which acids have been poured, and place another at the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	When you incisions are made into the heated place according to their length by sections of four parts as per the length of the body, and extract what is added due to fresh or rotting feces.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply care for this worm as if caring for other plagues in which drops may fall from two sources and are not evil.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If you soften all the vessels throughout the body, whereby their testicles are extracted or drawn out into them (the bloodstream), they will be deprived of nourishment for the vessels and thus become brittle, so that they do not serve well in these locations.
Capitol .lxv.	In order to provide an accurate translation for "Capitol .lxv.,
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of treating intestinal protrusion (hernia). The abbreviation ".lxv." may refer
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The arrival of this hernia occurs due to a process by which the cords (budels) extend over the stomach's interior surface as described in its abdomen, so that when these cord extensions come from their breaks or ruptures nearer them. This sentence is articulating how certain anatomical changes might lead up to hernia symptoms and diagnosis according medieval medical understanding—specifically referencing the 'cords' of internal structures possibly referring to intestines, expanding over a weakened area in the abdominal wall ('stomachs interior surface'), suggesting a vulner
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture occurs either in the cord or due to exhalation of it; these fragrances worsen them for various reasons: through blowing (percussio), coughing (sputum expulsion - perhaps not precisely termed 'sautz' here, but possibly implying a forceful respiratory action like sneezing or violent coughing as means to release pressure and relieve symptoms of distension in the body): either by blowing out air sharply (percussio), through spitting up phlegm during coughs ('sautz'), loud noise inducing strain, elevation from any severe cause such as being lifted improper
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The term 'aqueous' (water-like) when the cord is stretched out due to extension causes it only mildly or not at all over long periods, and does not worsen its condition; moreover, within a brief timeframe (not specified but implied), one may find relief by placing pressure inside these areas nearer where the cords are located. Herein lies an approach consistent with medieval medical theories—where external manipulation of body parts like applying compressions or positioning could alleviate certain conditions such as hernias, reflective of early understandings before modern surgical techniques were established to treat abdominal protrusions (herniation
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it happens on its way through one of his four limbs that there is violent pain as if by accident; and different types appear in what was previously thought normal, due to intestinal blockage from within (the bowel), affecting various parts above the area where discomfort started.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases it is necessary to remove what is inside (the intestine) from the sac (hernia), and this condition is referred to as an enteric prolapse or hiatus.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Here are the translations for each line of text from the medieval medical treatise:
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these spices for this illness, there is fear that they may be avoided in this place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The translation of the provided medieval medical treatise text into English would be:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Return the chin whereby it is located below the jawline, and incise along the entire length of the testicles there to facilitate their expulsion into those areas indicated by your hand movements; place one finger in each lip's cut section as you indicate how much should be emitted.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is at all possible that from that portion outflow occurs,
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	When scraping that which has entered the cords of the testicles and it is discovered within them where a white hard chaff from any division exists, do so carefully.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the tube into which sperm is placed (testicle), in water where it lies between the whitish areas of skin (scrotum), and below that, as well as above the second area (between scrotum and body), this releases any adhesion present behind the testicles.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When there is nothing inside those belts that encircle it, within the white cloth covering, which serves as a container for what could be causing the distension of the bag (the swolthy or hernia), then:
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause within him (the patient), then immediately remove it and place it in his abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And envelop your field extremities and this, they will not cause any leakage from these vessels that would lead to purulent inflammation starting here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And after waiting for another while (or three days) beyond the forum on this first ligament, place these two lashings around the sciatic nerve, which determines the size of the scrotum as per its grandeur, and secure it in place with a belt.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here comes the line for translation into English:
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And apply the wool soaked in oil, and leave it on the ground; administer the thread which we have treated (and some of these threads are cauterized with white chalk, as to prevent fluid discharge from them when bled), let this thread enter whereby itself may fall.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the application of water is delayed, then it will be poured into that which has entered since we have spoken about it.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And apply care for the worm in the other cure of diseases within that is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capitol .lxvi.: This line appears to be referencing an ancient Roman time
De hernia ventosa.	Here comes the reference to a barostat, likely relating to '
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	This line translates as: "In this type of hydrocele where there is an absence of previous intervention, it has not been observed that the patient was cured through these means." Here 'hernia ventosa' refers to a herniation with trapped air (
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first days showed that you suffer from the hernia we have advised upon; and it is here I place my tools over its softened area facilitated by your touch of liquid (presumably urine or another fluid); while securing them dry on the site to ensure healing takes hold as they are applied.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when it is time for healing as we have discussed, then take care of it accordingly so that it may be restored.
Capitol .lxvii.	Given that this text is written in an archaic or historical form of a Romance language
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	The phrase "Capitol .lxvii." appears to be incomplete and doesn'thy context within the provided excerpts, making accurate translation challenging without additional information
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	The given phrase in Spanish translates to: "Some damages break within the joints when we have them and come here." In this context relating to medieval medicine written like Latin mixed with other Romance languages' vocabulary (Italian, French), it appears that a physician or medical practition
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	The translated phrase in English is: "And if there were any cause from within the intestines to the intestines themselves; and they are few—return into all hours." Here, it seems that a medieval physician discusses conditions related to internal humors or imbalances (possibly referring metaphorically to bodily fluids like blood) affecting one's health. The text implies such causes within the intestines as rare and suggests they
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	The translated phrase into English reads: "But if the time for applying salt is prolonged, adjust it within the chest cavity; and acidifies the cautery inside that keeps its position in the abdomen where we have them inserted today (meaning as a treatment); which causes expansion of this part (of the body), soothing therein—the location being probated with fingers.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of him is with applied points after which has been described his case.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in some cases are healed by iron according to this methodology: and when the malady (disease) spreads over their two thighs, apply dry heat on the site of appendix rupture for three days following as per guidance.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	When strength is given to the white snake that has been discovered inside the coda (tail),
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Return the thread or string above that which is prominent in the spleen area and press it downward toward the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	When you bring the two locations outward on the upper part of the lower limb'dictum (which may refer to adjusting or setting up stitches), align them with one another as appropriate for treatment purposes in this area.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And if it is better in this place for healing purposes, then insert them there with care (inserting implies using something like an instrument or medication).
Capitol .lxviii.	Given that this text appears as if it's been transcribed using a blend of Latin
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	The treatment for the scrotum (referring to male reproductive organs). In English: The remedy for inflammation or pain
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The scrotum in healthy men is softened by applying poultices made from the fats that are between it; and they take care of its observation. In English: The condition of a man's scrotum improves when gentle applications, such as ointments or creams derived from natural fatty substances found within (between) them, are used along with close monitoring for any changes in the area.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary that one attends (to the care) of him who makes urine about his swolthy, and places all over the scrotum which has been softened on its natural counterpart; and ensure to align lips with stitches for proper closure. In English: It's important to pay attention when someone produces excessive sweating associated with an enlarged or 'swolty' testicle (possibly referring to a hydrocele, where fluid accumulates around the testicles causing them to swell). The treatment involves applying softened fats from within over their natural position and using sutures if necessary for closure. This suggests some form of manual therapy or bandaging technique aimed
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish to mention the surplus of the softened scrotum which has been subjected to three or four cookings, and secure with stitches firmly in place; In English: If there's an excess amount after processing (likely referring to repeated heat treatments) necessary for preparing a poultice meant for use on the treated area of the scrotum. Here
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return them between the stitches, and take care for the healing of other illnesses within that they are cured to prevent the fields from becoming sick.
Capitol .lxix.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De castracio.	This phrase, "de castracio," suggests that the
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Translating this line from the medieval medical treatise:  
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that castration occurs in two ways: through withdrawal or by breaking into sections.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When the pain is due to strangulation, the method of operation we perform is to fix the beast in water with its tendons relaxed and ligaments stretched so that when our physicians' genii return they will have made adjustments for relief.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return your hand inside that it becomes resolution and does not appear suddenly when touched.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May joint pain occur through a crack or section, where you hold the beast and press on its scrotum to the left side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Return the belt (or support device), and inspect each part within which two legs pass through.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those pus that you have caused by scratching or any external irritation inside them back into place (this could refer either to an abscess within the body'setup returning infection), and maintain your hand
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not let those pus enter any cause within the cavity but rather focus on that which is underneath (the subtler part of the cyst located below), and keep your hand over it to prevent fluid movement or leakage into other areas. This suggests a treatment approach where after opening an abscess, instead of allowing b
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This maddening condition is worse than what fate has dealt me for that the pull or tension of the testicles forces it towards desire (perhaps referring to a discomfort such as pain from undescended testes, which in medieval times would not have been understood medically). In modern terms: This frustrating situation might be worse than what one can endure because an excessive pull or strain on the testicles may result in them being retracted within the body (possibly referring to a condition like und
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Carefully treat what is inside that has been healed thus far, implying attention must be paid even after an initial injury or illness appears
Capitol .lxx.	It seems there may have been a misunderstanding in your input as "Capit
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Regarding the healing of leprosy (lepromatosia). This statement likely refers to treatment advice for
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	For leprosy in humans there are two methods: one is to observe the area within which semen resides between the thighs (where an abscess may be present with pus), and another method involves observing that space where wool fibers can accumulate, typically located at a point corresponding to where testicles sit next to each other. Translated into modern English:
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some of that fluid from his penis is in his cunt (scrotum),
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women there is a special kind: and it is that the womb of the woman rests on her pelvis, like two testicles of man with only a few yolks in their part where they are located together.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure involves three kinds of things: two from men and one unique to women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: For you have inserted those bones adjusted within where it escapes from that influence of which, and provided for treating other maladies as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men where semen is produced in the region of the coda (of the testicles), neither curing nor opposing occurs therein.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line appears incomplete or possibly just an identifier
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	This medieval medical text seems to discuss causes related to women, specifically mentioning "lentging" (which could be interpreted as slow moving of spirits in humoral theory) and bodily
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	In this line, the text likely refers to how natural causes are adjusted by lentige (slowing of spirits), and emphasizes that certain behaviors or excesses can be magnified in women within these reasons as observed during intimate examinations among men:
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Now when you grasp at your excess lubrication, whether it's on yourself or in the joint and entrails (incisions), here we go:
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	No longer in ignorance, mainly at the root of reason, lest there be a flow of bile.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Return that which is necessary for curing those afflicted by diseases within it has been cured, or care given thereto.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May fresh meat is flesh that has not yet entered the womb of the mother and thus it suffers in its parts according to the shape of a hook (and for this reason we call it "malady dragged"), hence why, as soon as possible, let us insert our instruments into their body so they can be healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or content for translation,
De curacio de alratica.	It appears there might have been a misunderstanding as the text provided seems to be in Italian
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	When it comes to female health issues that are not punctured or small ones (likely referring to hernias). The sentence translates into English as: "Regarding the woman's condition, it is neither a penetration nor a little one." This
E es o natural o accidental.	And whether it is natural or an incident occurs (the text suggests discussing if such health
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And whether it is due to illness that has previously occurred (suggesting an underlying condition), or because of meatless food/underconsumption, or by stealthy consumption (possibly referring to overeating). The sentence translates into English as: "It's either a consequence of prior sickness or caused by insufficient nutrition from meats and delicate subst
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it could be in the womb of her mother, or on her body, within lungs, below skin level, above lung levels—all these being sources where pus may rise up from (potentially referring to abscesses and other infectious processes). The text prohibits drainage ("cuoyt"), suctioning ("enprenguacio"), childbirth practices that might disturb such sites of infection, as well as menstruation. In English: "It could be within the mother's womb or on her body surface—in lungs and below skin; also above lung levels—where pus may originate from (potentially referring to sources like abscesses), with prohibitions against dra
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the intellect of that being is to be examined regarding our physician's advice—if there seems an obvious sign or symptom present (indicating observation and diagnosis are necessary), it should then proceed; otherwise, seek out another doctor for further assistance ("am le ray"). The sentence translates into English as: "And the intellect of that individual is to be considered in light of our physician's advice. If there appears a clear symptom or sign (indicating observation and diagnosis are necessary), then proceed with caution; if not, seek another doctor for further
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If it is an indwelling catheter and appropriate for the lips' sores, then use that tool to break up such painful crusts therewith.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied to the lips' sores and pause taken on these swolthy parts of our bodies, indicating abundance of humors within them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	E the woman is on her two legs, with extended thighs and lips brought forward so that this delicate instrument can be inserted and the obstruction removed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Return wool and linen in oil (or some other substance), placing it over the area to ensure that the location is secured for healing throughout the day.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the scaphoid is large and thick, then you must insert that wax or walnut in it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If it is for flesh (i.dict "oppilatio"), then suspend that on the womb (uncia), and incise that as well.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And these are the medicines that make stop the flow of pus with its bite, as they acquire it, and gout, and stones; adjust the calfskin accordingly.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And administer a wide iron rod for that dirt does not solidify in its place.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And if it is necessary for that tongue of his/her own (referring back to 'le budel' or hernia mentioned earlier), then administer a cupful of liquid, which should be applied there as needed over the
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And so it is cured with another form of comforting care within that period until healed.  
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	When some have pains in their breasts at birth of other organs, and according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	May it so be for apoplexy of the head, and not contra-effects appear in any part through one'dictation or direction from such an episode.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The given medieval medical text seems to be in Old Occitan (also known as Proven
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Translation of the provided line from medieval medical language:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	From the mouths of these openings where blood flows in constantly, when such effusions are present and painful (effusions), it is evident that there are fluid accumulations within them causing discomfort.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And in the division of those things and their essences, I have spoken about these that receive care and healing, as well as these that do not receive any form of care or treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So say that hemorrhoids and varicose veins when in the lower region of the womb do not appear to be treated with iron as a remedy.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	When those are on which mother'thy care rests, they are those that have been healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you put the woman into moist and warm garments or rough cloth, and inscribe those areas on her skin, it will affect those places accordingly.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Assign powder over those vents of his humors from one of the inscribed wounds on him, with affection and appearance as if they were already there for them.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet in bed for an hour, and apply pressure on that foot in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then it leads to decay and dryness in bones formed by milk (and/dictorns), gold dust, vermillion powder, and various pigments; these are what they take for treatment measures.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Return and apply flour of barley mixed with honey and vinegar, applying it over the two parts (likely referring to specific body areas) as needed:
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction has detached itself, then it bleeds out and is subjected to scraping on its breasts and nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the wool and immerse that part of the colonic or arsenical or mercurial sulphur in water, and care for it with oil within which is healed; take care not to let any dry out inside where it should recover.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request what requires strict attention, so that you insert the one I have shown to you in this tongue today.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is healed within.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from what seems like historical medical literature discuss
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Based on the fragment given and understanding that it's in a language with roots or similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French (which could be medieval Occitan
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The text describes a variety of medical issues in the mother, including infected wounds (accidede), which may involve various parasitic attachments and ulcerations along with abscesses or fistulas and erosive lesions potentially related to venereal diseases. Here is an attempt at translating this into modern English:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	When you have spoken about these illnesses and their respective remedies herein described, in the division of care for them.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: And when you dig out in this treatise of osteomyelitis what is seen by physicians who study it, and if you want to know how they perform its operation with iron tools.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And when you consider that the pain from penetration in their abdomen is sharp and accompanied by pulsation and fever, examine it without causing harm; if there are no signs of perforation on them, treat with whatever helps until the intensity of the accidents subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you make the bed (bed rest) for a woman and place her on a board that gives support to back; adjust your beloved's weight gently towards their lower abdomen area as needed, spread out their hips, pause briefly with hands over breasts if necessary. Here each limb is tied carefully using bands/straps (ligatures), ensuring proper alignment and restraint for the patient’thy condition requires it.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return (or restore) the matrona back in place and administer the instrument with which she has opened it, according as causes bring forth.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you are about to administer this tool near the woman'dict mother and her womb cannot contain more than its pearl (i.e., limit) from what enters through it, ensure that only the seed of life (the embryo or fetus) remains within her uterus.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	May it be so that the tool is larger than the mother of life' extricated, then pause pills upon the texture of the mother of life to prevent the entirety of the tool from entering into her realm.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	When you pause the flow that runs down in the instrument below and hold it with your tongue, turn the fluid inside so that no overflow occurs into the mother'dictor (likely referring to a phlebotomy needle).
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and it touches the body (ma) and becomes moist like a lion'se skin (molh), then cover that area with your hand overlaid by a splint of stone or metal from the head downwards (cap de lu am spatum lat).
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the illness is expelled, then you pause in mud or oil where some spotting occurs; and press on the wound area before it enters into the belly of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place your hand above the breast and under the linen-clad pillow, where they are boiled in water; these belong to her.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it is cured with two days of oil that must be applied until healed within, whereby the patient shall recover fully once inside this period when medicated properly.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here are the line-byse translations:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the child is swolthy in their breast-milk (which they have been forbidden from as part of treatment), then those who take care of them will tend to that which we had mentioned earlier regarding its division/distribution.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv.: This line appears to be referencing a specific page or
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	When teaching nurses, we must instruct them on how the black bile (melancholia) acts as a medicine when used secondarily in cases where nature alone is insufficient. Here's an attempt to translate and interpret this line considering its historical context:
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the matrona smells in the commensal of childbirth for its parts and when you breathe upon her at these times to desire scenting the air, and it is by this which she becomes undressed over there wherein lies parturition (childbirth), and hurry into preparation; knowing that this part takes after natural figures of birth, being an essential figure itself for childbearing in her bellybutton or navel region.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you press those limbs, so that the patient' extramand becomes settled on their head for them to take in the second essence, and is purged of any excess through good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May those that are not natural and unbearable become ill when they suffer on their feet or the head of a patient lies down with his/her body positioned above the neck, causing pressure either atop the chest, abdomen, or even between the thighs. The limbs' flesh becomes strained under these conditions.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Necessary cause is for it to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and that she should guard against error and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When you present them in their entirety and understand within those things how they stand for that which is herein described, thus being significant to know about it all at once as if standing upon water itself.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the foot is in its natural place on the head, it exerts force on the woman' extricable parts and often causes them to be weakened; at times they even become debilitated, those things that women carry with themselves (possibly referring to burdens or loads), which disappear when mixed fenugreek seed and olive oil are consumed.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return (or position) the metal spoon between your fingers and in that place another scoop is held wherein its tongue resides, containing the moisture of the humor within it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	When pressing the woman'dictum within so that childbirth occurs.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not done, then have the woman be anointed with pus of wool and honey, knead them together thoroughly.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquella stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If more of your flesh is cut open during the feasting (consumption), it will be necessary that you gradually reduce these smaller pieces.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If not obeyed in the interior, then lift up the woman onto a couch and remove her feet from it, placing the couch on the ground; thus ensuring that the woman does not fall due to loss of consciousness (concussion).
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the mass is not turned out and remains in its place within you or between your legs as it was before drape (undergarment) being put on, then turn that part back to where it belongs using forceps. If this happens inside the belly of a woman after intercourse, return those parts with equal amounts of effort so they will not protrude further into its cavity.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From birth about their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly is above their feet, it causes them to be pushed upwards and you reduce its size and warmth that part of him with your hands, taking hold of one foot at a end each time and gently expanding those small parts little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he is inside the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and cause that protrusion which may occur if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no water given to the patient that has been recommended (the absence of prescribed medicinal fluid), then return the fetus gradually within as long as you pause that second natural figure, which in turn will prevent leakage (cessation). Here's a line-by extralinguistically translated interpretation:
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited that all the humors we have retempered should escape, then take muslin and dissolved rubber, crush them thoroughly in the mortar for good percussion, apply lines of this mixture to the woman' extrices (a term referring here possibly to her womb or uterus), and between life-giving fluid from within her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	When applying that substance (likely some form of medication or treatment) on your body, enter so as to achieve the downward movement towards the epigastrium/stomach area.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts of it are softened and applied under the smoke of myrtle and over that area, thereby causing moisture to rise there as well.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you submerge it in fumigation for an hour, then place the pain on a pillow, and apply that same poultice externally to open up its mouth wide, pressing down at the lower part of their belly with a light compression, which makes them feel better almost immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Evaluation of his body and limbs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you engage them gradually; and have the woman stand with her back against the column, placing their feet on tiptoes, while they rest upon your hands – complete these actions for yourself.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here comes the translation for each line:
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not out yet, then lift up their feet and move them vigorously, applying pressure on top of the small intestines gradually until the fetus enters its respective parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert their hands and gently move the small part within them, commanding the woman to express it through that orifice.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eye examination is typically performed by one of them (referring to a practitioner or doctor).
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When she is reduced in her belly, if you cannot reduce that herself, then lift the woman and carry her away to where it can be done.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it is not possible to move them, place the leg on the bed and forcefully compress their thighs together; conducting strong movements of the joints they have been holding onto while you administer poultices made from mucilage as recommended by medicine.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has occurred, then make an examination over the pubis area and study how to reduce swelling, taking into account this second natural figure of the fetus, inducing it to enter through its birth canal.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Eye examination over expanded belly and its flesh is at two from her navel.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the matron holds her hand on the belly and gradually turns that little one over, it makes things easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is a certain amount of oil and honey that we have recommended to you here, then pause over the couch where they lie.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquella cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exitus fetus prepared over the side:
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the queen excretes according to this illness, consider it and when you inspect her second navel within your nail so that its moisture can be expelled.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is resting on the face and chest of a person, then you cut that part of the belly to ensure it does not stay stuck or delay its progress.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And lift the fetus into its divided parts while stopping that second pause they make, and order the woman to take some measures herself if God wills it so, in case of labor pains coming out untimely (childbirth).
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You understand that limbs are moved habitually and sometimes up to three or four times a day, which may seem strange or cause pain if touched; this can be due to natural causes, but they do not live as other creatures do.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	With those things that are expanded and have a second sister (likely referring to medicinal or herbal remedies), separated by signs of separation, they distinguish these entrails within the belly button of each of them at certain visits for natural childbirth aid, and at other times with recommendations made while we have you.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If the childbirth is difficult and we come upon conditions that are not natural as described by us, then tend to those pains with what have been recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is subtle and skillful with her cautery, making it easier (facilitate) and more precise (subtilize), as well as slow-acting (tardite), then according to all that she has prepared for healing brings salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember what formed within his womb has happened as a result of an abortion.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Alcune volte formano in maggio un, due, tre, quattro, cinque, sei, sette, otto o nove, ed essendo che una donna abortisce di vite e un'altra di dieci, causa dolori per la misura degni dei grandi saggi.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxxvi.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise written in a
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	From the fetus when it dies." This line suggests content related to obstetrics or gynecol
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for a dead fetus and what have been mentioned in the division of medicine, do not abandon it; instead use an opossery on its body, provided that the woman is healthy and has no accidents (complications) upon her concerning which one might fear loss. This sentence reflects historical medical practices where care was given to a dead fetus under specific circumstances while ensdictating conditions for when such actions were appropriate – particularly emphasizing maternal well-be0rning without complicatio.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Consider cases where the woman is pregnant (lying down), and her head inclines with ease while her hips are raised upwardly – indicating a position during examination or treatment to facilitate certain conditions, possibly related to prenatal care as suggested by historical medical texts. This guidance likely points toward an ideal posture for specific gynecological assessments in the past where physical examinations were commonplace and had tailored positions aimed at patient comfort while allowing effective
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister (or practitioner) holds the hand of one or both parts, keeping them in a position that prevents any extension beyond what is necessary for taking out (removing/delivering) the fetus – again suggesting an intimate and direct involvement with patient care during childbirth. The terminology used here reflects historical practices where manual skills were crucial to midwifery, emphasizing gentle handling as
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Apply moisture to the mother's mouth, using honey and sow (seed), aloe vera gel, and linseed – these ingredients indicate a treatment method where soothing substances are used possibly for comfort or medicinal purposes during childbirth in historical times. The use of such natural remedies was common before the widespdict access to modern medicine; this line exemplifies how
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	When the matron applies heat to their hands with these olives and mucilage, and places her hand on the place where they should remain tied in the belly,
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E locale conveniente in acqua: ad hoc, considera se caput est preparatum sedendum, et leuncestis retentibus humeris tuis, vel columnae tuæ, vel bocca teæ, vel palatis tibi, autem corporis aliquid aliud suspendere possumus.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If it is about your feet (the subject matter), then in the knee area or on the back of the lumbar spine, where discomfort may be felt as well.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	When the tongue has its mouth open and bends in that place where it is between the sides of his body to which they belong (the right side), make sure there'setup ease and keep their joints within those locations from which these parts come, until he arrives at the cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place another spoon or three if necessary (to prevent the tongue from being detached and to avoid extension beyond its natural position).
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	When gout affects the whole body, it is necessary that its removal be done as quickly as possible like tooth pain in a molar.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the patient' extrusion occurs, then they are allowed to enter back into the place where it was pushed out, and thus everything is brought inside again.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	May it be that the other is an abscess near you and cannot be reduced by this method of your body, as there'se a cloth wrapping over it; thus cut off such clothing from around or inside where all can see, either at the intersection of the wound or in the hollow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And if it is necessary in this other place of the body (presumably referring back to the feet, as mentioned earlier) and also on both feet, then...
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or there's constriction in the coccyx during examination, it may enter between the spines and fissure at the tail end to extract water with an instrument called "alundat," whose form will come from that used for other instruments herein described.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Here comes the first sentence to translate line by line into English:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is sick and compressed by the sternum, then its moisture which is in the chest has been discharged.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	May it not become complicated, nor should you eat in order that once the head is incised as far as your ability allows, then do so quickly.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there is a foramen or opening in the abdomen where fluid accumulthyon (presumably referring to excessive fluids), then you must penetrate that area to release the contained moisture.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If it is about your feet, then the attraction of you to me (the doctor) becomes gentle and directed towards my mouth (presumably where I would administer some form of treatment or remedy).
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and chest are compressed (or squeezed), then you must remove that dress which covers your hand, allowing it to enter inside until the fluid comes out in those places.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May if the other members are protruded and turn back their head; may if the patient's mouth is open wide, insert it into her lower belly area nowhere else must be inserted until that cap goes inside there as well—and at this point place a finger or two in there too. Now throw everything up towards the chest of the woman being examined and thrust those fingers forward to push things back; then introduce an unction (medicinal substance) into it, possibly one or two units' worth depending on severity/size required—and toss that as well toward their mouth for ingestion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is closed by apatema and you must lance it to relieve its pain, ensure not that she trembles upon seeing this done; afterward take measures against causes of thick greasy effusion.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Embrace liniments; follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on his chest, and if possible, make an incision with a sharp instrument: and administer the medicine we have mentioned for him in life.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then be inserted into pillows and removed.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When there is no cause discovered from the secondary (or perhaps a lesser or underlying issue).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all of your treatment, then administer what we have discussed for the medication applied to the apothecary cups which were inflicted by the mother (referring likely to an external cause).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have inflammation of blood (sanguis), then direct it into sharp and clear waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And there has appeared in her stomach a woman who was born dead, and upon that spot another pregnancy is carried within; this child too bears life inside of it.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Unfortunate it has happened that an abscess in his limb has persisted for a long time and swells up with fluid where the sore is located, causing discomfort when touched or grasped.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And when it has been called for healing this person, and medicine was administered unto them for long periods of time, the child is not yet solidified in health.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And thus you press on it for some days with strong binding and an applied stone to the bone, then walk lightly (or gently), applying a stone again today or tomorrow; this has made too much wonder in his belly not having any bones therein.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So then wrap the patient in linen, and extracting the stones from their bowels where they are positioned within the saddle of her womb, have done so for a long time, correct with a small tool (bracelet).
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you do not affirm that someone is strange, but rather in water they have science and help to remove the excess of water which the doctor applies for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of movement by which she is laid back:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how they grasp the body' extrinsic muscles, by which grip are two springs in each pair of feet toes/thumbs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Indeed this virtue may be subtle as straps or bands (silk, leather, or wooden), and it can alleviate pain either from arthritis or gout.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	When the length of each rod is two cubits and a span for both ends, and its height is a handbreadth and three finger'seach; at the place where these rods meet which are already tightly fastened together by this metallist's rods, their lengths amount to one palm and three fingers each, and their width two cubits or so much.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are inserted into the mother'thy mouth so that she is protected when you rotate these specified parts.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another likeness of that subtle and tender putrefaction appears here:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is a pain caused by iron or lead according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Even in the extremity of him/her two additional measures are added at a time, and the length of these additional measures is one handbreadth, and their height reaches two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish to open these chambers of the body (likely referring to parts where fluids are retained), then make sure to place the woman on her back with the feet hanging downwards, allowing what is between her thighs to be released/drained out.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply your hand on the instrument as needed for grinding, according to what you desire from within the mouth of the mother.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of movement by which they practice it:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressure where it pushes down upon the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship wherein he counts his head as large
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as they assemble a forceps for which finger is in the extremity, doing it several times, and some uses are long enough like this with forceps, doing so repeatedly, at which point fingers have been inserted into and counted on.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The shape of an abscess is roughly round or oval in form:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of anoint has a needle:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of an arrow has nails:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps in which his head is contained within it:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of scab has two extremities at which the head detaches:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two entities in Latin terms:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are being used, and when the spices of it all become multiplied and prepared by the craftsperson according to their quantity is placed on its surface layer for them (the patients).
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not perform actions with those instruments unless it is necessary for them.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the second extraction (assuming that "De" refers back to a previous context about removing something): Extraction
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second sign (presumably referring to an indication or symptom of sickness) is retained by the patient's body, you must command the malady that retains its essence within it and perform such actions as removing this affliction; tightly hold your hand over their mouth and on their nose if so directed. If after doing so they expel (or are cured), behold!
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a wave and pierce through the covertly made disruption; pause at that herb where its burning mouth inflames – with calamint and rue and chamomile and clove oil (and cassia bark), attend to it as you would.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave, and they rest on top of the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place one end of the funnel in the mouth of the patient, inserting that end into the cavity of the uterus where it will absorb the purgative medicine.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And fix that swelling here as we have described it earlier on, and the second servant is hastily attending to you now.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if this treatment is not going to be expelled, then command the maid that submerges her left hand in sesame oil or millet gruel, and inserts it into his/her navel; you want for it (the substance) found by the second one. If inserted within the waistband of the mother, insert your own thereafter as recommended, removing each piece carefully so that she does not catch on to her belt fasteners.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Given that it is permitted at both sides of the body easily and without difficulty.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	When it is adjusted in quantity of contact, provided that it listens and avoids attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with spark and medicine derived from water and plants.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If it is not possible to remove all causes that are recommended, then watch over the patient so as not to injure them further in repeated withdrawals; but if something from inside enters through her mouth and goes into the hollow of a woman's thigh, apply oil or plaster; this substance will purify it on fresh days and dissolve whatever has come out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When fever rises in the patient' extricating head and stomach areas, it is that which increases inflammation—thus when these are treated under fumed conditions for convenience sake.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May those from Antiquity come up under fumigation with nuts and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of tool by which a woman must retain her menstrual blood and second childbirth fluids:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Its pain is from iron or lead.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the small part is stopped under the chest and the large part over the focus (breastbone), with superficial effusion being controlled in the armpits:
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Even that tongue which is ingested under those fumes and repeated, repeat again itself.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of caring for an infant' extramammary (outside of the breast) area not pierced through/not perforated by surgery or
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 It appears that you've provided a line of text in what seems to be Medieval Latin mixed with archaic or regional variations influenced by Italian and potentially other languages as well due to transcription errors or dialectal influences. The phrase is somewhat unclear, but I will attempt to interpret the meaning based on recognizable words:
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Now cover the woman who has pierced that sign there with this veil; and if she hasn'thy done so already, then puncture it with a splinter, ensuring not to touch her wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Return your hand over that cloth soaked in wine and oil, and apply care for what is inside it to be preserved within.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is bloated, pause in the torture chamber for a few days and observe when the child will start to discomfort again.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And you have already disciplined the pupil of the belly for congestion or abscess; hence when that discipline is established, apply treatment with water we mentioned from healing and clogging removal.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of caring for those ulcers that come about by chance.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The ulcers that come into the lower section of connection and large joints, which occur from behind or in one of the divisions below:
E es una fistula o motas.	This line translates into English as follows: It is an opening or a clog.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that ancient concoction is concerned with the removal of moist and sticky humors or suppuration, some measures are taken for these certain kinds of tracts (fistulas).
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those penetrating things that make you sick because of their exit and from the discharge or release they cause; some even resort to purgation (using a laxative), others suffer from these same matters.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	From those fistulas some waters occasionally enter into the bladder, and enter into the meat of the urethra; they also come from where water enters at the junction of the thighs and in the pubis area.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And when the flatus (gas) that enters and does not enter through the anus is placed inside it in the rectum, you insert a spoon or iron into the opening of this passage to prevent obstruction.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is tightness in that area, they may enter into that delicate spot beneath what you feel as the pressure or on/in your thighs and buttocks where you sense it.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that one and if there is no cause of obstruction or worms nor windiness within it, as we have said before, then know that it does not penetrate, and take care of yourself accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or within the prostate, it means that its purpose is to extract the patient'thy urine from there so that this place can become medicine and be strengthened for healing.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May it enter the juncture of the thigh or into the bone and cause pain in circulation, then this person is said here for trying to enter inside without proper opening at the joint; they suffer immediate inflammation after entry; such treatment has no value here, nor does bandaging consolidate.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those piercing wounds, there is not complete healing; the treatment by doctors of these affecting nerves works and weakens them where they are fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May heal as hoped for when it is not piercing and old-fendoering, cure by iron expected according to your recommendation, which has already been given.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "And because the humidity enters between your thighs over their two and inclines them toward the abdomen of you, place a plug or clyster if it is in an open fistula wound; enter into this location so that you know where.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that sickness (or illness) has entered her chest, now is the time when you intervene to remove it from within her breastbone.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a thrust in the belly and perceive that it is trying to enter further downwards (into the intestines or flesh), then surely you understand that this has entered; therefore do not attempt movement there, for neither does such an entrance signify health restoration. Here's the translation:
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May those who are ill in armpits also be well-off with such remedies for arms.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	From the medicine by which hope is regained in you, as previously indicated, and into which that flame inserted undernethy narrows have reached beyond its entrance; furthermore insert therein said wick or three times more (for when all these sinews stretched tightly together seem like a feather quill of an archer), then they will be completely relaxed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt enters and does not penetrate to where it is inside your belly (belly), between that entrance which you hope for flesh or bone, then there will be a fistula on the surface of the navel, dry up the navel'se part related to the fistula; do so at the attempt site, and this action reaches within the fistula, freeing it through its extremity via the opening.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	When you make that water-cleansing for those clogged arteries assembled with the penis and do not burst from any cause,
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May it happen that the flow of phlegm comes between you and your body cavity when those stones enter therein; then with instruments for pus like cauterizing tools or acute medicine, these are used at the focus to adjust good habits: thus purification of those stones set into place, and absorption of excessive humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And return the care to that which is encased in borders or within places where it enters underneasse coverings and garments, then provide for its tender flesh made of hardened meat formed therein.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	So are these treatments in which puncturing and execution take place, when once they have been restored the patient is healed and need not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Might there be a fistula that enters the belly and extends along the surface of the body, at which point you insert your finger into the belly and investigate within it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if hundreds of forces and between you and her it is as though tissue or flesh (centes), and they are prone to invasion (propda a la penetracio), then the operation here in this place is not carried out, but by trust and hope'dictated.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	La cause that occurs is to administer in him one of three methods: or to cauterize it as we have described; or seal it within until the cavity has been healed so you can insert instruments and perform treatment, preventing any contents from escaping into the abdomen. And take care lest there be a rupture due to incomplete suturing of intra-abdominal leaks contained in the hernia; or lengthen that membrane within as we have described up until it is very tight over the base, where you can use acute precision instruments and mend fistulas dilated inside this cavity with said tools. And take care to restore all flesh of the abdomen sealed by these methods if moist exudate remains outside; or gases may leak through that rupture in part of the anus, allowing pus to escape along those same lines into the peritoneum (the lining membrane around organs).
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And when some patients have managed to close the fistula according to this methodology: it's when you insert the thread into the fistula, and within the abdomen area on top of the navel and around the belly button line, take that thread as if using a surgical needle for suturing their wounds following this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that protective covering of the field or around these areas, and attempt to place within the opening in which continuation occurs for them.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May it penetrate the margin of the anus properly inserted therein; and extracting its point, adjust both ends to these examples (i.thy), applying bandages each day or two days afterward until you can insert the tack back into the flesh where those body parts are between the endpoints of that nail and their buttocks.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Return care for what is inside has been ensured that it's solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then you must make it so in any way that you are prepared for, rather than being its cause whereby it becomes unhealthy; and do this within which has been healed by your actions.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of spur is what causes the opening of the fistula: its curvature makes it sharp and the other division does not make it sharp, therefore there is no need for them to come together again.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From the seam of hemorrhoids in which blood flows within that cavity.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Excretions from these two ways, whether it is between the buttocks seeming as if they are of grain and fatty substances.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From those small and large ones that come from these thighs and are a part of them, their stones, and they go outside the abdomen, in the limbs' extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Mightily those who have a dry mouth according to the signs of little moisture intake, such as watery saliva or a small drop of sweet wine continually flowing and in accordance with the color of the body,
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which you have injected into the bowel is to command the malady (disease/obstruction) inside it so that it settles and expresses itself where your arrow has entered, with its humors appearing at your presence.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you stand and suspend your fingers where they touch the tip of that nail belonging to your own skin, and press those very points upon their reasons (or complaints).
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May if the pincers are not clenched in those due to their moisture and softness, then take for them rough cloth or a sharp instrument made of metal or waxed fabric; place these on the tips of your hands as dressings, and rub some ash particles onto them so that they adhere during cauterization. Whenever this comes after what precedes in the chapter on caustic treatments.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Return that for care has been applied within which they are healed already or will be taken care of by another remedy inside, where it is necessary. (Here "a prop" means 'return' and involves the concept of
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the wound does not heal upon removal (ectasis), it is called an abscess in which there may be slight biting, and washing should occur within that fluid present in the cavity where bleeding occurs as soon as the swelling recedes with extraction. (Here "a prop" means 'return' or to bring back attention/focus on a subject; also includes concepts of healing ("cura"), wound treatment ("cristerisa le malaute am cristeri") and washing within an abscess fluid, related to the management following its extraction.)
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the bruises are from their buttocks (the patient's posterior), then it is due to black bile, and when you press those areas with your finger or tongue, another touches them thereon, while they remain pressed in place; apply care for these places as we have explained inside that they may heal.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who incise deeply and perform suturing according to this method: take firm wrapping material and wrap it around the inserted needle; press the swolthy areas into their respective divisions above, inserting the point of the other wrapped thread therein as soon afterward withdrawn from the needle's tip, extending laterally. First tighten the affected area using that very woundly-wrapped material and adjust it according to taste; then remove the wrapping materials attached to the inserted needle by extracting them one at a time (lateralwise).
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When all is applied and only that one not being used or carried away, to allow the excess of the sickly heart' extrinsic flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand above the back, and command the humors in their course to stop there.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within the box; and when it becomes solidified, take care of those inside with oil or other curatives contained within so as to restore their health.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treating hernias (Note: "De curacio" means 'of curing'
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Of healing ulcers caused by dry cracks or of natural construction, such as hernias where internal tissues protrude through a defect in the body wall due to weaknesses like those found naturally within our anatomy'dictation lines into English
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	When such conditions are stubborn and do not yield to treatment in this medicine, then you must make the points on the spine or within your finger with moist cautery (indicating that it is wet/wet applied directly onto affected areas) where there are pus discharges from undernesity. This helps prevent these conditions from healing properly; and afterward, care for those already consolidated into a more solid state within the body.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of healing with potions, this is its key (or essence).
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Be aware that this is not standard translation practice and requires knowledge of medieval medical terminology which may vary greatly from modern languages due to historical changes in both language and medicine over time. However, I'll attempt a line-bysean interpretation based on the provided fragments:
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when it has entered the body'dictum and is lodged in joints or teeth (or sometimes both), and extinguished from its origin within him, take care of that person.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then burn the second one that came before in your head (this refers likely to a treatment wherein they are instructed or allowed to perform an action of burning upon themselves).
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers with sharp pointed protrusions appear on the surface of the body, and they frequently occur in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for its care is that you extend and insert it therein or what you newly introduced inside the box (the body).
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it out, as we have said before, by fire or quick medicine (sharp treatment).
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now it has been removed with respect to inwards and outwards using that very same tool which I directed earlier.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May small or tortuous worm be present on the surface of the skin above the knee and when it is agitated, it appears as if biting a worm, causing pain throughout the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Care for him involves using a penis or pincer made of bronze or iron, and it is strong; place that above the body within which he's contained by the circumference of the part pieces with this implement. Then turn your hand around inside the cup so as to insert what is in its circuit into the flesh whereof you are holding hands, eradicating his humors from therein completely.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make an incision with a silver or iron needle according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to cauterize the flea as mentioned in the process of artery cautery, then:
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	From the instruments used to administer an enema.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is pains of silver or tin or lead that are felt, and some times from these small instruments used by doctors for treating children'thy ailments; and the one administered in their treatment shall also be small; and those whose bellies swell with gas or who have dropsy (water retention), they suffer such pains.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	La form of christer'm grain and small:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the downpipe in which the bag is tied according to this method; and that where it's attached, there you will attach it several times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise text line by line into English is as follows:
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is a bag wherein are paused the medicine of the bladder from beast or sheep'dictum, and its handle is held in one hand:
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	When pierced by a foreign body while being rotated; and if the space between these is where the large part of it lies.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If medicine forces it out (the humoral imbalance), take as much as possible; and if at night the patient is taken off completely for a day, they may recover better in health.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May you caulk that in the abdominal abscesses and intestine hernia (the patient'se condition), then repeat the application of the cautery until healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is bleeding or ulcers in the belly (belly), then let the cups of mercury be subtle and lion-like; these are what children rely on for their criteria/judgment.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of disease treatment or remedy for illnesses.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You are already in the division of curing diseases according to what is suitable for free use and you declare the cure of these ails using those same remedies, as per their complementarity.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it is said that pains are varied according to where they appear and how they manifest themselves when compressed by a mallet (or hammer).
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	The causes of motion being pains caused by drops (of fluid) from the bowels or their opening and closure as well as percussion on bone or wood, or blows with a club, resembling these causes of pain.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the humors that are present in the body cavities be brought out like dirt on top of the head, or neck (the col), chest (the breastbone and rib cage), belly, intestines, and limbs; they seem to belong to these parts.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And when you recommend some remedies for that reasoning and rule concerning other illnesses, here it comes:
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When feverish simple diseases come into mind, they will arrive at the third capital'thy time for consumption (the term 'consumption' refers to what we now know as pulmonary tuberculosis).
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So when you have a simple headache that is not fracture and there'supreme concern about an abscess presenting with cautious drainage, then press the occiput gently but firmly at once without delay; extract it according to its quantity if no impediment prevents further drainage, mainly when such swelling comes from within causing little discomfort.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	When it is time for counteraction of the diseased portion, and watch over the abdomen from replenishment and excessive consumption of heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If from meticulous examination there is found no cause, then the pain will be lessened by diet and not approached with meat or drinks.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When pressure is applied over the wound after applying an antiseptic poultice of oil or wine in which it is staunched (i.dict "stitching" here refers to stopping bleeding).
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	May it be certain that the application of cauterization is safe, and pause over the ground if it has been done recently; for as long as the dust recommended by one'thy self hasn’t changed since yesterday, proceed with small applications on your own initiative.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed and become dampened (likely referring to weather conditions), then place your hand inside where you have applied liniment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May it be if the child is large or due to lack of space and appearance, and their lips are not properly adjusted for venting (breathing), then adjust those areas with stitches as recommended by your doctor.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May it be discovered that the child has exposed bone and penis, but not restrained by him with anything except a small suspensor; then you shall attend to the child's medicine and restore flesh in place of genitalia using things they eat for their food: caps, forms (shapes) like those belonging to them, until it is compounded.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If decay exists in the spine and does not stick to the bone, then cut off all that putrefied matter and extract it with water, taking care of what is extracted.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these plagues the artery or vein through which blood may flow is not severed by medicine, then you should investigate that vessel; and if it has been damaged but not cut open, incise into that very same one with a sponge or lia (a sharp instrument), especially when what we have mentioned does not cause discomfort. If the need arises for this to provoke pain so as to facilitate treatment, then perform cauterization within it whereby the wound has been made.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pains are simple and small, then the cause of them is a cold leucon (blood), so that you should sprinkle this dust over those places until the air changes it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The given medieval medical treatise text translates as follows:
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	E loosens the strength of that part above the pelvis and below it as well, but not while she lies down so that it is not laid bare before healing takes place under medical care.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one makes self-catheterization alone without being in presence of you and your therape extraterrestrial (dragon), it is not advisable or proper.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation takes place on the large swellings when it is decided that they are stopped over there and have not been recently touched by air, which has not changed their state.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has been altered, and especially in summer time, I do not understand where this powder should be placed, but it follows from what we have said before; thus you pause on these spots with stronger purgatives that we previously mentioned, or stop on these particles of flour made with water and honey (which acts as a poultice), and take care of those medicines until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May you break a bone in the body and it is small, then extract water from its movement.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	Here is a line-byse translation of this medieval medical treatise into English:
De las plaguas del col.	From the illnesses of the colon (or referring specifically from conditions related to it)
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If worms acidify in the colon (meaning there is an infestation of parasites within it), then there's no difference in medical treatment; and between a simple case when they are present on top, similar approaches apply for their management/treatthy.  
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May the nerve of the chest or artery be inspected or is it not in there, but if it is a nerve, then it's to prevent treatment at this place where strong inflammation occurs, as soon as you notice and indicate that it'sin veins and resemblance with them; do so quickly.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No stops at any cause of complete madness, for the substance of nerves is fever and its continuous flow to the brain, which it puts into all members itself.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If the water is that which heals with herbal medicines, then take some warm or cold infused oil (in this case it refers to an ointment), and when washing with clean water according to these guidelzymes, along with other stones rubbed as directed hereby; also apply grease on the rheum.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the child is large, administer stitches or close their lips together, and take care that these are healed within where they should be.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Might there be depth or sores in the lower parts of it that are pierced hereby, wherefore one should drive out this purulent matter.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	May it be that in the patient there is an inserted artery and a flow of blood has been achieved; if so, separate or dry out that one, or perform cautery on it if necessary to induce diuresis (the removal of excess water from the body).
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May you have inspected the vertebrae of the gout or all, and thus saved the veins in the collarbone; once done so, adjust your lips to be sutured over the spine' extrusion site without touching it there itself; after aligning them with their natural form shape using stitches, apply firm pressure on that area for a few days until healing occurs. Also provide care and attention in those places where fixation has been done so they may recover properly.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May if the child already has pain in their bones, then you will strike that area; and if there are fragments of bone inside them, remove all those pieces which you can from them; but if it is not within your power to enter, allow water for the child to absorb so they self-repair, and be separated out and taken away.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the child is freshly born today, then sprinkle dust on that which was recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the patient there is a leak (fistula), then cure that part with water to which memory will return for healing purposes at their head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From pains of the chest or appearances when it falls between the shoulders and is felt in the space or at the shoulder, neck, or arm joints/shoulder blades.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of the lancet or cottle, and at times you reach depth, consider perhaps if the air infiltrates when blood comes out from beneath due to pleurisy (lung inflammation); know that the pus (pus) itself can be life-thseeking.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is no depth and the fluid has recently come to its sanction within him, then you pause in his chest for the first hour after sunrthy coverings begin (likely referring to morning), without stretching that which prevents it from being retained deep within him and returning to the heart; perhaps a lubricating ointment applied can assist with these movements, allowing them until later today.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your disposal, then rest in the chamber of mud and water to draw out moisture that comes from the humidities; let the gout sleep on the mud so as the body' extricated fluid can flow through it properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May you have passed through the swamp for three days or more and did not experience spasm, illness of the chest nor constriction of breath, now use whatever other good measures are available to you; then take care of that cure and also attend to any further healing until recovery.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	May it be that the healing of him is allowed, and even now he has been bound tightly, so prudently advise you that already there is a fistula formed; therefore attend to this matter with your knowledge as chief physician.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the pain is due to a fissure in space or cavity and it'thy simple on the surface of the skin or back, then cure that which has come after stitching if large, or powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there is pain in the bone and if those intra-articular stones have already been separated (i.dict), then apply force to remove them using a lever/tool from that joint.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, let them be placed inside that the vermin may escape out of their reach.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other accidents affecting the other limbs, health is maintained by what we have said here today.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From "the illnesses of the stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomdictio which you have in your stomach is great, little, or migrating.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great many influences that enter into or affect nerves and their joints, so it causes painful insertion of them and a forceful yet subtle union among themselves.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And so the best interruption will occur there, for in that place it is difficult to reduce the hernia, just as with the diseases of these organs mentioned hereinabove.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Even knowing that stitching of the abdomen is performed with four kinds of threads, it may be necessary to use common stitches for other diseases on the body as well.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other stitches communicate with each other (and possibly also with the ones on their abdomen), it is as they are within or near that particular seam of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	When each person is exposed or declared (recommended/advised), here it goes for you now in English, line by line translation of this medieval medical treatise text would be as
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the swelling is small and there' extrinsic cause of hernia in it (external factor), then healing becomes difficult; either because due to disruption with breathing as we have done, or if the balloon-like expansion caused by cold air. Here 'petita' refers to a minor issue that can be resolved simply through appropriate measures such as those mentioned ("disruption during respiration" and "expansion from exposure to cold"). The overall context of this medieval text suggests medical advice on handling hernias, possibly relating to treatment methods considering environmental factors like breathing or temperature.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	So when the humidity is present (implying a moist or wet environment), take care that you scrape away what submerges in water alone – suggesting some form of treatment involving direct application to affected areas, perhaps soaked cloth with healing herbs like comfrey and arnica applied directly. Here 'ayssi' refers to the conditions (humidity) when action is taken; ‘aquo’ translates as wet or humid air around you – a factor affecting treatment choice which could involve moistening of remedies ('sponga ho drap') with healing plants like comfrey, arnica and possibly rosemary. In medieval times without advanced medical knowledge, this text implies practical home-based treatments using natural elements combined in specific ways to manage conditions such as inflammation caused by cold or humidity – a practice not uncommon for the period before modern medicine developed
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And when some measures have been taken in which the secretion has stopped, it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine in the place where it has been elevated and swolgy with water; this allows for its gentle return to the body due to a slight cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	May it be that the interior is released from this treatment, and then you will divide the rupture into small parts with an instrument for which they have been inserted injections.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial text translation into English would be as follows:
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the tool, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp blow of the axe (or tool), and the other not sharp, along with a subtle touch that is not like bone fragility—this edge becomes blunt quickly.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the vermin is increased and comes out of the intestine, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on top of it, which would be better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is extensive and occurs in the lower abdomen, then you make the hernia protrude into your patient's thighs, and place cushions under their legs; if it is located above the stomach, put a cap on the head of the person and lay pillows atop.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: If the disruption is in one of the parts of the abdomen, then you pause your understanding and consideration immediately so that whatever it is inside can come out without interference from outside.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	When you administer this fluid in large and swolthy pus,
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the small pains you have prepared for it/him (the patient), position your servant between its two most pained parts; this tube holds all disruption within and adjusts their lips, also directing care from that which caused other issues to here where they are now.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here's the line-by extralinguistic translation:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And as for needles moving between hardness and subtlety, where small ones enter flesh causing bleeding; large ones find it difficult in bone matter, hence they move into delicacy.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And where the needle is inserted into either of the patient' extrinsic extremities prescribed by doctor (the term "propdana" refers to a medical recommendation or treatment plan), so that the flesh does not become detached and swelling occurs before its consolidation/healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And ensure that it is not extended with suture so that recovery (consolidation) is not hindered.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These surgical needles are placed carefully in the small wounds; it is enough for their stitching either one of these or that which surrounds them therein.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	May the second stitch be common: and it is that you insert needles into the four extremities (hands/feet), from the chest downwards, using a fine-pointed needle with both delicacy and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle of that surgeon'thy hand has penetrated these four extremities, reduce it from where you are handling it to make sure the wound cloth fold goes up into its own cavity below part split by your hands cuts and thus ensuring sutures tightly bound as with layers of cloth.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When there is a pause between any stitch of the body'dictum (likely referring to surgery or an incision), it concerns the amount of the bulk, that part of the body being referred to in this
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	When there is a pause between any stitch ("sutura") of the body's fabric (implied met
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	When there is a pause in the suturing of this body, it concerns how much bulk (the size or swelling), which was previously inflicted upon an individual within whose stomach stones were lodged causing significant internal disruption; these obstructions had been present for forty-eight hours. As such interventions are required to relieve pressure and address the issue at hand, you must reduce that portion of the body (the affected area) wherein the gallstones have become encysted within it due to prolonged obstruction in their native bile duct ("mieg loc"). The term "reductiu" here implies a medical procedure aiming for decompression or removal.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The following is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E the other physicians had not healed it; and by miracle of fire, they did no cure for that which was in place where ointment would not touch nor any medicine act, but may sometimes apply a poultice twice a day while bathing daily in honey water within the flame.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two kinds of stitches according to what is described in Paracelsus's word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with stitching of the penis and insert an awl from the distal foreskin to the glans,
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters into the navel and that portion of the body where it has entered, descending throughout all parts thereof in both length and breadth; let the point enter also into the other extreme part which you have introduced with the needle from its corresponding extremity.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have pain in that area, then make another passage of the same kind between those two parts of the body I mentioned earlier; and bring out the external cavity where it is located here, and insert the needle into the other extremity of these said parts:
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When something enters through your entrance and goes into the cistern at the end of that limb where it is within you, allowing everything to enter there completely.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Here begins at this patient'thy side and grasps that appendage on the other cheek, thrusting in the needle of the coccyx which has penetrated therein; retract it to that same spot within said hollowness whereby lies the cut part from yonder face. Also draw out that very instrument from underneath them.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And if it is necessary for another remedy or treatment and you apply one cure within which you have prepared, then according to that same measure do so with all that needs healing as per this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum total of this suture method is that you sew pelage skin with which you dress the fur, ensuring to stitch along the part of the limb extremity'thy hair (coding), leaving another stitch inside until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second specialty of self-stitching that Gualia speaks about and recommends through her speech is what you should sew yourself with your own craftsmthy material; applying another part's extremity to each other, thus completing all parts together in a way suitable by nature. Perform this action according to the guidance provided by Gualia herself.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Return those bones into their cavities and make them permeate the divided parts within, entering from two distal ends of what is opposite in this location.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than simple sewing thread for its ability to be remembered and referred back to later on.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is called "Guelder'dictum" or Guelferric speech (the term could refer
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	Might it be that the dietary supplement involves needlework on the stomach's seam, using two pins so you can insert here and there a pinch of this substance (possibly indicating an ingestion or topical application), starting with one inserted into these areas defined by their connections which form inside our bodies where they hold together parts like chest.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When a disturbance occurs in the intestinal area of the belly, it is easier to sew there than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the art of medicine for servants be judged by other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is when you complete the recent work done on their sinews today and return the intestine or hernia to its cavity while holding it down with pressure; after that, pause over the living flesh covering.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the patient' extrication, then rest upon that cushion where you enter and they make hard leather shoes and fields for their feet; these will become strong bandsage dressings as is done with other plagues within which one becomes healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	May you not have the medicines present at this very moment; if they are absent, pause over that which is most necessary now, and begin to apply a poultice of bran flakes mixed with wine, continuing its application for today as long as possible while accompanied by me or under my guidance. Thus healed, you shall not need other medicines when simple diseases occur.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin may communicate in injury to the principal members of the body, then submerge wool in cold-pressed oil or vinegar and apply it within the spaces between joints where bones meet each other; also place some on the legs' surfaces and others undernethy. 
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your joints, they move restlessly and become tightly contracted (stiff), especially if the swelling has reached into the cavity of you and it causes pain to exit through that space.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Be aware that what is of great thickness (the intestine) heals more quickly than what is in the small bowels, indicating those areas require less time to recover or be cured compared to others with finer structures like the smaller parts within them.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If the cause that proceeds from the soil is this fabric (referring to humors or pus), then you obtain it freshly and reduce those swellings with your applied force, whereby these lumps disappear internally within their cavities.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If space has been passed through and black fluid has been extracted, then press that faithful limb over the place where it is darkened, in order to make its flow outward for sanitation purposes; this occurs within veins and arteries of your body.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when humors accumulate in the intestine (budel).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When you hear a disruption in the intestine and it is small enough to be restored with cold water at home (through percussion on the abdomen), then come what was already present as an imbalance within your belly, which consisted of old age fistula/hole and waste product from the seventh part of the stomach, along with indigestion symptoms.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And now you apply the treatment to him who has not been healed in his cleansing, may it dissolve that which remains within where health is restored and the place becomes solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when a skilled individual enters into the hernia (budel), as requested hereinabove [accordingly]: take for binding large caps; and adjust the lips of the patient with those, while holding back some from within his mouth that protrudes over the lips of the patient. When you hold onto them like this, their head will detach itself without dissolving away.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And rest or apply pressure at another point on the first one according to the quantity of all the fluid.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Here is the translation line by line:
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine may be drawn out undernezymy of its own accord herein within the body; grasping for these parts of the intestinal worms therein, they will become detached and you shall take hold of their extremity with a thread. Wrap this thread around it so as to prevent disruption (of the organ).
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This action of stitching is only a second means of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the child is large and wide, mainly if it's in one of the small intestines, then they are not meant to be touched gently but with delicacy, and their healing will not occur completely from above.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Be aware that all children and scabs when they become old or weakened will develop ulcers (sores), which are not healed completely over time nor do they detach, but wherever there is one in any part of the body universally it calls for our attention; this refers to fistulas.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In moistened houses where one stands and feels wetness, such dampness is dissipated in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some movements of this fluidity occur, and they are few, thick, heavy, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes and their symptoms are part of the healing in division (of medical treatment).
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And only when you have applied treatment for the abscess, which is caused by surgical intervention and placed in its cavity, do so accordingly to heal it properly.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	E understand that fistulas are present in all the members of the body; some of these originate from veins and arteries, or nerves, spinal cord, bladder, any part of the back, lumbar vertebrae'thy joints where bone is joined together by composition. These give proximity to the main limb and its likenesses.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	So this is what the sentence translates to: And that which of these fistulas according to this illness are diseases difficult to cure and do not receive care; it engages work for itself, occupation due to lack of knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth to the wound that does not reach these places mentioned herein, and you wait for its healing while believing in it yourself, then attempt with iron or arsenic (as remedies), if the fistula closes afterward, seek out whoever treated him.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that subtle lead under its own cavity which lifts and curves with its twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an abscess with horrifying movement within it, it'thy not possible for you to attempt on the outside of such.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now apply the poultice over their organs with your ointments; through this moisture that you use for clysters, it will be absorbed by other applicators and carried away from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood over all these causes and see them as far-off or near joint connections, hernias, nerves, blood vessels (artery/vein), or other places where it belongs to you and which I tell you: then go for the treatment according to confidence.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry out the fistula as directed by its nature (the physician'dicts), and remove whatever is present in that filtration area which originates from decayed or corrupted bones, whether it be born within the flesh itself, a part of it, or resembles such things - heal whatsoever inside until cured.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May it be that the fistula is of deep origin and secondarily rectified, then take care to introduce that into the foremost part as far as your reach permits; purify all its corrupted parts with hot poultices wrapped in medicinal herbs, and insert those inside the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	When some cold humors enter for a few days into the cavity of the fistula caused by decay, it is then that sharp medicine dissolves all this excess fluid within.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Return that which is already there in ointment, for it produces healthy flesh within until such time as the body has healed itself.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this remedy, then you should apply a second one as recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of fistula is within and it'suposethat you must certify that which is wet according to what has been recommended, then inquire about it moistly as directed; provided no reason for vein or nerve or major member ailment accompanies.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Might your bones be discovered and there is some decay or impurity, then you must remove that which contains the corruption entirely; take care of what embodies within it so that it can become whole again.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healed and the brace was worn as before, you will understand that you have not reached the total eradication of corruption; hence immediately examine thoroughly both parts' reasons and purifications at nightfall carefully, to restore what has been lost until then.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed (and), drink water; but if not, then understand that the corruption exists in the deep cavity of the body, which has not yet been reached, and therefore you must seek a way to reach this within them.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bone is rotten or can be extracted with ease, then you may extract it using delicate forceps which I have chosen for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If bones are broken, then very carefully extract all of them without leaving any cause for your strength to fail.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May there be any cause of moisture that causes contrary effects; and in their ignorance they fear not nor err, then you should examine those ligaments or bones here present, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared with stones for your bones of the hour, then place some on the ground that nourishes it, and make sure they remain unconsolidated (i.dict non-fused) and constructed as part of what has been done in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having feared (if you fear), pause over the cauld pool below above or in Egyptian oil, or among those of waxen linings when they stretch their ligaments and bones are separated from each other; thus doctors remove them with these instruments.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is much bone in the knees or hips (or similar ones), and what from it has been ruined comes to affect only your face for so long, then let that person rest as little time until they are sheltered against such deterioration and damage, and restore health.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If it is that what comes from within has caused great damage and the decay has reached the bone marrow of the bone itself, then there is a necessity to close that part wherein this corruption arrived (has come), and for its healing ensure that it remains enclosed inside so as not to spread further.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	E you recommend that they enter into their thighs so as to support and assist in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A home young man whose state has been worsened for an unknown number of years experiences pain in his groin, and the inflamed material that enters into each part of the body is from within where it originates, which denotes great abscess formation without external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And now the focus extended to that area due to the error of doctors within which inflammation has occurred and foreign materials have entered, with its treatment proceeding slowly until a fistula is formed in it, where sparks appear from there used by all for heating purposes.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many years of treatment by doctors and not in these fluids but within the body' extrinsic that they were called for help or intervention.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E vi la camba de lu e les materiès que corrian a l'orificis granz, et el cos del homes estava totalment stabilitzat i la colúria era citerana.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And now introduce the thread into one of those organs and carry it through to the bone, where you insert the thread.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Here they apply and examine quickly those instruments, moving them over all parts of the belly.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and incised into one of those orifices where the bone has been broken, and damaged that organ, already darkened and decayed; it was also rotten in part within which had entered into the cavity.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Adorn you should collect what was discovered about bone and prepare it for further examination or treatment.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And only when it was not in the bone but that particular rot or decay which had descended and been fixed (set into place), did I already have made a separation/deterioration.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Return now the restoration of body flora through prolonged medical treatment and it is not solidified yet.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Return and trace over the bones of the lower part on top of which you first discovered it, and continue to abuse them with regard to the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And when I extract the fluid that appears from that corruption, and apply fine healing to him for his care and recovery, it is not restored yet.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And now you discover another wound and carefully incise the small part by part, performing the restoration of it, without exceeding one palm's width around its area; extract from therein the patient'thy marrow, restore with medicine what was extracted, thus consolidating bones healing.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	Here comes the first sentence for translation:
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	So heals the whole body, and nothing is in the hard bone; good fortune lies with his disposition within its own limb, returning of itself, and conversing without causing disruption during walking or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone protrudes in the area where you have manipulated it (according to this method), then take hold of that second limb and stretch it out at that extremity, holding with one while another assists; pull back the woolen thread first used from that part. Then place that on the flesh nearest your intention for cutting, extend beyond its exterior so you can tear apart those parts quickly wherein to make an incision—so as not to let any of the meat slip away during the operation at this location which you wish to cut into pieces.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When using a lance or table at your discretion, when it is not forbidden to use the sharp instrument that will remove the corrupted flesh from the body.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	When the screw is worn down little by little at this location and does not appear in its emergence within the bone' extrusion until another similar device has been used on it, here we go.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are not broken and do not show signs of injury, they constitute one continuous division; decay is in either location or between divisions, then: rest for a while, and hold that piece from the first division wherein the breakage continues to be repaified.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And when the instrument is placed in the location of the decay as previously mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the decay is in the joint, cut out that decayed joint, and saw away from it what remains of the other parts.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If decay is in the continuous flow of joints, it'thy not a reason but disease.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the mouth or chest, it's difficult; but if you seek out where that corruption appears to you and remove it as per your ability, after which correction can be made for each individual case without causing harm due to veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Here is the translation of each line:
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Even knowing that this operation concerns the specificity of the tool with which you are operating; when you have great study and length, as well as experience in handling these instruments for various diseases, then you already possess what is necessary at your disposal from where appropriate tools can be chosen to treat all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And when you have formed it (the body or some part of it) in the form of this chapter, count on your hand the simple instruments that will be used for your treatment process which you will try out here.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of other sharp object:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of other instrument:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of other sharp instrument:
Forma de ray:	The provided text is already in English except for some archaic language
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 The head of this beam (ray) is according to the shape of a star's crown (claw), and its points are similar in form to those on an astrolabe (star chart device). Here, we can infer that 'this ray,' likely referring metapdictorially or symbolically rather than physically, takes inspiration from celestial bodies such as stars. The use of terms like
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 They do not conform but rather have their heads smashed at the joints when corrupted (deformed or diseased), or it may refer to an open mouth that is broadly wide (possibly indicating a state of vulnerability). Here, 'confricado' likely means something like crushed by force while maintaining its shape and structure. The context suggests concern with the integrity of these structures
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form (shape or design) of this knife differs significantly from those others, implying uniqueness
Forma de razori menor:	Shape/form (likely referring to another tool's shape): The text is requesting
Forma de razori lat:	The form of the knife in Latin, which could imply an archaeological or historical
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The blade of this knife elsewhere fashioned is made from bronze and exhibits sharpness (from iron), while the arm or hands are equipped with swords as daggers/throwing weapons: Here, 'fayta' suggests making tools out of metal ('bronze'), highlighting their functionality. The text indicates a differentiation in tool use—suggestive that certain knives may have been specialized for specific purposes or materials like iron (for sharpness).
Forma de lu:	The form/shape of this body, possibly referring to either
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the knife in which there is a concave area (hollow or curved part): This line suggests that among different tools with
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of other subtle shaving tool:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of other instruments for curved body part:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small-looking knife for attempt:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of cutting instrument with which bones have been set/inserted:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of outer instrument other than lesser ones:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of another instrument; this resembles a ray and the tip of it is cut into pieces and displayed in bony prominency areas on the skull surface.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of cut that corresponds to the level at which bones are pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	E is the patient's limb has a sharply pointed or acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and somewhat similar tools that account for all the causes mentioned regarding rashes and cuts and incisions.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From joints or bone cracks/fractures:
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are softened or due to internal/external causes, or if treatment of that corruption with these medicines does not relieve discomfort and the corruption itself travels without being affected by any cause; when you insert this limb into water for its escape from death or malevolence (greater injury), which is harmful to it.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for that person whom you have injured, their limb is blackened because it has been struck by fire or if pressure applied inside wherein the darkening entered within this very body part which he/she holds and from here onward compresses his whole corporeal. Therefore, understand yourself to be aware of him (the patient).
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	When something resembles the effects of puncture caused by some poisonous sources such as sea serpent bite, or lead ingestion, or chickenpox and syphilis symptoms.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the decay or rupture is in the said limb'thy part, then you cut and do not leave spaces for deterioration to enter into it.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you manage to enter the cavity, then cut that which is in the focus of the fire within the chest' extraneously without leaving space for decay inside where smoke enters through the breastbone.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that individual enters (enters), then you will insert your arm into the waist at the joint'suponendo "envezes" refers to entering or approaching in a metaphorical sense here, possibly indicating when someone is presenting their symptoms for examination. The translation
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another passes through the decay and then sends forwards (sends) into your waist at that joint, it is considered as death of the humoral imbalance; and administering further causes again represent virtue or treatment efficacy in healing. Here "corrupcio" refers to a state like disease or corruption within one's body due to excessive humor (humors) – reminiscent of medieval understandings before modern science, where bodily fluids were thought to be the source of illness if out of
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly when decay enters into your leg (signifying illness or disruption), then you will insert that part of the body into one of its cavities inside a container such as an osteostatic bed, which is made out of wooden beams reminiscent to modern orthotic devices. The medieval physician uses this metaphorical language suggesting immobilization and contain
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you place it down the leg's slope (the path of least resistance or direction where pain may occur), then insert that entire part into your body for immobilization and healing restoration—implying a treatment approach
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If pus (pus) enters the belly or abdomen region ('denol'), then you will insert that part into your body at its joint with another—likely suggesting some form of draining, treating an abscess by relieving pressure and allowing for proper healing in accordance to medieval medical practices. Here
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the decay (infection or imbalance) has already reached into your belly, here it is not ingenuity but rather removal; and by extracting that malady you bring death to excess—indicating extraction as a form of treatment ('dimissio') in medieval medical context. Here "mort" signifies the end or resolution of disease when treated properly according to their beliefs, which align more with
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	When it is necessary for the member or limb you wish to fix in place, tighten one bandage on the part wherein desires fixing takes place and another over that location with your hand so: extend outwardly both bandages; stretch each other's hands further apart until all flesh between them has been revealed as far as possible within spatula-like space enclosed by two ligatures. Then secure it in position or cut it accordingly, according to necessity.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that the cloth covering him touches none of his parts, and draws out the adjusted injury and applied poultice properly.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	May you soothe the flow of bile when work is done, and if necessary apply cautery to that place where it has become constricted (biliary colic), or pause there with some powders restraining the bile; return your healing practice within which treatment can be completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that limp part of his body attached by sinews and care for it so that it heals properly.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And you recommend that which enters into one'thy home within your own foot, this matter by which you have caused it herein for negligence in thy feet due to accumulation brought about by fire-combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When that deterioration occurs initially within her body where you hold it all,
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that home prepares for itself to go into the body part where it feels pain and heat due to illness, inserts its tip at the joint, heals there.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago that medicine man was accused of damage in this area here indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now it comes to me, and so I am compelled to reflect back that excessive water which rests above the head of medicine; restore cleanliness to my body's realm; there is no effect on this surplus nor does it proceed further into another interior space.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When he stands up and returns to me, that same man has prepared his entire body for treatment and is now cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This sentence does not have been hardened for its own aid in dealing with what is causing this illness and as a signifier representing the essence of which it stands and through which action should be taken:
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of care for the nose and quality of enema administration with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When the suppuration (abscess) occurs within the patient's cartilage bones and the space of the abscess extends until it forms a collection of disease, break through and perforate it; treat the disease inside you thereby removing it completely without causing damage to the bone or nerves/tendons. Apply pressure gently with your hand over what was once moisture (body fluids), using thin cloth as an undercloth for that purpose, ensuring no further deterioration has reached and avoiding infiltrating into the bone or nerves/ligaments; apply internal lubricant without creating a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Even if spaces are extended within which the corruption enters any body part, it is then called a fistula and will not come out again.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure of the patient is that you insert their entire colon completely while turning them over, mostly when it'se taken away like a cloth and made comfortable so as not to stick due to decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	May you hope that the intestine will stick and that this disruption has not occurred due to any previous action, where there is tension in the intestine, then attend to it with a castile soap cleanser.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And extract that which is inside it; and let it out through so much time as the curve of the belly has become purified, and the modesty renewed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here are the translations for each line:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the humors of Egypt cannot tolerate the medicinal substances or ashes water thereof, then you will administer that to them with a mixture of water and honey, whereupon:
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you make a few washings and feel that the belly has become swolthy, then cleanse what makes it to cause discomfort in the body.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the fluid of the sinus where no catheter has been inserted for the enema is spread thin, then gradually increase that small amount, pausing in a wrapped Egyptian or basic oil container until it's expanded.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the suppository is large enough, then you should insert it into its quantity inside the rectum where it will be added to the bowel action.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the patient'thy device through which he walks is elevated above their parts below (likely referring to some form of prosthetic or crutch), it dries up that space in his lower body where he moves, so as soon as the limb comes into contact with the curve of the torso while being constrained by its sinew - this refers to when a patient uses such assistive device.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to suction the sine within the patient' extraneous space according to your wishes, then puncture that you prepare for its use in lifting up their limb so as not to retain anything there causing brachial contracture.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	When taking prolonged restorative medicines that are applied at the most suitable location for absorption, so as to extend them over the patient'thy cloth (clothing).
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	E the cloth is of such great quantity that it enables communication with all parts of the body; and after marking points on the frontal regions inside the cavity of the chest, place an ample amount of pus therein within a small container placed in said region to facilitate extraction during post-operation recovery.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When someone is on top of the belly (probably referring to being in an embrace), it causes them discomfort throughout instantly because that which has been adjusted, or fixed inside their body cavity there becomes hot and irritating.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	In order that you may understand whether what passes down from the liver is moist or dry, or not digested at all.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	When you thus examine the location of that bend, if in it the patient feels pain or has an abscess therein,
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical care is prolonged in this manner, and the material that adheres to the cavity of the sinus sticks on it, if you adopt such attachment, then for three days after applying lubricant or wax with which we clothe ourselves every day when removing dirt from our bodies; once removed, change your cloth (rag) and renew the grease.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that from the fold of his anus you provide space for subtle viruses to pass through; do not despair in him whom healing takes place within those spaces, where new life generates flesh during times when illness occurs and affects them herein.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the intestine has been idle for days and indigestion persists, you realize that the intestine does not stick; if delayed adherence of the intestine is prolonged, adjust it with medicines in purgative action, and if these remedies are moist both by substance and virtue, they should be used externally along with a dressing to seal wounds.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And where it is being treated by these wax drippings and their dissolution in oil, rubbing that upon him with this lotion, and applying whatso extricates itself from therein (and using it).
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, you will understand that the corruption lies in its prelude (the early stage), and now investigate bones or hard parts of the body; already it has been cured by fistula therapy as instructed above. 
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of healing for inflamed fingers/nails and cuts on digits added, along with incision or separation (cutting).
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	When the wound you have applied causes bleeding from either its heel or foot (and other parts), and as it extends with treatment care – an apothecary's application of a poultice on these areas, holding their hands – then:
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have obtained the required amount of water that we mentioned in division and do not interfзу with your care, then remove all excess moisture from the skin using salt (or any other available substance), after which apply cauterization to this water on the affected area; for such treatments are beneficial.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is and its ulcer heals, then additions to the wound will be absorbed into body parts divided by it, whereupon you shall begin pounding that area with a mallet and extracting therewith; as long as you pause undernezyminute motions of your needle at the point pierced through flesh thusly extracted, pressing said extraction downwards until no more can be drawn out—until all remaining corrosive medicines within have been expelled from body tissues entirely. Additionally ensure that enchantment has taken place therewith for healing purposes; and maintain this position as long as necessary to foster the recovery process.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May it be that if decay has entered the bone beforehand, then you must insert and extract it here, for none can heal a bone once its flesh is ruined.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the bowels and belly come down here, then you must incise that part where its memory is presumed to be located, taking care that it goes back inside so that it becomes healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May you percuss or prick the tongue' extrinsic parts and where that severe pain occurs, then once cut off the blood vessel (arterio) at the base of the spine crossing above in line with bones, ensuring it does not enter into the body part adjacent to which there is bleeding on the tongue; this will cause sharp abdominal pains due to superfluous flesh adjusted over that area—and pay attention where fluid comes out painfully.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May be adjusted herein among the strongest men; for they are robust in flesh, and equally firm in bones or skin (flesh), which grip their hands tightly.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	E from him is numbness in the area of the joint, or it'se his natural state to have such pains in its knees (nuts).
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not one born of dried nuts from this disease avoid it; and he who is born at the joints strong will suffer greatly.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Of those who are excessively fatty in nature, their section is light (likely referring to a body part being lighter due to the patient'thy condition), and it is that you must insert this into the spleen likened to stone (possibly suggesting treatment or intervention).
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	From that person born at the junction of reason and humors, treatment is difficult; therefore, be mindful of his abdomen.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May those born in this place consume nuts (covering) that you have inserted into the patient's body inside their bones and appropriate one of those instruments as needed for intervention, ensuring what is placed within remains healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May consolidation that occurs between their movements or due to birth defects in which they did not have, or because of plague care or combustion (fire), until such time comes when these consolidations return them to their normal shape within the regressing back into form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here's the translation for each line:
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	When confection of leeches is in the water and ready as needed for body shape, then dry that decoction accordingly when it's prepared.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From weakness of joints, they become swolthy (or possibly misspelled as "swarthy"). In this context, it likely refers that
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 From weakness of joints they become swollen (varicose), and their veins are thickened with melancholic humors that come into motion in the limbs, primarily occurring in the thighs, especially among travelers and laborers/workers as well as those who carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now administer purge of the bowel from cholera blackness for some measures to expel it forcefully, and bleed the patient'thy vein Basilia.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Must the cure involve their iron is for two reasons: one is that it should be clear and attract attention to that black vein, and the other method involves raising the vein and extracting it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return it back to her (referring likely to the patient), and order that she refrain from black humorous foods produced by them (likely referring to dishes or ingredients causing harm).
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Iterate the treatment for varicose veins when they become swolthy and are in the malady.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation according to this method: if you raise the cushion of the thighs and immerse it in water while they swell up (and when veins are prominent), or if exercised vigorously without bathing, then the limb will be injured.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Return the navel to the middle of the vein either along its entire length or at the back end (or base) of it; this should be done in the patient's belly area where you must draw blood, or on their foot sole if necessary for drawing blood there.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity and place your hand over it where you perceive sensation throughout, in order to prevent that part of the disease from deteriorating further due to blackness (darkening).
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	So when you withdraw from under the necklace its white string is drawn out.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	When your tool is raised and propped up from the spine, and held with one hand for an hour by a lion'seemingly strong arm:
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Return another portion of that section for three days, and apply scrubbing to the area below the segment where it enters the vein within which light appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Here the text translates into English line by line as follows:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	When you draw out that which has been placed inside or in any part of the sections, then all putrefaction will occur; and at this time insert it back.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey and extract or elevate (perhaps referring to the treatment of inflammation), then insert a sturdy double-pointed needle, tie it with strong thread, pierce through that area where pain is present, and rotate your hand throughout the entire affected part until relief.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the entire atmosphere has been purified by being immersed in water and oil (rosinated or not), then care for that which is healed inside.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is contracted and has twisted between the parts, which we have not mentioned before, now it'thy time to cut on that part where there is tortuosity of the vein as well in all areas covered by such contraction, place your hand inside what you will cut so that everything can be raised up.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you must keep your limb that has not been inserted into and does not trouble that vein, for it is difficult to raise such one thereof; serve diligence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient who is suffering from dehydration (or dryness):
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an urn:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Not accustomed to sitting as they are used to standing nor is it an acute extremity that would harm the vein; for there's great flexibility like a lion, even if subtle, which will insert itself into the vein due to its subtleness; we have excessive bulk in our bodies.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein in the leg (or thigh).
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hollows of lands that resemble Algiers and dry, barren regions found at the foot of Asia where neither grass nor herb thrives.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When it is suddenly generated in other parts of the body, such as between the thigh cushions (couches).
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The translation of the source sentence is as follows: "Its abdomen (belonging to him/her) consists of putrefaction that quickly travels down its intestine with venomous snakes and worms, and creatures born between the intestine and the flesh." 
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, wrap it over that one piece of lead wherein is set the weight of two drachms and do not smear this lead with wax from the cushion.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	When as many dietary excesses from him occur outside of his body parts, enclose them in lead and spice that thing over there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it prolongs, you cut a part of the limb and wrap bandages around; do not insert that which is outwardly pus-filled when cutting so as to contract it within the flesh where abscess (pus collection) will occur causing inflammation, ulcer, and decay.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that which is treated with increased moisture and extracted gradually, must be taken out from under the skin so as not to twitch or cause pain in any part of the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein, it has entered in the hands and feet of men who are at their full length, and I have already reached ten fingers' span.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is inserted during the time of his medical care, then insert the lance into the abdomen and pierce that long intestine within the body cavity until all the fluid present in the matter has been evacuated, administer putrefaction to this area for several days under medicinal treatment; take special care for appendicitis.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And this vein has sometimes flowed backward (reflux), and mostly when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the skin thereof, coming from some hot compresses applied here;
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so care for that ache which we have discussed in division and water, what has been said by it is dismissed.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the removal of worms generated under the skin is called cattle disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named nowhere on any land as bovine malady due to long motions in the belly and it has little of which lies between the navel and flesh, moving throughout the body, revealing its limbs within one another where the navel breaks open and things come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of it is due to the putrefaction of some humors along with worms and snakes, and lice in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: For fear of him, when he goes on his feet and rises up to the waist, his liver becomes full in him, and it enters into the entrails (intestines), whereby they are destroyed repeatedly, which drives them away regularly.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you intend to heal and extract it from there, do not make so without your walking stick appearing in its sensation, then hold tightly what is above and below the area as well as that which holds together with ligaments (flesh), thus drying over it and removing it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a blow to the body and you do not cover it with cautery near where it lives (the site of injury), then take hold of your heated iron above that place within which the wound resides, as its deterioration causes this location along with us.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May if that being has reached the top of the hueled (chest), it will be strong over its upper body tightly constricted, and on itself placed to prevent further movement; remove that; for the humoral imbalance in his chest uses medicine evacuation of putrid bad humors harmful substances from foods.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From suffering above healing can be derived or obtained (literally "Healing is achieved from the upper portion of illness"). Here's the
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named in our land and it causes pain that comes to our limbs; accordingly, the condition can be transferred from one limb to another (literally "In our country this illness has its name, which brings about ache felt within the limbs, hence such sickly state may spread between different limbs"). Here'dict is explaining how an unspecified disease causes pain in
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one which I recommend to you (literally "But now, look at the next thing I am suggesting"). Here's a continuation from where it
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called upon a woman ill with the village and found her arm swolthy (literally "You summoned an afflicted lady from the countryside"). Upon examining her arm, you discovered a small inflammation in one of its veins; afterward, for an hour or so, that same tiny inflammation seemed to wander alongside as though driven by vermin (literally "You noticed a slight swelling within a vessel's channel on the arm. After some time – about an hour - it appeared almost migrating along with something reminiscent of parasites"). Here is how you could further elaborate in English:
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And now it enters that pain into this location and settles in the muscle here; stay for one hour at this place.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Return correction into the other limb while entering it in therein (implied "the cavity" or space of that arm).
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And recommend that I turn around on my body as I see fit, and if it is necessary due to the exchange of humors within themselves and between limbs with varying speeds.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E tu già avevi visto d'acqua in le mie sue viscere secondo quella maniera, ma tu hai vista i morsi che causano dolore di cambio tra corpo e parte.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not there be water in the veins when with a woman?
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "E tu no cogiti esser acquo sino che es per acquo quar la femna era di velluto, in secca corpore et venas discoperte, e hic aquest apareciment l'aqua ventositat permutada.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have hardened veins connected to the body during this back treatment.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to heal the patient and they feel that pain, then it's not apparent at first glance as we have discussed before; now stand firmly over them and dry up any moisture within where there may be effluvia (outflow), and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not time the hot poultices well, then soon treat that which has been evacuated from the body and expelled winds, using those putrid pills and seeds of beneficial herbs and similars.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of pus (or abscess). The translation here is direct from Latin-like medieval medical
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Gases are diverse according to species, and in the parts of the body where they draw blood (where extraction occurs), for that diversity is found among those with large points, small ones, concaves, hollows, hard; also between those with three angles—and which have tongues—as well as tongue-less ones. Here we understand a description from an old medical text referring to the various types of gases or pus within bodily infections that present differently depending on their form and structure (large/small points, hollowness). This line indicates how physicians would have historically characterized different kinds of accumulations like abscesses based on observable physical attributes before modern medical imaging techniques.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	That which is in the limbs and joints where we draw blood (where extraction occurs) according to two hands: for these are like body members—and brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, kidney, womb; hence when this appears on your neck as signs of death, you must take care that there be no pulling out from where the deadly ones appear among them (in major conditions), and if they do not present themselves in these places—and then extracting it will cure rats. Here we have a medieval medical text describing procedures to deal with pus or infected material within joints, which could potentially cause death ('quando en alcu de aquestz membres e apparo'). The instruction indicates careful handling of such situations; if signs appear on the neck (the patient's body parts), there is an urgent need for attention. If 'deathly pus,' associated with severe infection, surfaces and it has not emerged at major sites within these body members, extraction can lead to recovery ('la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre'), metaphorically using the phrase "cura rats" which might refer to removing harmful entities from one'thy own health. The term 'rat,' in a historical medical context within this document, could mean an unwanted element or foreign invader—such as pus causing severe disease that needs immediate attention and potential removal (extraction).
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the senchels of the servant are in it (presumably some kind of container or body), and they pass through the bone, which is above the brain where it becomes intensely bitter due to its strong potion, causing blindness, dizziness, groaning from joints/bones, spasms and confusion of understanding along with vomiting resembling cholera's watery quality like body fluids. The humidity white within the worm (likely a metaphor for disease) is expelled here; it looks similar to that of fleshly bodies in motion/movement, causing discharge from them.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	So if there appears on your thighs, then refrain from treatment and removal of the swelling unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	May the joints of the body when inflamed be close as they are to the left breastbone, and their position is fixed in painful matters, not caused by chills; similarly, the movement of these swolthy parts resembles that of the limbs (arms/legs) or movements like those of crawling insects. Suddenly there's feverishness at the extremities and agitation along with fainting—hence you understand death approaches swiftly from here on out.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	E when the scab has suffocated the lung for cleansing with sacred vapors of swine, and those vessels that are attached to the chest have been pierced or inserted, the color of the spleen changes, great breath expires, and it demands a supply of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the swelling is in the skin where it' extrinsic to the body and pain occurs on the little backs (likely referring to a condition like hernia or possibly an abscess), then there will be severe, involuntary movement of this part along with suffocation breathing; not all members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is gas in the belly, it causes vomiting of some poorly digested foodstuffs.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the cause is in the stomach and it has been fixed within you, there may be a hole of dung or fabric that which has been torn apart, and there'se no hope for its removal by this action alone.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the bladder is swollen and urine has drained out, there may be some cause for concern in the parts where it was expelled from; when pain occurs on the abdomen, you know that death approaches.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May also have these members along with the face, chest, and groin; shoulders, arms, spine of both sides, neck, shoulder blade (scapula), waist, hips, cushioning for limbs' likeness, are saved according to major precautions when no veins or arteries are harmed by the lance.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend that I have seen of these teachings, so as to indicate through them the treatment necessary for recovery.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in the patient'se eyes there lies sagging (deflated) tear duct within their nose area, and it extracts this from other parts of the body using gold leaf from the auricle; thus healed without harm to the eye region.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extracted from another Jew (a person or an object), which was taken into the patient's bowels in their hip area, and after briefly touching with eyes closed at once, it became hidden again; this extracted item was actually a large acute sage of Turkish origin without any claws.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Senate is present, and not an unfortunate incident occurs therein.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extract another reed from the home of a Crestacian who was captured in Gaulish territory and it is an Arabic type; this one I hold; moreover, once inscribed upon its surface among these teeth (the signs or marks), already submerged therein within that container (the basket); thus having delicately handled it, and extracted it from therein, the Crestacian recovers.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extracted from the home which was sick in their belly; and considered that they died because of it; so I kept them at the hole for XXX days without any change in cause related to their dispositions, attended to the extracted matter and worked on it, hence not falling victim to illness again there.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And you may find in this room where I have caught the insect between his feet, and established it on him, placing the flame here for up to nine hours until the insect is trapped at the base of his thighs.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man comes whose face has been scraped off and solidified into mud, not experiencing pain here either, but seeming to be in good health.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted from the body of His Majesty'thy king who was caught in his own breath at my nose and had already descended into the seventh stage with a small one present, it remained completely hidden within its place.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And it is called for here the application of care through removal, within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And now you have grasped the small creature of the thighs tightly; and then inquired about that subtle thing hidden therein which one did not feel, perhaps by pressing with the tip of a needle on the area swiftly, to find out whether this pinprick felt at the extremity of the thigh.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And place the limb in which ascent and digestion occur into where it was implanted firmly so that when this location appears above me, it settles there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And not an accident occurs at the significant place that the hawk has reached it; and you continue to hold on over it for days, and consolidation is formed within those spaces during which a day passes as long as I am pressing your nose.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And thus you place the medicine' extraneous and corrosive for up to three days under pressure where it has burgeoned (bubbled), applying therein said remedy; then apply stopgrowth therapy on that extremity, which adheres closely to the staff.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Here the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and they restore it along with the fodder (likely referring to nutrition), which consolidates its state, healing the throat completely without weakness in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here comes the sentence to translate: The skilled craftsman compares few with water, and what is present compared to that which is absent; atrocious operation and new tools must be used for extracting external causes when sickness worsens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so it is said that salves are not inserted into the parts where they are fixed, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the location in which they intersect, or contrary to the other divided portion.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When someone enters through this place or descends into its flesh and is thrust out again,
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not obey the medicine at the time when it is to be taken, then take it during the days permitted within which meat should consume its environment and have your discharge managed and departure regulated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Here's the line by line translation:
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not heed my medicament for the next few days, then open an incision in the circuit of the sacrotuberous ligament on that part of the bone as much as possible to enhance entry into the said location, and remove it thereafter.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the stone is lodged in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the chambthy's cavities, appearing there as those accidents which it brings forth for mention, abstain from its extraction and leave that within whose walls it rests; but if the stone pervades to the bladder (which could be a mistranslation or confusion with "cyst"), then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the splint is not fixed on the bone of the limb only and does not pass into the cleft of the skull, and if the swelling persists for several days without being caused by these accidents, then your ingenuity in setting up the splint and placing it should be demonstrated.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If there is motility and you do not extract it (possibly referring to expelling gout or its symptoms), administer balm along the circuit of the saddle position with what we have prepared for use, taking care that such location remain healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the seed is inflamed within the groin area and also in sentiment; then you should seek out that which has touched there, if you feel it, thrust it away with an instrument of metal sharpened for this purpose—those tools suitable for retrieval.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot reach over the patient due to contraction of labor and lengthening of blood vessels, there are neither nerves nor veins here; therefore, proceed upon the abdomen where it is enlarged for extraction purposes.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you find the flesh around your auricle swolthy and hardened at all points of it, then tear away from where it is fixed upon its entire extent; using reason over such removal if unable to remove fatty tissue within a broken earlobe or inwardly entangled.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any given location, then use your hand'gy and forceps for all parts inside where it forms; subtlety by which the extracted pus is not broken apart and remains difficult to handle due to its nature or removal process.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot over that of your time, then lie down for several days until the parts in his circulation are restored, and repeat this whenever necessary as soon as he is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May if you cause an opposite flow of blood, then apply what we have discussed about healing in your own library.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Here is the line-by-line translation of this medieval medical treatise:
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	So that you make the saddle tightly enough to ensure that the hernia is kept in place according to its figure shape; this may benefit health (improve it).
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If it is not within your power, then administer what you can for their figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the scrapings that come out due to opposites in other parts or any part of flesh you have already cut through become granulated outside and sometimes protrude beyond it; thus I press on that, according to its quantity where forceps are used for removal, draw back that which is loose.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then twist according to contrary tension until the stone enters into the bone and increases its size within there.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave that for several days until they are ashamed (i.dict), and then repeat the same treatment within which time period?
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is from a spatula (referring likely to medical instruments), then you will carry that with it here.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May it be that the lance has been struck and you wish to administer an injection, then insert it there if it'dict (is mute/dull), thrusting gently so as not to enter into the concavity of its own in the groin area towards the sagittal ridge and push it back towards itself.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	May it be that if the sac is concave, then you will push in there with strength to cause this one through that (the concavity).
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the sausage is inflamed, then you must compress all of its flesh where it truly resides if possible, and apply care to that which agrees with such application.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or ribcage, and it provokes pain when you touch it, then press on that area where possible without injuring veins or nerves; remove it if necessary, and apply medicinal mud to treat that part until healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps by which hooks are drawn (towards each other):
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs, like saw blades when they take hold of the saddle to prevent them from falling off.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those come special kinds of pains: large ones and small ones, as well as migratory (meaning that they move from one part to another), depending on the greatness of the humors' excesses in the gouty body and its weakened portion or paucity; also considering their extent within the patient.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of pushing force applied to this limb with pain as if from arthritis pushes the interior (or intestine) out into sight; and a similar blow is struck.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pushing outward for a deaf limb:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	aychis when it is that his internal organ has been pushed into the concave section of the cavity, and he is thus propelled by this force within here.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The blood vessels of which it is customary to cauterize, as in the sixth section (head), these are arteries that supply hands, and herbs found on both pedestals; veins present in two tearducts from two sources called aspirants; prepared vessel at forehead location, and vessels located at nasal extremity; guides at neck region; vessels under lower lip; vessels under upper lip; these are the gill-like blood vessels; and arteries of which is said to be present in the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that were cut in the joints be bleeding; from those is one cephalic (head) and must be tied with wild herb silk - this they call "the vein of all limbs," and domestic wool-silk its name. The vena cava, which is named “chest vein” here, it's the same kind as that in the ligature (tied area), called a chastity; from these two branches emerges what they call "the belly vessel," and this one sprouts between those auricular joints you mentioned. The carotid artery is held above the flame, it's where bleeding occurs - that’se here referred to as “joint vein.” And the jugular vein lies in two branches;
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh are three veins; one of these is where the curvature of the deep femoral vein meets, located at an angle in the superficial inguinal vein; another is the saphenous vein, which intersects with this location also within its superfloped region; and there are other veins similar to those mentioned here.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of the veins that supply blood to the ears is ancient and migratable, causing ulcers and sores on old wounds.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "For that reason you should have your head under the large vein and cap of the humerus in the place where blood flows freely at night; support the arm with one bandage so that fingers appear there, these are what I recommend. And if you feel their pulse on this finger they will attempt.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the surgical knife in your hand, and that is what will be inserted, insert it into the vein within where the bladder expels urine from the body.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	When your hand is raised upwards towards the vein and cecum, trace along these vessels as far downward as possible:
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the intestine is equivalent to two fingers adjusted or contained, and heals as desired, so that:
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength at the balls (of joints) and place that which is healed inside, so that it does not spill out from there.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in his free time he observed those and treated them with cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	May the veins and arteries that supply blood to the temples weaken due to ancient neglect and excessive bathing, resulting in overflows of fluid at the joints (head).
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And as for the quality of performing those operations, it is according to what you recommend: constrict their thigh with your hand inside so that blood vessels appear in response and are shown by palpation—and at this point, you attempt (perform).
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Raise your hand above the vein at those places indicated by you, insert the cauterized needle slowly down there, and raise the vein in it; examine that ache as well with other hands inserted into alternate veins elsewhere, allowing blood flow according to what is necessary.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And it is already followed by their memory recalling them and that of the one with whom they are bound in communion.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	So the fluid drainage of the vein in the forehead is appropriate for the draining of the cerebral (brachial) vein, as well as migrathy and discharging exudates from sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the bloodletting that you are recommended to do is such that it tightens the spleen with one bandage appearing, allowing the instrument used for this type becomes evident.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the protruding point where it reaches above that vein, and hit upon or due to other causes in its turning movement as you desire; and close this opening of the hernia until healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the strength of the two veins that run through the tearducts of both eyes due to dryness in the eyes and rosaceous skin conditions affect their health overall.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of lithotomy is that gall bladder tightens its place in one bandage while you stand over it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	When necessary, allow the flow of blood from that area and rest it there for some time; then straighten those out in place again.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the phlebotomy of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent sweat, as well as facial and limbal maladies that worsen on the face, mostly when old age sets in.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this lithotomy is that it tightens the patient'se neck and places your hand on their nose with your left hand, while performing the stone removal delicately until its location reaches up to the head crown part of the nasal second ridge, where the vein does not appear here, and blood flow begins.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you finish your hand at the small bloodletting tool and make it run along the second vein according to what is needed, that which has been restored loosens up.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of laceration from the surgery on the limbs guide contraction and treatment for leprosy, as well as addressing other diseases and harmful ulcers with a similar urgency to when one has hematemesis (vomiting blood).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of that patient'thy lumbago is such that the hump stiffens any part upon its backbone; and it stands over a portion thereof with his/her spine on top.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return and bleed from the long vein gradually, as required by necessity at times of urgency for another vein; mimic what others do with their own blood flowing backward in small amounts over time or according to need.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Return the ligaments and strengthen the veins to prevent the swelling from spreading further outwards, ensuring they stay within the body while the child is healed inside it (within its mother).
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And with the bleeding of veins during phlebotomy, soften small blisters and sores in the mouth and corruption of gums and bad wounds that are inside it (the body).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt as to which of those it is, then you understand the greater one and its visible discharge; that being so, consider what needs immediate attention first.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears as though veins are in the lips below (the subject' extruding or presenting an issue related to blood flow within their mouth area), then:
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May custom dictate that we insert our needles into the veins located in the patient'thy thighs.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May be the veins that are near the tongue'thy movement should guide (or indicate) where to perform craniotomy at the occipital region for tonsillitis and mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And as for the quality of intubating those areas between your thighs with his hand in sunlight and lifting up the tongue while watching it from one vein to another, noting that each's hue is descending into blackness:
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And now apply pressure where necessary; be careful not to press too hard on those areas by your fingers, for soon afterward these will become the patient's blood vessels.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In the veins in your thighs where blood usually flows for all men, and their puncturing is performed according to two methods; either insert a cherry or an olive with subtle declination, or use a needle and call upon elixir (or some other substance), this is how it should be done.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And here it is, how they must join and collect these diverse species according to the extent of veins and their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mulberry extract treatment:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs an incision for drainage of pus (fluid from infection):
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This scalpel is of lesser length and delicate touch, and it's suitable for vascthy vein surgery that contains subtle chylous contents.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of phlebotomy on the basilic vein (which is one of three veins), extract diseases that come out from between the legs and waist area; this procedure removes illnesses coming upward through these pathways, namely: when they ascend to the chest and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When the lancet holder arrives, when lancing that part is done and kept in caution thereof to prevent fear from spreading at that time, for then an artery will appear; if it makes a mistake during insertion into the puncture of the lancet, they must incise that artery so blood flows out, thus ensuring no accidental lancing by their hands.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear for overt manifestation, then you should keep what lay there and change to another (perhaps a different instrument), or if any knots are found in your arm where it ends, that is where the issue appears; treat that area with cauterization as we discussed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you wish to perform the surgery on your patient'se leg, then move down from where you touch in this location until reaching the area of their wrists; place a bandage over that hand vein which is curved like an arch for bloodletting; and secure both arms with cloth soaked in lint. Be mindful to monitor any percussion through these spaces around the artery's locale within your patient’se limb.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you flex the ligament, it becomes tight at the spot where you stretched it out, and thus inflames that part of the artery; therefore, this is how it swells up there.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see the blood flow in the flebectomy as with a child'thy essence of arteria (the patient), then be aware that it is from the patient’s artery; and your touch upon their body shall cover those spaces long, so press down on your fingers thereupon. If the blood has detached itself, gently move your arm to assist in its reattachment.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard the humors of your body (mucus), and keep it above you without causing excessive sweating for as many days as are necessary for healing.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May the wound not be torn apart; if you don'thy have medicine at hand, then examine and open up the artery when necessary – for once contracted, it may cease bleeding on its own with therapeutic fistula (a small incision) applied to stop the flow. Observe this area closely as part of immediate treatment; take care not to tighten excessively above where blood vessels are constricted and ligaments meet bones within, which may indicate a deep vein or arterial blockage that requires attention today.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction has separated (likely referring to an obstruction or separation), beware; otherwise, care for that which caused it before recalling where the dust particles of the separating matter came from.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The translation of each line from Latin-influenced medieval text into English would be as follows:
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Major vein bleeding is conveniently treated by cauterization of the upper and lower parts of the thigh below and above the knee; thus it consists mainly of branches from basilic and facial rami, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Even if a fear occurs during the patient's bloodletting (fleubotomy), and every time this happens it is due to nerves; then when adjusted in the puncture of fleebotomization, pressing on these nervous points causes dizziness for the patient, making recovery difficult. Such a sensation relates directly to feelings/emotion; if concealed from certain individuals and subtly not displayed (handled), pause bloodletting at that spot where you previously drew out body humors through an arm'seeker limb ('alnessil'), thereby avoiding the nervous pressure point.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then make it in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The lymph drainage of the carotid vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and relieves humors imbalances in them.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this specific area, if you wish to lance the needle for puncturing, choose either a lancet made of ivy or one made of myrtle; here it is safe from all veins and does not touch the artery or nerves directly.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Mayhap you will need to perform the procedure that keeps the cauter away from piercing through the patient'thy head so little, and secure it in place with bolts; do not touch or feel anything until after the initial percussion over this area has been done first.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Even if you strike firmly on the body'dictum (as), and there is no bleeding during the initial touch, it may be that such an impact has caused a hidden swelling or inflammation beneath the skin surface—an underlying apoplectic condition not immediately apparent.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May be the quality of that incision and these accidents in which you consider for correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le first of the which you know that bleeding is not administers but for preservation of health and hope thereof; it should be done through one of the veins present in the groin area—the cephalica, femoral (fusca), or basilic (basilica); performed at breakfast on Sunday morning and lunchtime, respectively. At dinner time during winter when signs indicate repletion comes into view; that too should be addressed with bleeding intervention.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When arthroscopic surgery and/thyroid removal take place within the first three hours of the day, or as soon afterward as possible following a patient'sin bed rest period during the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When bleeding is administered, it may be necessary and convenient at any time of day or night, always and forever.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to perform clysters for any ailment of their bowels, provided that there are holes retained during the procedure with a clyster lemon (cleansing enema), so that veins do not protrude in the process of cleansing the bowel'dicts, which are putrid and would harm primary members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider carefully in the subtlety of humors coming down from above if your patient is large for their sex, due to food and drinks, or through medicine it can flow upwards into them.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Return within the bath if any cause does not prevent it or due to exercise for that reason such sanitized may become subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the cauterization of him in his chest is done for an hour, it is time to go into thirds as we have discussed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And so that your chest is guarded on that day of all ill-fated animals coming in distress (anxiety, anger, fear), and bodily accidents occurring excessively with pain above normal necessity, as well as hernias and semblances thereof.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: At his seat is present there are causes by which men commonly use fragrances and scents, as well as balms and similars according to their abundance of possibilities.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the lancet along a cushion that has been placed or upon which it is supposed to be lancing, referring to where and how the medical practitioner should perform bloodletting on the patient'dictated by their condition. Here are my translations:
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Extract his arm, and rub that with his fingers three times; strengthen his ligaments in the joint and rub them for three turns as well.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	When the constriction is fresh or when it exceeds what should be constrained by reason of its excessive nature, forbid fluid movement from the san; otherwise, allow for softening and restrict movements in parts of the body affected by the san.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return (E aprop) the stricture, which that individual who underwent cauterization has between their masses within where their veins are inflated and have been declared by feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here is the translation line by line:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for this reason that the surgeon must be locked and engaged in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, se lo loc non est apostemat.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is punctured or the groin protrudes, leave it for a day or two without tightening the bandage, nor forcefully retract it externally; otherwise, apply external traction to remove the apendicitis quickly and avoid bathing.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Return (or bring back) the fracture if necessary with cauterization.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and subtle, and you fear that it will expand into a larger quantity, repeat lithotripsy on that second section of the rectum and adjust in the area where puncture was made; as long as this location remains punctured by only a few needles.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	May you see that already an apostle has been placed upon it, and do not wander over it anymore; nor does this excuse any cause of yours. Press down on some portion of the crack in oil to relieve the body'dictor (sickness).
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place than where others are present.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a great abscess is formed at the site of cauterization and continues to ooze for days, mostly where it does not bleed but rather drains (likely an accumulation near a vein), then apply pressure with a moist sponge soaked in water and salt onto that thinly cut surface. Press this overnight, which will dissolve the abscess after about six hours of continuous application.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up that which flows from that vein of said person or another, as complement/addition to it.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is any blackness or greeness in the place for a few days, do not worry; and if you wish to pause it over some cause of inflammation or dissolution due to myrrh or resin, or similar substances from this malady.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically extracts appendices and elevated flesh of the lower body, performed through dissection from below (the 'basilica', referring to a surgical incision).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	So you place your hand over that (the affected area), and if you must apply pressure with a compress, do so on that area; for there the elevation is wicked and evil – as soon as any cause comes up from what we have discussed herein, it flows swiftly through the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an emetic is applied in the water for puncturing purposes, it hardens and allows for proper care of that other cure within which they are healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	When you extract from the sanction according to the quantity of its virtue and as it appears, then immediately return what has been removed back into the sanction accordingly.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black, then you will insert it and appear that it has been inserted within when viewed externally; if thickened, also seem to have inserted something thin inside – likewise for gout (condition). Externally appearingly as though there'd been an intervention.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When he is weak and needs extraction of pus in a feverish period, it should be increased lancet puncture both at venous sites and localized areas, holding their hands firmly.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In that who is feverish, their opposite signs appear, and they extract him in guarded measures to prevent further disruption of his balance.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method for venesection is not piercing but cutting through a cross section of the vein.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This incision made by cauterization is saved from the flow of blood and nerve inflammation; it was placed well and serves as a safe place for surgery according to tradition and duration.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: At which it is customary for fainting (syncope) to occur following an operation, and you must treat that immediately afterward with a small cup of honey infusion or simple syrup drained from white wine; extract liquid therefrom in three or four doses.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is inflammation of the complexion, then it should be drained through cauterization in an oil infusion with myrrh or spiced wine prepared with pepper, cloves, ginger, and possibly other aromatic oils that are fragrant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you experience syncopes and it'thy phlegm is caused by motion sickness, because they breathe in water vapor mixed with an odorous substance that subtly enters through the nose; then use aromaticity to alleviate their pain at all times. Here we can see doctors advocating for using certain scents or essences as remedies when dealing with syncopes (an old term possibly referring to dizziness).
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When using other causes that have been mentioned in Section II of constipation for expulsion,
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Whoever wishes to loosen their arm and dissolve their sinus according to the healing course of which cauterization is performed for expulsion, its excretion occurs gradually, as per the quantity of secretions in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May those who wish to heal their arm, and gently stroke their chest where the first incision was made, hold firmly for seven or nine hours after the initial surgery.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May who wishes to draw their limb contrary to the direction of departure may happen on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that part of the body where bleeding has occurred and is cut and inflamed happen to cause fever; because it originates from within there in a wound, with large quantities being discharged at once, increasing internal pain until syncopes occur—thus you will have preserved all conditions for bloodletting therapy. Keep your hand on the patient's pulse of that wounded part to prevent death by syncope; because when ignored or neglected as a bleeder-eraser, accidents may happen at any time during such periods.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you intend to remove the arm and excrete the bladder after a necessary delay, when its valve is already sealed with blood clot and difficult urine that threatens to spill out under such pressure, it's too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the patient's bloodletting done thoroughly; or let the thickened sanction be coagulated in the vessel of the vein; pause on that which is tender to tarry and swell, applying compression there until the sanguine matter has been fully expelled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is swollen, do not touch it there until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to exacdict the sanctum naturally, and this not be an exemption, then evacuate that part over there or in another vein as well.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the referred "arm vein" is cut or opened in place of the dark (or base) one when it's not dissected or pierced, which consists of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bleeding during his operation is that the wound becomes red and swolgy as if it were being roasted over a flame, which makes veins visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	When it is necessary for the string (thread or suture) to be placed on that limb affected by stricture (narrowing), and positioned transversely without being longitudinally aligned nor following a lengthwise direction,
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Whereas it is both your broad incision and your cauterization that you perform on the small joint of her body.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeatedly draw out the blood in the tail (anus) so that the blood can circulate within until you fulfill your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would be excused from bathing in the tail of water, and your legs are rested therein during times of youth.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And here is the translation line by line for the source sentence:
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And surgery of the sacral disc is granted for the illnesses of the womb.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the femoral artery until such time that you come across the nerves of the disembodied limbs.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply it repeatedly in the tail vein and let the blood flow smoothly there; if you do not apply it there in the tail vein, then the blood will clot at the place of lodgment within the vessel, and its passage is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When extracting the vein according to necessity, pause over the vein and salt as not to solidify it entirely; similarly performing actions throughout the entire limb.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the strength of that surgery on her right side be for those illnesses of the womb.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	When it seems in foot puncture as you did with them elsewhere,
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The vigour of the vein that emerged from phlebotomy is related to diseases present in the lower parts of the body, as well as with menstrual disorders and retained menses, and their appearance resembles those illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the bleeding (fleubotomy) is that it introduces moisture into his foot and forms a clot on top where blood vessels appear; and above the joint between the foot and leg, you must pinch down with your fingers, which will reveal veins.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply a poultice of warmth and place it on the area where you previously applied pressure or cushioning to provide better relief (implying that after applying an initial treatment such as pressing with hands/cushions for pain in specific areas, using a warmed compress can help alleviate discomfort further).
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If a boil appears on the face of the body, then guard your nerves that are near it above the face of the body and pause your incision there for as long as you wish to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	If it is for your pus discharge (which could be interpreted as referring to an infection or abscess).
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	May you prevent the intestine from expulsion (which means to take measures against a condition involving internal protrusion, like an incarcerated hernia); thus ensure that your patient' extrudes their foot into the anal canal and allows for drainage while they are evacuating.  
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the lancet-maker makes a mistake during the first visit, repeat with another lancet on their body part where it ended up and do not fear ill omens; just be careful of your nerves as we have mentioned before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	In accordance with the other shoulder of that person's body part (the implication being a specific area or limb).
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	From the sciatic vein, it is said here that we must elevate the foot heel just as much as above its basin (the lower leg).
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The strength of Lu's bleeding from his thigh is due to the sanctioned cutting.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you apply that poultice to each limb as far and wide as possible or section by section until the area is covered better; if applied internally through insertion (inscizia) or externally in sections (sezione), then the location of your hand becomes.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "She is in pain; and if you worsen that, she will feel discomfort anywhere on her body, including between her thighs, near the fingers of both hands (the ears and rings)," which translates line by line into English as follows:
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let them run through the vein as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return and apply pressure on the site of incision and tightness where it is performed firmly so that healing takes place.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From windswept and concerning those quality of dressing them with those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	When joint pain is caused by corn (cold), or worms, or lead poisoning, it refers to these sources of discomfort in the body.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When wind disease is said according to these four humors: one of them is a wound and its removal from sanction, and the other is also wind sickness as it has been cut out or removed by cutting.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This abrasion that you have injured is either due to cold or burning touches (sic), whether it's from the hands or fingers.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Even when the humors enter through small pores in the flesh, they do not exit from those veins; similarly, there is no need for a suction if effusion occurs within any disease of excess wherein all parts are expelled out - as it would be done during phlebotomy.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May it be necessary to provoke a breeze due to illness or continual discomfort; administer that immediately at the meal time of today and during its nighttime rest, as well as whenever there is in bed (the healing period).
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When the cause is among men in which they consume liquids for expulsion and indulge excessively at their grave, head, chest, and abdomen; whereby phlebitis occurs on the face and forehead as well as darkness and heaviness within one's lungs; when liquid excretion from that area happens; whereupon belching increases among them; in which case there is a taste of expulsion for those who consume it, or their tongue protrudes while spitting out the liquids; and others experience increased sleep, as well as sighs at rest—and all these are signs they bear:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	So when it occurs in any cause of them and especially on the third or fourth day after passing illnesses during the day for three hours, they command that such pain be called by a breeze-like sensation (windgia).
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And when the wind lifts from the back of one'thy head, as it grants weight to your head and sinks into the humors within the vessels; perhaps this will expel all impurities from thy body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This discomgy is in the location of trepanation of the skull.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not permitted that one should apply it (likely referring to a treatment or remedy) if they are of complete impairment or suffering from rheumatism; for such actions would bring great harm upon them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Through which mouth do I use that same thing, and in the crowns where ill humors freely flow.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May forgetfulness continue over it and because of what you command the bellows to release a small amount of air at intervals, they fear generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May breeching of the wind in this location is for phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilica: hence it confers asthma, chest constriction, cough, and pleurisy (inflammation of the lining of the lungs or chest cavity).
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When poison enters through a small opening and is allowed even for just a moment to rest, it causes weakness in the body and the belly (stomach).
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The wind of alchemy alleviates the pains in the head and neck, and escapes, and prevents pain from reaching the teeth'thy chambers; it is located at the site of tooth extraction (dentistry).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the bellows not to press on your hand so that it does not cut and cause bleeding of the artery, thus preventing blood flow disruption.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Evening discomfort in the chin is alleviated through mouth placement, and tooth decay or gum disease symptoms are present among their illnesses related to the mouth area; they seek dental implantation here at these locations within the lips' inner walls.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the warmth that is felt on the hips be granted to you, which has been obtained through suppuration of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanded by the pneumatic tool, do not proceed with cutting as long as flesh is removed from the site, and immediately afterwards remove nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is through this wind that flows over the abdomen and conferred upon the hernias of the belly and putrid ulcers recently,
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May the gentle breezes from the cushions for ministration manifest slowly throughout the body and ease old pains of rheumatism and menstruation in both sexes; they provoke menses, and alleviate lumbago and anemia. They occur at sites designated by women'thy gynecologists or obstetricians, where dilatations (female genital examinations) are performed using forceps (obstetrical instruments), tenaculators (instruments to hold tissues in place during surgery).
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In spite of everything, they will weaken all parts of the body and cause fainting spells therein.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	E from the coughs he gently extracts their vitality into that of the coughs in his cupped hands:
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this process; continue until you see the place become reddened and swolthy, whereupon signs of illness will appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you scrape and suck repeatedly between two pieces at a time, pay attention in the disposition of the limbs.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that man has tender meat of rare porcine origin and you have not scraped him gently without causing a lesion, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When ordered by the bellows, increase the incision and make a small puncture, ensuring continuous suction for ease of procedure.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the vein is thickened in the sanctum (the bladder or gallbladthy), then rub it gently, and after the first massage, open up the pathway of subtlety to the sacrum/liver and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May now take place in the second phase of obtaining knowledge about the removal of the large stone (likely referring to kidney stones).
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is due to dirtiness, then make a scratch on the smooth skin so that it continues (probably referring to healing or purification).
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And at last, when we intend to extract the small amount of blood from an area or two (or three), it suffices for us one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a sick humor, cut it out with the knife for extraction; and if this body humors are thick (sick), then cut them out before cutting for removal.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of cauterization in which only the depth of the nail is involved.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the thigh's tendon is thick, hard, blackened, and its pores are streaming with pus, so that the ventouses become softened and more easily penetrative; if it is summer time, then apply oil from aloe or linden flowers, honeydew juice, clove wine, cinnamon decoction, or sanctified water to these resemblances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick and cold, then apply honey (probably referring to medicinal or cosmetic properties of honey), or oil made from chamomile, or oil made from aloe, which have their appearance/properties as such:
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be that the bellows is made of thick leather straps for tendons, and must not use oil, nor these locations where wind chambers are placed with warm water (from hot springs or heated saunas), or cold water from wells, rivers, or streams similar to them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And it is from that which the moisture comes forth and washes their nostrgy or nose with water of myrtle and sumac and similitude to them; these are what they use for cleansing themselves when there's excessive humidity.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that which has excessive swelling, wash their breaths with vinegar from old wine or water made of juniper berries (juniper) or thistle flowers and cloves; these things resemble them in appearance.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	When the wound is kept away from bathing; there are times when it should be administered with parts of the bath for one hour or two hours, and also periods wherein rest should accompany care for the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is required for a bleeding vessel (phlebotomy) before wind dispersal?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the meal: when the wind blows on and over you today sick with cholera and inflammation, caused by cold dampness, accompanied by indigestion and bloating, and flatulence, sweetened vinegar, honeydew juice, these are suitable.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When they take their food with bread and boiled meats prepared from animals, and eat as usual, it seems to them pleasant (or enjoyable).
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that of which the complexity is quicksilver (mercury), or a pomade made from almonds and seeds, mixed with mint odorant entering between Hallow and Holiday; it's recommended for use in little quantities of honey and food, pause consumption of legumes like peas and cabbage along with cannabis and piss-fish (possibly a formulation involving urine or waste), as well as small birds and dove flesh.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in the day of fever and bleeding it is necessary for them to drink more than food,
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the wind-like cuts made on you be pauses for your feet, and over pleurisy and gout, and about the umbilicus, in the joints of the legs, where this wicked pain is not inflicted upon these members.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E no it hurts from these but due to a blockage in the blood of their limbs, when they are weakened with feverish movement within their veins; and use that for dispersing wind agitation on their belly and breast area, which rarely reduces the body part and splits open its pain.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is stopped over the churned or bloody discharge there, because of the forceful connection and withdrawal from their humors' overflow (blood). Here, "es" refers to a process being acted upon ("it"), likely referring back to an unmentioned treatment for such symptoms.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When a resemblance appears while you are resting on the pelvis and chest, where air circulates in those cavities.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These breezes are administered with suction alone, and some remedies are also given by fire (likely referring to heat or hot applications).
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When water is administered fullness in the diseases of the mouth,
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is for that reason the wind becomes full and thickened; now only water alone or in which thistle plants are suitable can provide relief.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	When administering poultice at the focus: it is two lids of a drop and as formed to us; quantity of powder equals one palm's measure, located in here (the body), within this place that forms its circuit, measures equal amount taken by fingerful from inside.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Its pain is due to heavy bones like stones or lions' edges that do not allow the body part to maintain its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever moonlight passes through bone or iron, a burning flame is held at the focus of light.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great wind that we have recommended for those conditions, and its weakness comes second in line among these diseases and their state of use by them.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When liver and large intestine swellings are more than those of youths and thick legs,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Return its position on the patient'thy thighs and explain what we have mentioned about this issue here; when they breathe hard without digestion stopping that which produces steam over it, then at times such wind becomes moistened.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And with fire according to its nature, repeat that if there are digestive issues from it, do so again.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May an air catheter be administered in the fever of painlessness, where there is neither cross-flow nor disruption, and it is only filled with water, resting upon the limb as much as possible.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it should be done: And this is the form of treatment: The more significant the windiness, the better it will hold a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Given that "Capitol" is likely an abbreviation or title rather than a
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administers on the limbs where it's impossible to place droppers due to their small size, as they are near teeth and gums; or in a naked member body part like this tongue, when there (the patient), one should do so with hands holding them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And regarding those which you have found bloodsuckers in the ears of people who are immersed in public baths,
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Ensure their baths and nightly immersion in water are such that they become cleansed, without causing any disruption within the patient's belly; ensure waste elimination from the affected limb through phlebotomy or enemas; cleanse the member of the hernia until it turns reddened, and make sure their rest periods remain.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When filled and case occurs.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to suck out the location with air, then they may return in health gradually.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, wash the place with running water and apply warmth therapy (or treatments); they will become cleaned and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leg of the sick is extended and blood flows out (hemorrhage), then immediately place a linen soaked in cold water on it, pause until the effusion stops coming out.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the sanction is multiplied, then sulfur has been powdered over it three times, or galls and similars from their causes specifically for stopping the condition; whereupon the sanction becomes suppressed; or they are paused at the location with cooked fava beans pressed in place until they adhere therein, and thus the sanction is subdued.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	Where necessary, repeated infusions of bloodletting, when possible, can change those things.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the bleeding vessels are prohibited from suspension, they will be constricted at this sanctification or an arrow (a form of cautery) can remain inserted in these places until I feel any new signs; and those that have become arrested should already be stopped.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice on those areas, scatter a little of ash or salt thereon, and then apply it immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Ayssi begins what concerns restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is a necessary guide in the practice of medicine; it concerns restoration and treatment for broken bones and displacement accidents involving bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, know that the doctors and quacks boast about this chapter here, and those who at times disregard the freedoms of Ancients or cannot read these letters themselves.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason the disease of these learned men in our land is excluded; and I have not ignored it at any time since its discovery; nor has anyone applied to me after my learning about them except for a long period following reading of ancient books and studies on their understanding, until extracting knowledge from those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Return adjustment for experiments and studies throughout one' extramundane life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	E verily you have described in this chapter all the water that has been accounted for by our current science and on which we have passed; I made sure to open up such waters from yourselves and release them of occupation, allowing flow during ablutions; likewise opened up these waters at the time of revelation; and formed aquatic motions resembling the shapes of structures that are being administered herein, as was done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Capital First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections from the bone breaks needed before we begin to recall the members of the broken bones and various other ones.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Here you are to drink in the preface of this chapter, and understandings that occur herein during comprehension—it is we (the speaker/writer) along with those who can discern or learn these noble arts from us; so be quick-witted as well when encountering such esteemed knowledge.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so it is said that when you experience a bone fracture or dislocation and twisting (or casting), then coil yourself as much as possible for reduction through splinting or external fixation of such injury unless any cause prevents, assist with debility relief, or if the pain occurs suddenly due to inflammation or intense heat.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here comes the first source sentence: E propria sua contemplação in foods fresh herbs and meats from birds and pigs; they prohibit large grains and fill with such foods, ensuring safe administration of poultice medication unless you fear effusion into a limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	When the hernia is returned to its proper place in accordance with what it customarily does,
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You understand that bones break when they are present in the lower body and among the weakened ones; it is not possible for them to remain continuous and become solid according to their nature through purgation of the members' bodies.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	Evenly and steadily they are solidified according to their nature for as long as needed for the purification of those limbs; similarly enduring in time like bones formed from fetuses.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Even nature adjusts and binds over the broken bones of any part caused by excess similar to gout, wherein there is thickening within which one becomes ensnared when they gather together into a mass, with venom from strength or firmness inside that allows no interruption for these reasons.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason it is necessary that we pause the foods of humours heavy in gravity and consistency, as we have said before.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	According to different types of bone breakage according to different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	E understand that the instruments of breaking are various according to the variety of members, and a bone break in the thigh is different from a bone break in the head; and a fracture in the chest differs from one on the two (arms); and similarly all other parts have their differences among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And when it is time for recollection of all types of fracture, separate them in the designated section of this book.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion various types of fracture in itself (patient).
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The whole specialty is in torment specific for each location that comes back into memory after the recovery period.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motor sign of bone breakage.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For that reason there is a perceived break in the bone: its curvature and position relative to one'se sensation lead you here with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is no obvious curvature or break in the bone and touching it does not cause severe pain that moves through the thigh and groin area without causing injury, then this condition here is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Have it possible that there is twisting or small fissure, not covered by your hand and compression of all; you have pause over him regarding the medicines to which he remembers from that moment when necessary; also apply gentle pressure for subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Here you understand that when the area where it bends and does not divide into two or another which do not come together in time, at your hour of arrival to correct what has happened due to apendicitis inflammation (appendicitis), then take immediate action because everything needs urgent care.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an abscess comes out with caution, allow it to resolve itself within a few days according to each manifestation that you can lift and manipulate; also apply warmth therapy as necessary for healing.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	When you understand that I have put a remedy for him and an ointment on the place where he has fallen ill, from which bone it concerns (the hip or shoulder).
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Return strength to that second one who arrives for memory'dict (or recall).
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is fractured in either leg or arm, it's necessary to extend this broken part of the body if possible with your hand (if you have a small limb), or use one string/cord and hold onto it using your hands; alternatively, two strings can be used along with holding on.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If your position is where it rests naturally, as the parts of the limb are extended, then you will perform those additional actions necessary in their respective locations according to each movement they make.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When you touch it at that moment in your mind and if herein thou spiest any other cause different from the one intended to be cured with such force of thy will, correct this found fault and apply necessary treatment according to the extent of its correction needed by thee.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive extension and compression, as the doctors have long warned that it may cause an abscess through their operation or lead to contracture in the limb they operated on (i.dict).
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here comes the full translation:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of a relaxed limb is what I recommend, so that you understand how members are diverse in their smallness and greatness, as well as in their shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	From those who are small in stature like the arms and chest he directs them as if to these things, for their wrapping should be made of a fine silk undercloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who have thick thighs or cushions with them be covered in a tough and durable wrap that links the large and strong parts of their entire lower body together until they cannot move within it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the procedure, take your bowel evacuation when convenient for the patient and pause it over the location of that fracture which is three to four layers deep into the limb; tightly hold onto a small part of the suture thread.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand (or tool) to the part where you placed it for stabilizing the broken place, and hold tightly so that there is no loosening of what was applied at the site of the breakage.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Return your hand over this other bandage, and place the tongue on these wrappings carefully to avoid infection if there is no suppuration or abscess present at that location, apply it for several days; and keep yourself tense while maintaining pressure with the tongue on those dressings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Here come the splints of bamboo cane, and they are formed carefully; or made of wood; or from palm branches. The form and size of each splint according to this shape and dimension:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, if the splint placed on that fracture is large and a small one has been added to other such devices (splints), according to its length when applied to the limb in both size and dimension; and strenuous force should be exerted over those splints as per your first bandage technique, which corresponds with the location of the fracture mark, and every time that it is elongated from the point of the fracture, so too does the swelling.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And if it is not suitable to use subtle methods for those who wish them and have an interstice between stones of a day without departure, do not attempt strictures on these waters but wait until they arrive naturally.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the malady is led by the extremities of the bones to tightness in your locations, delay briefly those that press on stone or woolen garments so as not to cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some accidents result in a broken bone and damage to the spine, leading them to remember that specific incident at this place of assembly once more.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	E understand that when all body parts are broken on the first day; this causes the limb to become large and it is not sufficient for you to rest upon those bones until days seven or more, according to your knowledge of the incubation period of impetigo before applying cauterization.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how medieval doctors (employing their tools) treat conditions such as fractures and dislocations with twisting, causing them to pause or halt the movement related to these injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Medieval medical treatise translation into English line by line:
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And when that comfort arrives with you as well, otherwise the patient'thy blood turns cold and thickens neither thin nor subtle – use this then.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Autumn's seasoning mix for the placement of impaction or fracture and dislocation: asafetida, lapidanum (orpiment), acacia, enula (myrrhbush), and migrach; made from hundred grains each ground into fine powder with water by dragon ants. v; aloen plant sap also processed similarly for the same purpose
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other incantations for the purpose of immobilization and fracture: recipe with white henbane extract, thyme from myrrh berries, acacia resin in six parts, frankincense (Armenian dragon). xx; .xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Everything is crushed in the millstone and their pills are taken from water or an albumen of eggs, which they administer to themselves.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of the splints and bones apart, causing pain in those places; both a stitched linen bandage and immersion into oil mixed with vinegar are applied to these locations after being placed on them: this is how it's done.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this cast it has not been used for restoration, but rather as a poultice and pain is removed properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other treatments for cautery restoration include hazelnut shells and poppy seed pods, together forming the plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut (injured), then comfortably apply that same water from the colon or even just plain water and use it here.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Other means of plastering firmly for resolution so that when you harden the initial ulceration required restoration: recipe with raspberry and lentil seed, and balm, muskroot, mint, violet flowers, chamomile blossoms; all are crushed and applied in water from juniper or two waters of elderflower (or vine), depending on the quality of the limb and rest period.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras says in his free time that healed is only by wax and oil, not any other cause; recommend that they travel between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia have seen that there are pauses on the broken part of them for their restoration and due to causes which exacerbate with warmth taken in water, mustard, and similar substances recommended by her concerning those causes causing harmful heat absorption.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manipulation of the plaster that comforts wound and pain: recipe for joint compound made from honeycomb (from teeth or animal hair), pine resin, finely chopped parts; ground into powder and cribbled together, forming a healing paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you tear and separate it is that if there isn'thy occur pain or bleeding nor bone breakage at its place then do not rush your work for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If the pain is severe or sharp and inflamed at this place, then you should move it away from there in an hour, apply a plaster on that spot.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply that delicate tightening and plaster small size to your initial compression herein applied, subtly covering the area where it has healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If at times the ulcer and pain and inflammation and all accidents have come upon you together, indicating indigestion and constipation, then repeat that which you performed earlier on the patient' extramuncially (outside of their mouth).
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of those causes mentioned, then wait three to four days or seven; and some measures may be taken for up to twenty days as you observe the healing process after fracture detachment, until it becomes firmly attached with tissue over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust in the tightness that may be present even as your primary constriction at this moment, and fix within the belly'dictum of the malady (the patient), after its memory has been recalled/reflected upon by you.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May if you open the fracture site and dry it out may so that nothing grows thereafter, understand that nourishment is forbidden to prevent its return; hence provide such sustenance only for three days at a time from which this food should come—and drink water daily until the swelling subsides in just a few days. Herein lies knowledge on how one might treat fractures according to medieval medical practice:
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May those who restore the fracture of another limb postponed when not restored to the table for repair according as it bends, and is repaified according to its twistiness; this is error in their work, great fear—if they were straightening arightly, then these Ancients would expand freely without restraint from water.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	Yet they have not seen any doctor for it, so it's reasonable that there has been nothing done about it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol second: When you break a bone in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Las spices of fractures are movements, and their forms are various, and the causes are distinctly different: for one type of fracture is caused by impact on a space (percussion), which enters into both bones, as if it were entering through the mouth to reach the chest; hence this particular spice is named. Or when an indentation incises some part of the body and incises the flesh without passing inside below that place: herein lies another type of fracture called lifting absolute.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture or invasion has already reached the periosteum of the bone where it lodges now; or is within the face of the bone and its dust (i.dict humors).
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is about a bone fracture, it occurs in the subtlety of the hair strand small and for this reason we call this particular kind of fine-line fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it hurts in the bones of our joints when they are covered with phlegm (or effusion), as such:
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So for all these hard-set fractures, they are set apart with splints as if separate stones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this fluid returns to its place, in that location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	With all these spices for detection regarding those and to investigate their attempts at restoring corrupt flesh upon them,
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special vein is discovered through observation of the bone and it's withheld here on this body until there appears a black fracture breakage.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	When treating fractures consider the accidents of humour imbalance, and when these signs indicate distress as if vomiting from cholera, or extension, loss of understanding, abscesses, syncopes, acute fever, medication and requests of those affected, all such do not lead to healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If an accident occurs due to improper flow (of humors), then you begin treatment for it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that the plague comes into your meal together with it and water in the days of winter, hence you should study its location on the bone during the twelfthy day entirely.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, when you press your cheeks with your hands throughout the day, they become rotten due to the pancreas (the organ mentioned here could be associated with digestive functions), and this causes accidents that have been recommended for us.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has reached the brain covering (panniculus cerebri), and it is composed of small bones and cartilage, then cut out what was broken and put together again as recommended for you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	When you raise the head of the patient suffering from inflammation, and examine over their shoulder bones according to what is customary in your practice for such illnesses, making them lie on their back with respect to the hips.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you have to detect the bone and apply sanction or pus cauterization now, then hold back what fluid is flowing from it in water and oil infusion until the purulent matter rests; this will ensure that there are no more discharges of pus. Start at the location of the affected limb and incision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When it is one of two methods for operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One of the methods is to insert an instrument into your skin tightly like this, and here it goes as follows: And another similar tool with only a little more length than that one. This represents how they conduct themselves in their practice:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	E assigns medication or poultices that may be applied secondarily (or after other treatments).
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Using their ease in touching upon the joints, that they may not cause pain on the head and lead it away from them.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are strong and hard, then when you puncture through their circulatory system immediately before administering injections at the sites (which they call 'injection points'), these injection points do not penetrate deeply.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	Not so it is called absence of urine but these are the ones that stop the flow in the bone'se edge where the upper part meets the lower end, a rounded extreme or margin on this place seems like an inner circle small enough to prevent submersion and passage through the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these many ladders according to the sharpness of each bone' extrinsic part, provided it is within all parts of your brain where this extremity protrudes acutely, and its quantity in length as well as brevity corresponds to the sharpness of said test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And when you take care with complete caution that the inscribals do not touch any cause of chafing,
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone permeates through, and if it continues along its path within the body, extract that which comes out therein—the blood and marrow appearing like incisors to this fluid contained within the bone at other locations; however, also consider whether such extracted material is putrefied or subtle compared to other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If any small and painful part of the bones, take that which is easiest for you to remove them from their structures; care for the flesh and liniments we have prepared.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E it is that the lens-shaped portion [joint] has no cause whatsoish and its sharp edge lies in two positions ahead of length, as times pass; such that the lens-shaped portion aligns with the face when cutting into bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E percussion upon the joints of a small injury within which is facilitated by bending and turning over in it, you are secure with your tendons not to encounter an accident while handling them – provided that the physician14 is only ignorant or foolish; indeed if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If any additional cause is related to the patient' extranodal lesion in their bones, insert that of it at its extremity with a lenticular instrument and remove it carefully; for once extracted from within itself, no harm will come nor fear arise.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what is left of the bone becomes its face, with roughness and subtleties present therein, take care that you remove those roughnesses and eliminate those subtleties using tools prepared according to their various sizes so as to be able at all times within this place administer medications or treatments suitable for each patient's location precisely where they are needed.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	When you administer in your proportion that which allows the bones to come together at their junction, and use from below what comes out of those proportions; do not cease until reaching where treatment is needed for all this putrefied pus and subtle pus there.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any small or subtle breaks in the blood vessels among them, which you must administer treatment according to what has been lost for correction of it all together.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they have not been trained in this entire area of study.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	When we have shown great breaks as you did (implying that the speaker has previously demonstrated significant injuries), here it goes...
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you remove the bone, then take for pads two pieces of cloth as much as needed by the patient's size and immerse that in olive oil; place it over the wound bed with such padding, another doubled or triple-layered piece should also be immersed into wine and oil, placed on top of the initial layer to prevent further harm. Administer this treatment onto his ligaments as much time he has until sores are completely cured without leaving scars; apply pressure accordingly based on how tightly clothes can hold back fluid (patient'se blood).
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When pain is felt in the chest where it has been struck by the tool and becomes more intense when nearing completion of the treatment for oneself; therefore consider if you feel such accidents (possibly referring to internal or external injuries), understand that your entire body will be affected.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not alleviate the pain but with medicine that is applied above your shoulder blade, it'dictates where such medication should be placed: take honey and oil in small portions (three parts each), apply them on these lines using a cloth, place thereon over the collarbone; afterwards ensure its positioning within those cavities. Also, secure that portion with healing spices chosen for their curative properties so as to facilitate recovery.
Capitol .iii.	The provided text is challenging due to its archaic language structure
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When the nose fractures, or breaks. (This translation interprets "trincar" as a verb related to breaking
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken but fractured into pieces which were placed sideways; these two bones form what was formerly part of the nasal cartilage, and it causes twisting (deformation) and subsidence without actual breaking or crushing injury to be done. This sentence describes a situation where someone may mistakenly believe their nose is completely broken when in fact only parts have been displaced sideways—likely due to trauma that affected the nasal structure but did not result in full breakage of the bone itself, as indicated by terms such as "cartilaginosa" (related to cartilage) and specific symptoms like twisting ("tortuositat") or sinking below normal positioning ("sinuitat").
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	May it break one of the limbs' parts, then place a small object in your nose and encircle that fracture with said item between your nostrdict (nose), keeping it there until you return their nose to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if it is needed for your ease, and that you do not harm the groin of yours through this operation on them,
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the break is in the upper chest portion of the ribs and does not move towards that area, then cover it with a piece from where the end part of the bone meets (the tip or extreme).
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the bone is broken into parts, then you make it appear as such.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	When the wound in your leg has healed on the first day of the breakdown, if it's possible; otherwise, apply for rest seven or eight times the pause required by gangrene inflammation.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return the extremity of the nose with a cloth piece from him, if the fracture is in one bone, or apply metal nails as needed for breaks within two bones; ensure that it fills out the gap of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; but if you wish, do so with fire and hot water.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you apply a caustic paste externally on the affected area and cover it with wax or hot oil, alternatively use linseed oil as an alternative remedy.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you have not yet applied an antidote to the ulceration, cover that wound with flour and honey crusts made from almond paste; place it over a bed of leaves (like a pillow), ensuring no breath is drawn towards any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If bones of the nose are broken or crushed, take care to separate those fragments and remove them with instruments suitable for this purpose; also close that wound using appropriate materials available at hand, which will encapsulate and consolidate it as needed during healing.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you suffocate a worm that has entered through the nose, then treat it with this medicine and insert iron rods inside so that its entire body heals completely.
Capitol .iiii.	The provided text appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When referring to the treatment of a fractured jaw, in English it would translate roughly as:
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone loosens and it'dict not broken into pieces or bent at joints, but is just slightly displaced, their knowledge of this injury is clear.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of those pieces until it's possible for them to come together again.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If consciousness is disturbed and you hope that they will come out of the mouth or silver/gold nail made with precious metal, pause over the broken jawbone cratered in place, as well as on both layers of the cloth doublet, including a linen gauze thread stretching along the length of the mandibula; and apply that underlayer where it fits into your garment's lining. Do this until not destroyed by you (the patient).
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the humors (body fluids) that they rest and calmness, stopping food from being absorbed by the liver bile stones.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you find that the figure has been altered in some way, then take care of it and remove whatever is causing this change today; rectify what already exists from its location here and place there among powders such as chalk or albumen (egg white), flour made from rice, which will provide relief for your body.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is placed and adjusted on him, and the position of his bones remains unaltered, so he who does not enter it will recover fully strengthened from this fracture; such breaks are mended in three simple stages.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another flogging occurs as an abscess treatment, then apply what we have mentioned before for these previous treatments within the patient' extraneous membrane until it is healed and that ulceration removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is of bone, consider whether it has been separated or dislocated; then remove those displacements with whatever tool you find suitable for drawing them back to where they belong in the body'dictory positioning during recovery.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the poultice of the patient is dry, then increase it with more lint according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed those stones and are no longer suffering from them remnants, if there is still space left in the belly for treatment with purgatives (if needed), apply it to that part which was previously designated; thus healing will occur as desired.
Capitol .v.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When the wing is broken, it's time for medical intervention (likely suggesting a fracture in need of restoration). Translating this line into English
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Carefully examined is the broken wing of the player and that fracture has been classified into one of three grades or types. Here's a possible translation:
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, separated or divided into parts not adjacent to splinters; and for its repair in such cases, lubrication may be applied within the fragments (which indicates a non-aligned break), making restoration difficult if at all possible—or when fractured as with children.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the operation in that case occurs because of a broken clavicle, it is to make sure there are two ministers present: one holds the attendant' extricated arm (tengua), and the other extends the collapsed chest where it was injured (furcula trencada).
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Return the bone as it is within that where its form according to what covers it should be, and let there not be little elevation or indentation in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion extends, then stop the thrust of your malady'setup with a cloth or woolen pad as needed; and raise and contract the shoulder blade according to what you need in order to unblock it within yourself through clutching (holding tightly).
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the clavicle to the parts outside, it will reach the sternum, and the humors ascend above the chest joints, stretching a limb through them significantly.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E the minister presses on the muscle of him at the joints until the bone of the shoulder blade is elevated above his shoulders, and then he corrects the fracture and applies it with those bands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel sharp pains in the shoulder and neck area, it is advisable that a blade be applied to that spot and removed from there easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then you will make an incision of yours on one of those instruments which have been prepared for this purpose, and place a pause quickly at the shoulder joint' extricator; its form consists of either wood or iron.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It appears that the text is written in an archaic form of a Romance language influenced by Latin medical terminology and practices from medieval times. Here's my translation line by line:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of him be as much as you can for surgery; let there be two arms with which to operate, one wide and the other stretched out.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the bone you have inserted when extracting the splint is wide and there are signs of an abscess present, then tighten the wound edges with stitches on the broken bone.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the displacement is slight or there'sinfection that requires treatment with caution, then apply poultices and powders according to the quantity of the wound gap.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you strike arthritis with cautery, then apply cloth and oil on it, and pause over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the bone when it is crushed and torn be that a plaster made of flour mixed with white albumen (egg whites), placed on top of the board stop (a splint or temporary fixation device), held by hands, so tightly bound are the Saracens holding them; their grip long enough to form three fingers in length and similar appearance. Wrap that around it as clothing, wrap another cloth over this bandage under the fracture's location on site; hold your arm(person assisting) while wrapping again, placing pressure at the injury site (thigh or groin), repeating until no more movement occurs within the fractured bone. Whenever there is further contraction of the cracked bone fragments relative to each other, it should not be hidden on you anymore as a sign that healing has begun.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return the patient'thy bedrest on their thigh over his/her neck, and afterward gently tickle him/her there so that he/she can sleep tonight in a small cushion; thus ensuring aid from one of your servants for this task. Therefore, raising is done to elevate the fractured collarbone towards muscle retraction or straightening out his arm at that position.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	If you do not tighten the ligament at this location promptly, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Strict and rested according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some symptoms occur among healthy individuals during that time of year.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI. (The given text does not provide further context
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of shoulder bone fracture healing." or "Regarding the treatment of a shoulder bone fracture."  
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken at its lower end and not in itself, but rather along the edges." This line likely refers to an object such as a wooden or ceramic implement that has been used for spreading substances (possibly food) and now possesses a break
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken at its lower end — and not in itself, but along the edges—and through touch, as if by preparation for treatment of 'it' (implying an object or possibly limb), so that you can reduce this according to nature’s design which allows possible healing."  
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Return the padding over the spot where moisture and albumen (egg white) stop, as well as a double layer of cloth pad; also provide padding under the stone pillar below according to the size of the entire spatula or perhaps just one portion thereof.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the stone is concave in some parts of the scalpel, then you grip that indentation with your thumb and index finger to press it down like a lion' extrusion (suggesting firm pressure), and adjust the blade accordingly for balance/equilibrium.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from below upward, away from the spinal column's compression and herniated disc within so that it is not worsened by its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, apply another application of oil to strengthen its joints if they have become swoln in their place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When you place it over your body'supinating its own gravity or pressure, so that no dislodgment occurs from above downwards onto yourself (
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And when restored in x days or after XLV., it means the instrument is expected to be back in its original position and function within that time frame, according to a specific healing
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, you will then break down the ligaments (ligamento), and understand that they are secure from those bones with which I started not to fear their destruction or breaking apart. This implies a healing process where after certain exergy-restoring actions have been taken—like applying pressure through an instrument over several days as mentioned earlier, followed by addressing the ligaments without risk of damage (as they are deemed secure), ensuring that rehabilitation proceeds in safety and effectiveness.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed to the location of the bone and apply pressure with pads (padding), then stop and hold it there, as we have said regarding the healing fracture in the humerus joint socket affected by immobilization therapy if necessary here—indicating a specific procedure for treating such an injury. The emphasis is on applying gentle but firm pressure with padding to aid in bone realignment and stabilization, followed potentially by additional measures like casts or splints as needed ("if accideys," suggesting immobilization might be considered). This would typically occur during the manual manipulation phase of treatment for a fractured humerus socket.
Capitol .vii.	Capitulo VII: (Please note, without additional context or understanding the subject
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Restoration of the bone breakage/fracture here refers to continuing with treatment steps aimed at healing a broken area within the
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The joints of some parts are broken in the warmth place there and may be moved due to being cracked or fractured.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When accidents happen as a result of the breaking of his sleep (loss or disturbance of natural body fluids), they decline into parts and cause great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughs, sneezes, feverishness; these are declared within the broken bone(s) and cannot be hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of him is that his spleen be placed above the two legs and a cushion between the shoulders; properly tend to the muscles, adjusting the back so as not to exceed two curves, being subtle in both operation and dance according to all possible art known at this time which suits well with returning the figure of bone.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the translation: Apply pressure with bandage and tape on this area, cover it with cloth as you do so. Understand that if there is a fracture without displacement here, secure thin sticks or splints of bone/wood beneath these parts (legs), binding them together; after feeling the spasms subside for some time, tighten further on this tendon to properly align it with its joint. Continuously assess how well-bound that ligament is at all times and when softened by pressure, continue applying tension therewithly.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke the dismemberment of that which corrupts or pricks therein, causing pain in the locale, then you must break and remove the impurity (implant), correcting what causes such suffering by managing its nature; if sometimes directed towards the face, adjust the constriction within so it may heal.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol Book VIII (Note: "capitul" typically refers to sections
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When the coastline is shattered, restoration of the beach area may be necessary for several reasons including environmental concerns and local economies that rely
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	When the coast fractures, it does not occur in large spaces which are between them but rather near their joints; and from there, we understand that these dislocations do not directly affect those parts to be thrown into adjacent cavities due to such cleftnesses but because of water channels so cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Upon learning of his mind not being afflicted by its own inquiry, I understand that he has insight into himself now.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration is to be done as best possible according to the patient' extrication manner and timing; immobilize and bandage the broken bone at the site if required by that person.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the backbone is declining into parts, it causes severe pain and piercing sensations, similar when you cry, and due to this cause your bones become weakened (as if held by a woolen garment); difficulty in breathing occurs along with coughs, fevers, nausea, vomiting of motion; these are conditions that require difficult treatment.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	Even then they are engineered in that manner of motion.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And they said that by pausing (resting) the foods of humidity and inflammation, so that their stomach is puffed up and stretched outwards, which in turn will push the fracture towards its parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we drink this water to ensure it is not the cause of an evil oozing wound if you do not squeeze out blood; and if already there's a flow of blood, may it help with that as well.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And their masters, they should cover that place where oil has been submerged with wool and let pillows between their backbones while inflamed (the swelling occurs), which is when covering again after its second round of expansion; thereby treating the gout in pleural effusions caused by meat or medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the large intestine is contracted powerfully and does not suffer, pinch it with a needle for puncture on its surface; fear over the large intestine as they tear above the location, revealing the fractured coastline, and pause there to preserve the cautery instrument that precedes remembrance of this act. Here, hold your hand firmly so you can easily remove it once everything is done with the necessary procedure using said tool.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	1. Return that we adjust the lips of the patient if they are large, for comfort's sake, and treat it so as to heal within these bounds.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an abscess that bursts open and spread on the skin, apply pressure with your fingers over the location so it heals by the fluid provided for treating the abscessed area.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When it is placed over the back where they sleep, so that it becomes healed.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided as an actual
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The text you've given appears to be in a mix of Romance languages, which include Latin roots and have evolved into modern Italian ("restauration" means "repair"),
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Translated into English line by line:  
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When you have caused the blood to flow upwards towards your head and veins so that their softness has been mollified and stupefied (made unconscious), consider whether these masses will heal or not; if they do not improve, nor can you extend them with forceps when compressing those masses which are like pains in the flesh for a needle. When feeling painful sensations therein, know that it is unlikely to be cured at this stage of application. In matters concerning dispositions leading towards death, caution must prevail.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If the humors are moved in those and cause pain therein with piercing or constriction, then you will know that bone of the body is saved and maladies guarded by blood for cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see that his backbones resemble water and wish to know if they will heal or not, then pay attention to the patient'thy feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you find that it is already soothed, apply to those waters where the matter occurred on your belly and back (which relates to abdominal or lower body pain), as above when standing up helps expel breathing discomforts of will, and some even rest their upper bodies here. At this point you understand that it is mortal, thus no longer requiring treatment for the patient.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May it not cause any further harm if there is none of that for which I speak about; then the worse and more painful condition will be inflicted upon you by me as punishment (or treatment).
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of him is that you perform ablations with a poultice applied over his spinal column fractured or ground into dust, or moistened by dripping waters from holes in stones; place it on there for some hours until the poultice calms the fracture.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	When one of the cushions meant for comfort and existing, rests upon that limb; commands the humors to take a pause and maintain tranquility so they do not sleep on the part where pain persists until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you have fractured the bone or any cause that has already separated from it, then press on the spine and touch the bone itself; if there is a large wound, suture with thread (surgical stitches), and take care of its covered parts until healed. 
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	May your bone ends break (fracture), and the fissure of blood is what you insert into the left side's hollow in the belly; doing so close to where it broke on the other flank as possible with a lance, applying pressure above this wound site if needed for bleeding control. Also apply firm touch over dressed (bandaged) and armor areas that have been touched by these instruments; similarly tighten your grip therein accordingly when handling them.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel broken pieces in it (the body), then touch that area and hold it steady, and heal the child as follows: follow what has been done before for recovery until they are cured.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.: (The text seems incomplete or potentially referring
De restauracio de la ancha.	Based on your input, it appears you are trying to convey a phrase in another language related to
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	Translation: The bones of the broad ones are broken, and if they break, it is not just a communication in their extremities; these fragments descend to the divisions of that body—and woe betides them when crushed by weight! They suffer pain at the location and puncture mark. Whenever there's movement or impact causing breaks (fractures), excruciating pain occurs where damage has occurred, often requiring immediate medical attention from a professional to treat such injuries properly.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of him/her is that you stretch your hand over where there'thy body part lies, which forms the figure of them (the patient).
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the break is in just one of your limbs, then you should apply that which has been applied to it by means of an arm bandage until it forms back to its normal shape naturally.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is long or already descending into parts, then you shall speak to the malady within your belly as it becomes prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have applied the plaster to that area, pause over it with a splint made of wood or bone, and press firmly on the point where there is no fear of a fracture puncture nor removal of the spine.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	When the cavity is filled with water that occupies it equally as far as the constriction allows, and commands the hump to lie on its back or over its chest side,
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May you apply poultice if there is an ulceration to stop its extension and begin restoration within until the poultice has soothed that which precedes it; then return the wound to its healing state, and strengthen this effort with breaths.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you crush or break in the bones, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The translation of this line is not
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restauración de la fractura del adjutori." translates to "Fracture fixation by the assistant surgeon
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The provided Latin-based text seems like a medieval medical context, possibly referring to surgical procedures related to bone fractures and their treatment by different healthcare practitioners such as assistant surgeies (adjutori). Here's
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken (truncated), the restoration by him/her among these two methods involves one where you hold a wooden splint at this angle, according to its form here presented. This line instructs that when there's a fracture requiring fixation or repair:  
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	E they are located in joints and hanging from above positioned therein.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the thigh down on a beam; and bring forth (or lift) your broken arm inside where it will meet the pillar of this place, which bears the curve of the beam.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the swelling goes up on the patient'se back and suspends their collarbone, with two servants commanding one to press against the fracture site using their mouths (their tongues), while the other keeps pressure just above it; having all four extend towards the part of injury.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish the extension to be forceful, then hold it on the fracture and that other ligament, so that both of these servants stretch their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the fracture is near the limb of the muscle, then one should pause on the ligament over the joint and at other times address the broken area with care for the hernia.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if there is a sign that the break belongs to the groin area, then have it bandaged over that spot and on the hip joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you apply cauterization for the ulcer, leave it within seven days, and rest on a small wound bandage in place during day six, pause until respite of treatment, then continue that which is necessary to tighten.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And when the cramp is what causes the immobilization splint over the fracture, and wrapping of woolen cloth around that which ensures proper alignment; place your arm on top of this assistant'gy aid, holding its position above their muscles.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the cloth and tightness over the assistant' extrinsic hand to ensure that the arm remains in position of fixation, provided there is no cause from outside (water or other external factors) disrupting it.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And when they use tweezers (or forceps).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength over the bones at which I have mentioned in the assembly of the head,
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your constriction at the site of the break is loose or spread out.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When I extended the length of the fracture or slight contracture,
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the situation of the stones and constriction as we have discussed at this hour when restoring your limb to its state, then do so accordingly (perform or take action).
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear abscess drainage is necessary, then today at the seventh hour after we have discussed this, do so with caution and care for the swelling and stones within.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here comes the translation line by line:
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May if you are above or on the bed and there is not any cause for this fluid accumulation, do not remove the ligature but wait three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And his sleep upon the thighs is on his two legs, and their hands are over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the assistant cooked with wool full engagement, and consider at all times of day or night whether the figure of the broken limb is not dissolved nor dispersed by its mollifying bandage; then correct what you have done according to your intention.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the food of the malady according to the order we have now, so that the food is subtle in consumption within which it's consumed while rough parts are avoided by him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom, they should be strong in forty days; and if weakened, it is when baths are given along with oil treatments applied herewith that which corrects them.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the bone is set with rust or dirtiness, do not remove that piece of metal and pins until in some days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Given that "Capitol" is likely not part of this medical text
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The given phrase, "Restauracio de fractura del bras," translates to English as:
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The translation of the phrase "Restauracio de fractura del bras" into English is as follows:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if only the main fire is broken or even just a spark remains, then it ignites an ensemble of fires.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire undernethy is broken down, then it restores and cures him there quickly.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the patient's fire is extinguished suddenly and their bone breaks, healing for them becomes difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that bone was broken from there, they came together as two pieces.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that has been broken is the smaller one above (the hip or shoulder blade), it's convenient for a doctor to restore it, which will ease pain until they can have it properly set in place.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that if a large fire is what burns are caused by being broken down (or 'tricked'), then I have taken precautions and restrained the burning force with vigorous action.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two focus points merge together, then when you pause their extraction forcefully pushed out.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of the hand must be rested and extended over a cushion (a bolster), then its palms are placed on the parts below it, as well as others if necessary; each other's hands is put under their shoulders, and ears beneath them—this positions all while placing one centrum above an inverted trough.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if a hernia is present above or below it (the patient), in order that the intestine may not worsen.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Extend the minister' extrends the arm of the party placed downwards or upwards along their body, and another minister extends outward like a pillar.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Engage the doctor'thy bone within that which has been drawn out in accordance with its best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the treatment of your bone you have caused it to swell entirely within its place and by your virtue alone, then there is no need for further intervention or medication from yourself (the doctor).
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in you separate sign that presses the navel and is not within your hope for restoration, then over it do so according to the manner we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May it be that if there is a bone breakage (fracture), you feel pain in one place only (singular hotness or inflammation at the site of injury - "aqua capitol"), and therefore take care of that specific location'setup.'Here comes another source sentence to translate:
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you cauterize the wound on your patient'dictory repair site, then take linen soaked in olive oil and white wax, weave them together intricately; place this bandage tightly over that stricture within which sclerosis is to occur. Afterward remove the cloth (bandage) and apply a cast-like plaster made from powdered clay mixed with lime water for strengthening of fracture points previously set in, securing it firmly until healing occurs; whereby this stone pillar provides support over that crack once filled.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	E when you know that the bones of the arm are located in major positions or there is a fracture at one or two points (the focus),
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propiament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the body part and its connection with today' extrinsic factors or daily influences that may affect it according to medieval medical theory, possibly relating humoral imbalance due to
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any cause that requires correction, address the issue on the affected body part immediately with water applied to the base of this limb until that urgent action subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	When you let the limb remain inside while taking breaks, it returns its tightness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If extraction is softened and the bone appears to return to its original state along with them, then you have corrected all of it according to your will.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if the nourishment is prohibited to prevent deterioration of the limb due to excessive tightness; consider allowing that small amount for several days until it reaches the said nourishment again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	May if in the belly there is not any cause of those that have been mentioned, then do not expect relief within the next twenty days or so from among them.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place its belly in the cavity of the malady for its active disposition to move about and rest on their backs.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You understand that this fracture will be healed in either xxx days or xxxii days, and all according to the complexity of complications and disposition of spirits (humors).
Capitol .xiii.	In translation from an archaic form of Latin influenced by Italian, Spanish,
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the kneecap and thigh bone (femur).
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You understand that when there is pain in the joint of the bed and between spouses due to excessive hardships or injuries without mercy, it does not harm them but serves as motivation for endurance.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you have caused the fever or fracture, then make sure that the heat follows and stays for one hundred parts of equality; place your hand over it to prevent its spreading outwards.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Extend the minister' extruded bones and let them be engaged where they are in good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And when you apply plaster and bandage without treating the abscess immediately, adjust the size of the dressing according to the amount of swelling present in that area, which you have already wrapped in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	May the dislocation be in the parts of your abdomen and it appears like drape fabric, then order the hump to tighten that part with its hand where there is dislocation; make such tautness on the drape as well.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	When the body'dict (corpus) is covered by cloth in which it rests, and that garment strengthened for support, then apply pressure to this part with your hands accordingly.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the extremities, then pause below and above stone fragments from that part of the break on your palm so that it may be held upright and tight; also halt the swelling, as you turn your hand between the digits near where they are connected by ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break the bones of your fingers, then if it is in your finger, straighten and support it with the palm of your hand as much as possible; if you wish to pause briefly: stop at the small stone for four days so that the fracture heals properly and does not become dislocated.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any of those places (the shoulder blade or indication spot), there it will also be here, as that one we have found; if they are all like this continuously, better so to pause over that small stone marker which corresponds with what has been mentioned above. Or similarly when handling them just like bones in the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration, and apply that which is applied during the operation—that from where any cause of those symptoms arises as you narrate their story.
Capitol .xiv.	The provided text appears as an excerpt from medieval medical writings
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Regarding the treatment of a hip bone fracture (presuming "os" refers to the hipbone and "coyssa" corresponds with thigh or gro
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone (os coyssa) has been displaced and is declared to belong to the foreign body when it enters suddenly, thus suggesting that immediate surgical intervention may be required for its realignment or removal. In modern medical terms: The dislocated femur (hipbone) requires urgent orthopedic attention as a potential case of fracture-displacement due to trauma/sudden force applied externally leading
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The treatment is performed as follows: One suture threaded through the fracture site and another immediately adjacent to it (proximally), both tightened around the hipbone, with a bandage applied over abdomen and face for support post-repair/immobilization. This description indicates that external fixation methods may have been used historically before contemporary internal stabilizing techniques were developed; sutures would be tied to secure fractured bone fragments in place while surrounding dressings provide additional stability during healing.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The doctor then extends the suture to its corresponding position on the bone fragment as soon as they reach it within the hipbone's socket (os), ensuring proper alignment and immobilization for healing during external fixation treatment methods used historically in such cases without modern internal hardware.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If external manipulation is needed for the thigh (cueyssa), then one suture threaded to its corresponding position on the femur fragment should be tightened around both leg segments and hipbone simultaneously with another immediately adjacent, thus ensuring that when extension occurs at these points of fixation in line with each other across all three structures—the cueyssa (thigh), calcanheira or patella if mentioned earlier, and the femur itself. This procedure indicates a manual technique for external splinting using sutures to maintain limb alignment while awaiting further treatment options like casting or internal fixation after assessment of
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	When the joint is prone to dislocation, it will be treated with ligament proper for dislocation and its extension at the joining parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it becomes an ulcer in you, then wait for the abscess to be drained over several days before returning to your care routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strictness of the limb is painful: because it encapsulable over the fracture, and folds twice or thrice for days at a time; then tighten the band until it reaches down to the ankle and knee joints where her body holds.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Here inserts a long thread between the thigh and leg piece provided by the donor at the joint parts where pain occurs, bringing those extremities of the inserted thread to the area above the knee so as not to have any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return pressure over that wound in the location of that fracture and apply pressure on those stones above the bone of the thigh.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return and fill with cotton wool between the sheet's change (transition from one material to another) in their legs and thighs, thus ensuring that any discharge is absorbed.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Expose their feet' extrême parts of the limbs to where they enter into the cavity of the foot, and tighten those extremities with sticks from other parts so that it does not escape its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Here comes the translation:
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If bone is set upon the other which has been placed by you, then ensure that it holds in place as long as possible; otherwise, cover and adjust this one until healing begins (as remembered).
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And when some days have passed since this hip dislocation was adjusted with the straps as we mentioned earlier in our aid to the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even if the patient' extrication from this position does not relieve them of thigh clutching; and if it is restored alone, another cushion must be applied on top, then he/she will have to walk that limb again.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You understand that the thigh is tense in forty days or a few months and all this fluid depends on the complexity of structures and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	In this line of translation from medieval medical treatise into English, it appears there
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	When addressing the restoration of a humerus (thigh bone) dislocation in modern terminology:
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You understand that a broken shoulder of the hip bone may be treated with regular rubbing.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If you break the bone (fracture), it is merely a crack or dislocation in their parts; and that which breaks has been made muddy/dirtied, and thus all of this stands as feeling for them.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the patient is achieved by having their intestines or hernia, which were previously removed from within where they are gathered and joined together as far as it can be done for horseback riding ease and craftsmthy purposes:
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And apply compression bandage and pressure over that round stone if you are out of it; stretch tightly below to prevent the stone from going down there again.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Consider all dispositions that have been recommended for other fractures, as well when it is necessary and appropriate cautery resembling these existing ones so that they may enter into those who need them in order to heal from this water-induced accident.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (This line is not in Latin or any
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	La restaurare de la fratura en el cáncer." seems to be a mistranslation or typographical error, as "c
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	It appears that the text you've provided is a medical description in medieval Latin or an early form of Spanish with some similarities to these languages. Here is my attempt at translating your line into English:
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	When you apply warmth to the joint of two bones in the arm, and by this application there is restoration as well for both arms together, then that which acts upon it is considered an operation itself.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are joined together, then the cushion becomes all parts of them.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the bone is trembling under pressure, then the cushion becomes parts of Dent's area.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If your bone is fractured thickly and quickly, then reduce that piece immediately; these are the causes beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Accordingly administer stretching and limping exerthyze of the joints as per that direction.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Mayhaps if the bone of the thigh is broken and has splinters inside it, make the extension swell up and apply pressure with your will to aid healing.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the cushion there is a cause for operation on the arms, and when you insert nails into it and perform the entirety of the operation, then take hickory shafts that have been paused just in time before causes previously stalled outdoors (i.e., due to weather or other reasons), which are used as tools with white palm leaves for this task; apply them only to those places where there is a small growth, and do not use hands unless necessary, the length of these according to the cushion's size, all within it until just before entering.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Envelop a cloth over each garment according to the length of it, and pause one on the division between the thigh cushions (one under another), and the other around their chest within the pus located at the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Return the limbs' pins to three locations of pain and at nighttime, where this positioning is forbidden for either left or right side movement, which serves as good support.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a bolt of wood is administered according to the length of the cushion, and it's placed under the cushion in order that this one retain its motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you perform this action in a fracture, and at that moment it is done properly by itself.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvii.	The given text appears to be from an old medical document discussing treatments for conditions like
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Regarding the break of the calcaneus (heel bone) and the bones of the foot, including metatarsals/phalanges:
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Although the toe does not suffer complete fracture; some bones of the foot may experience breaks and do not break in their positions but rather exhibit sprains within joints' arrangement.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot have been broken and sometimes those very same bones are raised above each other on prepared earth as a result, then ensure that the humors (or fluids) do not rise within the foot' extruding pain or swelling.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place your hand over the part where it is lifted from those bones, and apply some lime to them so that they are pressed back into their respective places until returned.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Return and apply pressure downward (and upward), applying an enema to the patient's abdomen using a small basin with two lids attached, holding their hands.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strength that is in the arm must be stretched outwards, so you have wrapped it up and addressed other possible reasons for which a patient might seek help.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then you should loosen the bandage, as it is necessary to crush and reset broken bones or joint dislocations, at which point these operations become concurrent with carrying loads (as in "coneysses").
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If your fingers are chapped and cracked, restore them as they were before the illness, applying oil on them just like you do at home in their restoration.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Here comes the translation for each line:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May it be that if you have fractured the bones of either two or three joints (or possibly more), then rest on any one part of their body encased in a woolen cloth, and stretch the table undernethy's chest, so as to keep the tongue firmly attached.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not overlook the causes mentioned to you in other accidents we have described here, and so I address them all at once with this intervention.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	From the breakdown of the hip joint (coxa) in women and men, as well as the pelvis bone (coccyx).
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman'thy bone is broken, let it lie in its place of breaking downward slightly; her limb bent at the joint should rest with weight behind and hands held back from there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And apply pillows to the two of them (presumably referring back to patient'setup described earlier), and when urination reduces discomfort and facilitates flow, return that second item according to its function afterward, returning first item initially as well:
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	When applied for seven days or so brought about healing of that which was restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take once-cooked lamb and stretch it over the patient's abdomen using a reed pipe; insert all of the bladder into the cough tube until it is inflated inside where the bladder returns to its place, thus repairing the fracture.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Return its inflammation and feverish state for two days after treatment until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of either a man or woman are cracked, administer in their restoration and bleeding treatment the fluid we have prepared for them into the thigh bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And when such breaks are not hidden within these particulars and rarely occur to those without knowledge in this subject of mine, it is clear that they signify major dispositions directly through the primary means of restoration and restriction herewith, thus understood by me.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the knee joint is broken, apply gargum made from ash, and place it in that area; cover with a cloth wrapping, wrapped tightly around it, and leave for three days or send these along to be healed by others who are lying there (possibly suggesting communal care).
Capitol .xix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or content for
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When bones are broken in children, the healing process typically occurs faster and more effectively due to their greater regenerative capabilities compared to adults. Here's a translation of your
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	To the extent you have fractured bone(s), and most commonly if it's in your thigh or hip, similar to how someone else has been treated there (in terms of casting/splinting they received); apply such treatment as directed by healthcare professionals who were present.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the child excretes phlegm and you see it exiting from them, then if there is not another cause for this presence, cover what comes out with powder so that they retain moisture within themselves.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When restoration of the fracture begins on that day, do not extend it unless an abscess forms.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you soothe the ulcer with cauterization; if necessary, restoration will occur within one day after treatment, provided that the ulcer heals by then and not on the third day out of four total days, during which time harmful accidents may happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If your bone is fractured and protrudes above the neck of the femur (thighbone), then you must reduce that, which will make it easier for yourself to manage and a little less extensive in terms of movement.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be extension at your preparation, and the horse is in their thighs now; therefore reduce that which you have for those legs herein, this thing made of iron with a length of seven digits or eight (an estimated total length), its width as per the quantity of clay used to make it; henceforre it becomes necessary for the doctor who wields such tools in all types of fracture treatment.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And provide relief and place it gently on there so that the compression is not excessive during the operation hour.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it is done:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E it is named in Greek "Labre wing-bearer", hence, a small cushion or pad.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that limb where pain has subsided should be raised above the bone end.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When you enter during a period of rest so that bones return and your tongue is placed upon any cushion, here it goes:
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so you should grasp the limbs of the fracture and if that part broken is delicate, do not apply force for good alignment; rather, insert into it whatsothy have to repair with strength.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May you not be able to reduce the entire bone amount that we have recommended, then divide and assign what is left among those bodies which are prescribed by us today; take one portion of it with any cautery available at your disposal (if within reach).
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Return that which is hard in the bone and sharp small bones back into its cavity, and keep your hand on it so that those things do not come out again.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and you secure its reduction, there arises a vehement pain in the affected area, so that wisdom dictates that the bone should not return to its natural position; hence, it'dicts at this time what interventions you must provide for the inflammation.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and you submerge a tight black cloth under the arm, especially in summer, without stopping over wet soil or any other cause that could make it happen, thus preventing skin irritation and deterioration.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Even as you take care that no child stumbles on the broken thing, doctors often advise for caution because they may fall and get injured or develop a rotting wound or inflammation, thus becoming ill.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a soft or narrow swelling of bone (as opposed to other types of fractures).
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the patient is large or ill-conditioned and fears those malicious accidents which they have recommended for them, causing pain in that place, do not cover over it where you would normally apply bandages; instead, may you wrap this hard cloth around the area of swelling and tighten it there.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once a day or two times already begins the fever in them (the patient), which produces chills on that very spot where you have placed your cloth pausing above, apply warm compresses to those spots according to our custom for treating illnesses; as we use ointments and resembling medicines at this place.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the child spends days wandering without rest or if they fall off their cradle, then understand that these are signs of small children who attempt to escape (possibly indicating a desire for independence).
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (likely referring to separated or extracted substances) that have been removed and extricated, the ones that cannot be separated from each other and are placed back into the body cause pain; for this reason, insert them according to what is possible in your ability.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you have bruises or swelling, they are signs of corruption and putrefaction; therefore, it is necessary to pause on one of those bodies needed for healing as described in my account above.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	Of the fluid in which my speech is and where you present your hand: when large bones are crushed within the thighs and hips of those who help us, as well as on the limbs of our great ones, do not think to take them out or withdraw for prolonged periods due to the bitternthy fluid's decay leading towards death; having seen such a creature inside that you may cure it in up to 20 days or so. And if at this time one does not see any improvement:
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.: This line appears incomplete or possibly corrupted
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The provided text is written in a form of historical medical Latin, likely from the medieval period when scholars and physicians often wrote about treatments using language derived or influenced by classical languages such as Greek (Latin' extrinsically) combined
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The text speaks to the traditional belief in medieval medicine about joint pain associated with bone fractures:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	And consider if the knotting is recent and administer those medicines that have tightened it up around you (the patient), using extracts of hawthorn berries, cornses, and other plants directed to them; soothing these applications will be applied externally or internally depending on some parts being affected in whole or part. Tighten the knotting with linen wadding and apply pressure over it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that the knot is already converted and tightened on its bedrock, which when caused by starvation provokes the hernia to come out of place, cut off any excess or protruding parts thereof; insert a light object within whereby it may return softly towards normality so as healing can occur.
Capitol .xxi.	Given that this text is written in an archaic or regional form of
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the bone healing after repair takes place, and according to its natural motion once again.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the gentle upper part and lower limb are returned to their place: at this time it's not pain due to movements but rather causes such as: excessive contraction of ligaments or joint capsules that prevent nourishment from reaching the member; overabundance of connective tissue within these contracted spaces; unnatural, rapid movement beyond its natural timing; bloating in abdomen and distension with air.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Care for the fluid involves draining it from the malady and making the patient's heart tender within, then apply washing (bathing), and massage with oil and liniment over them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Place pressure on the limb so that the poultice draws nourishment into it and returns its sustenance back to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol xxii.: (Note: This line appears as an abbreviation
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	When the bones are broken and healed in a twisted manner, it is forbidden to operate on them now that they have covered over with callus (calcare).  
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you have restored the sanctification of its twistedness and elevation in bone joints, and it is due to form defect on that part of his body, although not prohibited from natural healing by this operation which you receive for him who exists such a member with new trunkformation.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	May already stand the doctors and innkeepers, who have caused harm to our healing place; this action is lost forever due to great fear of what they brought upon us.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	May joint stiffness and knots be recent, the ones that have been in contact with water where your thighs rest (the area between the legs), along with herbs soothing from above or raw/grated substances mixed into it; together they form a poultice applied directly to itself for softening. Alternatively, mucilage of grated raspberry and honey paste used on this spot as well—or fat unguents pressed between the chest (breasts) using either linseed or olive oil gauze pads; similarly prepared with fats rendered from lean meat trichinae applied to their breasts, which are recognized medicinal concoctions for women's consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some waters are soluble due to persistent cold breeze that is present at the top and should be administered mobility throughout the entire body in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May if tortuosity has arisen lately and it became a stone and necessitates care with iron for that the patient's thigh muscles have retracted and continued to dissolve bone, as well as excess fluid above the joint due to unnecessary connections made by this physician in their treatment approach; all of which is administered easily under examination.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.: This line appears incomplete or out of context without
De sermo en dislocacio.	The provided Latin phrase, "De sermo en dislocacio," translates to English as
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Translation: Dislocation is an injury of any joints in the body that prevents movement and it causes great pain and serious injuries to vital spirits (humoral imbalance). It's necessary for a doctor or medical practitioner because dislocations bring about severe disturban021.7586943, 'title':
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when you bend the patient downwards and forcib extricate it so that it is reduced, do not delay doing this; if delayed, the place becomes arthritic and making reduction will become difficult then.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	Through so much that it is not covered nor stretched out at the time of application, frequent movements will bring on spasm and pains to come forth.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When you acidify the fluid, cover yourself with flaxbath treatment of the malady and place it inside so that restitution occurs; apply pressure to reduce limbs submerged in water clogs and oil, and for ease reduction is achieved.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every part of the body is cured by the water from which its memory will return there.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And when the displacement occurs as mentioned before in the broken bone, it enters from one section into another that was pushed downwards quickly.
Capitol .xxiiii.	In this translation task, it appears that there may have been some errors or typos in
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The provided text seems to be related to dental health and specifically the treatment of a temporomandibular joint (TMJ) subluxation, which is
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Translation:  
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the detachment of it is slight, in major positions returns for itself with a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May if the dislocation is complete and finished, then immediate reduction of limb should be administered without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the full translation:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce the patient, especially if both jaws are dislocated, apply warm water and oil inside their tailbone area for easier reduction of both, so that we may have what has been said hereinforth.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are swaddled, the mouth of the humerus is closed but not soothed, on those woolen pillows he lies down with beeswax candle drippings and wax rosin; this facilitates his limb muscles.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is to be administered easily, and not work on the opening of the mouth for consumption and drinking until the jawbone is numbed and healed within this time frame.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and cannot be converted back to their respective places during labor, you will endure continuous fevers and persistent diarrhea; moreover, it causes severe pain in the abdomen related to bloating (or distension), and purulent colitis.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it again, then understand that I have lost it; and proceed with care to the place where you took it over these days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv. (The abbreviation "Capitol
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder blade and the limb's extreme tendon. (This translation suggests a medical procedure or context where there is an urgent need to address issues related to joint instability, possibly in reference
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder blade is not displaced by lying down on the chest; and some have been displaced to the backside thereof, which it expresses as feeling. (This translation indicates that certain conditions causing a dislocation are recognized through physical symptoms felt when one lies prone.)
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of the patient is that their hernia presses upon their chest and extends its bronchial tubes. (This suggests a treatment approach where positioning or manipulation might be used to address issues with internal organs such as lungs, which could imply an attempt at reducing a hiatal
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Apply pressure on the location in your hand for tightening contraction; it will return to normal then. (This line advises applying manual technique with one's own hands as a form of treatment or assessment.)
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Hold pressure on that bandage and pillows, strengthening it thereafter. (This suggests the continuation or intensification of applying external support to an affected area.) ### Instruction: Based on the document provided by "Captitol .xx
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	As the limb that was placed there remains extended and not displaced on any day, provided it is reduced (either manually or through some other means as described) and bound tightly; this must be done according to what has been stated previously in the document ("Captitol .xx").(The translation reflects a treatment scenario where maintaining an affected limb's position without displacement requires reduction, possibly of a dislocation, followed by secure immobilization as per prior instructions.)
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	At this moment of treatment by this physician, pain in the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text appears to be instructions from an old medical manuscript related to treating
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	For reducing a muscle dislocation, here are the translation and interpretation line by line:
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You understand that the muscle is not dislocated but rather in one of three ways, namely when it becomes dislocated at the juncture between the thigh and knee joints (the hip).
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	Here comes the second sentence to translate: It is that it gets dislocated from below the muscle, and this happens there as well (meaning within its natural position); nor does it get dislocated behind for the shoulder joint; nor in front along the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is a displacement and departure of the body' extraneous parts with tittillation outside them, mainly in those where flesh is thin; sometimes even when muscles are affected, it departs from there due to difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And with cold water application or strikes by hammer (percussion), and the patient' extruded limb is marked for amputation due to its already dislocated state.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	And when you hear that fluid has entered above what is already attached to it and begins processing in the treatment of it, then proceed with care.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is a displacement of either leg or feet and you must apply touch treatment without fearing harm:
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation it is felt a light reduction when it becomes cold and enters into the malady.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May if we have not returned to it and where the dislocation has occurred over several days, let's bathe the malady in tail water and administer an emetic that will soften and dissolve its lines as with salt from above high up (presumably referring to sea salts), honey in tail water, fenugreek also in tail water, all of which should be given.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to reduce this further: and make present a home that is long beyond the waistband of it, belonging on that side of which the hernia lies; immediately insert your muscle into its position with haste around the base of the hernia until suspended in air, while another servant pulls out the mass from within those parts just below one's belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the thigh is loose and another cause loosens it further, thus causing a severe condition that leads to its displacement, here we go.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If reduction of the patient is difficult for all reasons previously mentioned, then use this treatment: grasp a staff with the length that extends to two arm'se lengths and its handle four fingers wide; tighten it at the end closest to where you are holding (the thumb). The size or thickness of such instrument should be shaped according to the specifications below.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Even upon his head rests soft linen, ensuring that it does not touch the patient's waistband.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Here they are the lines translated into English:
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the intestine is completed in any manner that you can do it (i.dict possible), and when you pause for a while to tickle the patient's lamb skin with wool of varying quantities; prepare an emplastrum made from mill dust mixed with egg white, applied all over the muscle so as not to rotate upwards, tightly applying where there is constriction. The ligament will be turned over onto this dressing and attached firmly to the patient's chest, secured in place without noise for several days; ensuring that it remains quiet during these seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When food of the malady is little paused (consumed), and then enters into rest (digestion), it leads to healing for that person.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Return (or restore) the food given is moderately or sufficiently increased and exergy engaged in motion; thus if it remains closed and does not soften, then healing will occur.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	May it be if the joint is dislocated due to humidity that you induce in him or for another reason, then administer three kinds of treatments as described in the manual on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this pain is present and the ligament and joint are not fixed for seven days, then after some time both the bandage and strain will be reduced on it, and that arm which cannot rise to its respective parts, you know well that the nerves of your limb (which run through or extend within/towards the muscle), either inscribed internally or softened externally with ointment, have never remained fixed in their place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is painful in the hips and breastbones or parts behind, reduction is by force and extension until return (meaning the joints are put back into place).
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	In that other constriction, it is given care until healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you worsen the fever in the limb and slow down its movement, then make sure that such gravity is relieved until it returns to its original state of nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii. (This line appears to be referencing a specific section
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Regarding the treatment of hip dislocation:
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You understand that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and appearance; it's dislocated in all parts, mainly at the part leading backward from there, and when you adjust the dislocated hip as needed (touch or manipulation according to whatever form it has been dislocated), then this becomes manifestly evident: now its concave joint is apparent, which means that your arm cannot bend here nor touch this very muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When the restoration of him is possible, it means that his chest should be expanded and arms extended, and the doctor's hands are over the hips or thighs (and possibly on their back), pressing at the joint between their hands to return them to place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation occurs at these parts (implying certain areas of movement or joints), then return it so that your hand is between its own position, pressing until you hear a click in the part where your palm rests on it.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If sprain does not submit to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and motion forcefully.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	It is that two servants stretch their arms outward and hold them thusly to prevent excessive extension from occurring.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Return its arm completely turned over, placing it fully under the patient's chest with cloth or sinews (ligaments).
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, anoint it with some oil so that this is what helps in its lubrication; and apply pressure to tighten the joint until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The reduction of his chest that has been placed upon where there is its fixation and protrusion outside the albumen of humors, with the arm hanging from the collarbone, held in place by pillows for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And make it detachable; and so if the joint is formed in that place, then cut off its ligament there and remove that part from it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not strengthened, repeat the plaster and bandage until it comes out within days; then remove that one as well.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you apply pressure to the joint for reduction, and its position is in motion, then administer moisture with warmth lightly, and compress it until swelling subsides; when attenuation occurs on the joint, that's where fat movement happens—and secure it firmly, leaving some applied over the bones during day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Return that one over there (referring to an object or substance previously mentioned), and immerse the other in the bath; when it thaws out, rub on its joint with warmth from a freshly cut cold-tempered spring water alternately for several days until rumbling sounds occur. In this context:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Am inside where it has been immersed (entrar onde está o líquido), allowing for absorption or integration into its substance (
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And pause over that hollow and wounded hoof at the border edge (presumably referring to an injured part of cattle), rest on top of it, with strength or pressure applied; and thus makeshift washes are given for moisture absorption/integration into its condition (This translation interprets a medieval text where medical practices often involved direct interventions such as applying compresses. The terminology reflects the era' extrusion from nature-based remedies, with specific care taken to address injuries and treat them using locally available resources like cattle hoof for dressing wounds
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol Case No. xxviii (assuming this refers to a legal case
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	About the care for hip displacement, it concerns the joint between the arm and body (This translation likely addresses treatment approaches relevant to a specific type of injury involving articulation—possibly referring to surgical or manual therapy required where an arm connects with other parts of the skeleton).
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Some of the joints in your body are displaced (refers to a dislocation), and realignment is more laborious at these junctures than others; yet if immediate reduction occurs upon displacement, indicating an open or fresh fracture with periosteal reaction ('aposemat'), such cases can be managed effectively. This translation acknowledges the complexity of treating joint injuries where quick response times are crucial and complications like a specific type of bone injury needing different treatment considerations (Here, 'malassen' seems to signify displaced or misaligned parts).
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you hold the thigh'marrow above a table and extend it from there; then let your doctor or hand rest on the imminent joint area, and push it back to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Even if it is considered that the palm rests on the belly of him/her, then inflate and reduce his/her thighs over a table; and if dislocation has preceded, place her position so that her abdomen lies beneath this object inherently upon which meticulous care can be provided for impending joint connection.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns shortly afterward, all is well; but if not, that part becomes sore and begins to loosen its attachment, and you may not intervene until the days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Mightily the joint according to its curvature; and there is not a cause in Maelwuth but that it becomes softened, and cannot strenghten itself anymore—knowing that the nerves are twisted or spasmed, and you will strengthen them with purposeful cauterization at this place, providing some water to confer.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when discomfort returns and we apply the one recommended by us to it (the ointment/remedy), let your rest on top of this, for days; furthermore, cut off its excessive part as well while exercising is done with you every day.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	May it happen that the patient' extrinsic movement ceases and there is a decrease in their body weight or moisture; then you should provide them with water (aygua cauda) and cold measures (fregas), until they are relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Given that this text is similar in structure to Latin with elements of Italian,
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	About the treatment for displacement." (Here 'curacio' could be translated as "treatment", and 'dislo
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some movements may have caused the joints to become misaligned throughout the body. ("Dislocation" refers to an injury where two parts of the bones in a joint are no longer aligned properly.)
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a joint of one hand or abdomen is dislocated (meaning the bones have been forced out of their normal position), apply pressure to realign it and gently manipulate back into place until return ("dislocatio" means "dislocation," with applied actions for correction).("Pouses tieus") might refer metap each time they are moved or returned.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Support the head of the limb and suspend that portion where it was dislocated; leave them supported for two days ("dislocacio" refers to "repositioning after injury," with an instructional action on care).("Deves la part a la qual es dislocat") translates as “that part which has been dislocated.” This suggests rest and immobil
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Support that portion and extend it while still keeping the limb elevated for as long as today ("engualha" refers to immobilization or holding in place, with an instruction on continued care). This guidance implies maintaining a position of restorative support without movement until recovery.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night approaches (when it gets dark), take that portion and alternate between resting during the day ("nocte") as described earlier in this narrative, and engaging with movement at night; do so for days until fully healed ('streit'). This sentence suggests a treatment plan involving alternating periods of immobility followed by gentle exercise (movement therapy), applied over several days leading to recovery. The term "alcus dias" can be translated as “healing days,” referring not just the passage of time but an expected healing process guided through periodic activities and rest, tailored for a patient with joint
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it seems like fluid is coming out at other body parts as well.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" doesn'se seem related directly
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The provided Latin-like text seems to be discussing a medical condition, likely concerning the vertebrae of the thoracic (or possibly lumbar) region:
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When one or more of the thoracic (or possibly lumbar) vertebrae becomes dislocated completely and subsequently move out of place there is not immediate treatment; until then death comes from shock to the internal organs, often referred to as 'the bowels'.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Thus it is swolthy at the back and there's no lubrication.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure for them be that you also contemplate if the green sickness of youth is not a cure or healing for all of it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May enter through cauterization or palpation to these areas, they have learned the ways of treatment in detailed speech; may return from there and open up where necessary according to their proximity for better understanding—this is what I speak about today, having used various tools available at that time to show them how.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "E dictum quod in gelobitatia quae ad partium dentem accidit, non est ingenium atque sanatio illius; et semelmencie in ea sicut puteat.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From those it is not healed but that which you apply directly in their two places, as recommended by water;
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the staff and it is not fixed in a hole; another minister holds the other in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Envelop the bandage over the head of the malady and tightly bind it with strong threads, extending up to where you need on the top part that covers the patient's head; secure this in place for the patient' extraterrestrial body parts (limbs), securing cushions under their legs as needed. Tighten all bandages firmly and tie them together at another barrel-like structure, which you need to support the weight of these alien bodies ("pes").
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here comes the translation: And have you stretched out your minister (physician) to reach the part of the beam where they are working on it, but do not make them overly tight as we previously mentioned.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor pauses their hands on the spine for strength to return it into place and adjusts their weight within that space as well; this is done while maintaining contact with one hand over the spine, which provides support back in its cavity using another body part or cushion.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return by this method, take a table of which the length or width is three feet, and dig into the place where we have previously mentioned that there should be an opening for the malady in between (the legs), at the location corresponding to the extremity of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to turn the quality that has been revolved around your head; and it is necessary for you to keep the top of your waist on the ground at the back end of two sticks, which are each as long as one arm, and place the top of your head between them so they form a triangle with a palm-length space in between; now that quality has already been found within any stick where it is moving upwards (as if ascending), and at some point on land it rests firmly to prevent being gouty.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take a staff in which you twist it between the two sticks of each pair.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a disruption where it forms wood of such length that its width equals water turned over; and in the two other pieces, they seem like that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And for each turn and position of the thighs you must appoint someone to hold it in place, and have a doctor adjust the spine as we've discussed.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes with this injury (or condition):
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And place the spine back to its position, and fix it in this way, while bleeding is stopped with albumen poultice (made of egg white), and bandage applied; cover over the algid stone-tablet whereupon my teaching lies - three books or more are enclosed within these pages, whose length corresponds exactly as to pump liquid out from depressed area around spondyl.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And return it (the intestine or hernia) back to its cavity, and introduce the malady'supremum(nutritive fluid/humor), into which it will heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any indication in the place at the end of healing, it means that medicines have been applied to moisturize and cleanse for a long time as recommended (which has already been administered here), namely limestone layer placed on this location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.: (This line appears to be an annotation or
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Curacio di una coscia dislocata." translates to "Treatment of a
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Sapiens that the hip joint and muscular connection only so slightly becomes dislocated, without wounding those waters which you would otherwise harm at other smaller body connections with less curvature." translates to "You who understand that the hip joint's slight misalignment is just a minor dislocation without damaging the fluids surrounding these areas. Unlike injuries caused by displacing fluid in more delicate, concave parts of the body during other movements or conditions.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	E the joint of the wide is dislocated according to four ways, it can be dislocated at the parts inward, or towards the inside, or forward, or behind;
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is dislocated at the joints and rarely in front of or behind them.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	E when the dislocation of his limb occurs among its parts, as you adjust the bandage on the healthy joint, it is applied long and tightened up with pressure to restore strength from where it was injured, so that the displaced joint does not bend backward under tension or attempt to sprain further.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	When that which causes the displacement of him is due to accidents happening elsewhere in his body parts, it means these accidents are contrary or opposing those occurrences causing the dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When the name of that person to which dislocation has occurred nearby spreads outwards through their cushion placed below, and if it proceeds further away from there without being able to move onward towards those parts at this time; his urine is retained within him and a drop occurs in place, making them walk with the sole of their foot.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When you have loosened dislocation at the posterior parts of it so that none expands its joint (no expansion or bending), nor can such a thing double what is already engaging, and this cushion placed undernethy is short like another's, which keeps their hips in place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May reduction of these spices for this dislocation is what you consider, and if the dislocation is old and ancient, already treated by your previous reductions here at Rome according to its disposition—not in all treatments; hence do not look for any improvement therein now.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that where the dislocation is recent and one of the four species of dislocation, then take up what has come out to straighten the joint and extend it towards the limbs above and below, as well as to both right and left sides; once done, no other treatment will be necessary.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May, if it does not return in this attempt, then the servant who prepares must act strongly and extend the cushion under their limbs from where they were placed for a while; or hold them themselves tightly with what is bound above that rests on the underside of said cushion. Another servant extends the bandage over therefrom up to those extremities, touching gently so as not to disturb it further; and another secures firmly by means of rope (or leather strap), holding tightly at their limb's tip.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	When there is extension from the limb joints towards the chest or between the shoulder blade and lower back of the thorax, it implies that movement may be causing pain in these areas.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	If all of them experience extension within a period until the malady is lifted and rises above their place on earth, then so be it.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This particular type of extension affects all four parts as well.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns with water that we have discussed, be well; but if not, it is necessary for all special waters needed for their own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the patient's reduction, when it is dislocated, and its displacement occurs at joints, causing the hernia to sit upon their backbone; hold the ligaments over the area between the waist of the thigh where the head meets that place from which they bend forward; extend the ligament on the part of the angulated shoulder towards either end point of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another servant applies pressure to the limbs of him/her, and compresses firmly in all parts downwards strongly until that place returns (goes back) to its original position.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This specific is of yellow pus that heals this body part, which other substances do not reduce it.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	May it be excused upon you and not obeyed in this particular form of healing care, where the two pills taken at mealtime serve as a link between both legs and feet through ligaments and tendons, ensuring strength for those parts together with them.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of a patient' extrication length is four times their body size and the groin cushion extends as much as two parts in that same measurement, it means:
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Return the scrotum positioned on the head of the staff and placed in the middle (of its length), which corresponds to two cubits from the ground, as measured by one's foot span.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Command a strong young man to reduce the head of the hernia and have another youth suspended above it, whereby the other boy presses upon its strength until it returns to its proper place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it is dislocated from behind, where the hump of the belly presses upon the buttock as per our recommendations in this manual; and its sinews are placed properly on the hollowed part of the belly and over the chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Each minister extends to his/her area; and the doctor holds on with their mouth according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So then, if you heed the reversal (revercio), slow down immediately; and if not, rest over that place carefully as we have discussed in detail for that area of concern.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayhaps the thighs of our patient are being pressed down upon them by his/her leg(s).
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When dislocation occurs towards the parts below (downwards), it is necessary for the cushion to be extended downwardly, and this second method describes what I tell you; the doctor places his palm's fourth finger on the lower thigh area, supports one hand there while extending with the other, resting that same support at the location of dislocation (downwards), where it is stretched.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If dislocation is at the joints behind, do not allow that humidity to spread outwards and rise onto the ground—have someone who has stopped it in its tracks stand over a solid foundation; there should be another person holding his hand if he is dislocated from the parts further back, as we have stated regarding two anchors for support. There shall be no pain on his face or ligaments when extended outward, just as described hereinabove.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When compression is applied with a table over the location where joint pain occurs.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is completed as instructed, and "the name of the reduction" does not worry you, then extend cushions from undernethy (patient's thighs), once done so adjust hips and pause-embrace them; this way ensuring that broadband/wide part doesn’t protrude in any section. Keep these bands on for three to four days straight.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the sinew and bandage to its place, compare one cushion with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those crazy ones in a state of seizure, then understand that the dislocation has already been fixed, and so let' extrusion come out (from Latin: "dislocatio"). The translation seems to be describing a medical procedure where upon noticing someone with convulsions caused by what could have been a joint injury or sprain ("crazy ones"), it is recognized that whatever had dislocated has now returned into its proper position, allowing the disp
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you discover any cause of suppuration (which indicates infection and pus formation), then return to treat it by applying an emplastrum thereof (an external dressing or bandage) according to your first technique, and leave that for three days. Here the text seems to be giving instructions on how to deal with a wound that has become infected ("suppuration"). The advice is likely drawn from traditional medical practices of applying an emplastrum as both protection against infection spreading further into deeper tissues (as indicated by 
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then lift that part up and allow it to walk on crutches for as many days until comfortable (translation suggesting a period of immobilization with the aid of crutches). This indicates after treating an infected area or following any other medical procedure, patients are advised rest and limited mobility – here specifically using assistive devices like crutches to prevent
Capitol .xxxii.	It appears you've provided a fragment of text that may relate to some form
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The treatment for joint dislocation (from Latin: "dislocatio"). Here the medical context suggests an immediate focus on addressing and correct
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thigh is out of joint three times (translation unclear but seems to be referring to multiple instances or recurrences), it has been dislocated both above and below the knee, as well as forward/backward movements; nowhere else are there no more occurrences. This statement from a medical context implies that after treating an initial joint dislocation with certain procedures (which seem undefined but may include manipulation or specific exersitary actions), further episodes of misalignment ("dislocations") have ceased, suggesting successful treatment at the time in question. The instructions likely come from historical medical texts on handling and correcting a thigh's disp
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The name of the displacement is that you command the bowel to apply its cushion in the thigh area; be aware, it gets dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And it is for this reason that her couch rests upon the thigh at its elevation, not laboring.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Return and apply that bandage to the thigh area, attaching it securely with strips of cloth for three days or four, then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the humoral fluid of walking for more than a few days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	May as well the reduction of your condition be excused from you, then apply strong extension to the tendons mentioned in the previous treatment for your joint'dictions.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The text provided is in an archaic form of Latin mixed with characteristics from
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Regarding the treatment for a tarsal dislocation, here's how one might interpret and translate that line considering its context:
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The heel occasionally is twisted due to slight motion or displacement; the sprain of it occurs in any joints or extremities.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The translation of each line from Latin-influenced medieval medical text into English would be as follows:
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May the cure of his return be easier and more comfortable, so that it is extended for ease of movement as well as being kept within until he returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment of him when he is dislocated again, make sure you straighten his thigh correctly and hold that hand strong and valuable from behind the two legs at the place where it rests there.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Return yourself the tender thigh of the patient lying supine on the bed and your left hand to their belly button area in the location of the navel, where you have already provided comfort with a cushion for them both.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Return the arm to your left for two steps, and return it again with an extension of the arm on its left side; press the hand bone against the back of the cushion you have there as part of three turns.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and it occurs when they have eaten recently (after meals), according to what has
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And thus lifts the chest of the patient into position on their bed gently afterward (carefully), and you are at the footstool/bedside restraint.  
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus if the patient returns to health in one or two follow-thy days of treatment and their foot does not become swollen again, then all is well; but otherwise, continue the operation until that return occurs.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are not allowed to reduce it with the water we have prepared, then the hernia will complain above your knees on land, and a tightly woven mat is placed there; between the thighs of yours, and you already enveloped him in cloth so that he does not expose himself.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Return the minister of mercury to their thighs and have another minister extend the patient'se skin or bandage above it that rests on the back of the knee; similarly, expand each appointed official against his extension part so that Mercury will not be drawn out from these parts tonight.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Here the doctor applies pressure on the displacement and another servant holds onto healthy parts of the body until the displacement returns to ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	So when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you that there has been restoration of your body, then apply strong compression bandages and bind tightly this limb with its sinew attached to the cushion.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When you fear or protect the nerves located behind your ankle, to prevent them from being forcefully pulled and led astray on that part of the foot.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return that thing for two or three days, and if it is made softer by the ligature, extend it further outward.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return that item there in the morning or afternoon and prevent it from entering for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it not be the case that if one goes into this space, there is no guarantee that loosening or rupture will not occur here and they do not receive treatment care; return them to their proper place immediately.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply a poultice to the wound we have described previously (in this account), administer it in the location where applied and leave until repletion occurs.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Based on the provided medieval medical text'dictions in an archaic form of
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The phrase "Capitol .xxxiiii." appears to be a citation marker rather than actual content from the treatise, likely indicating page
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The translation of this line from the medieval medical treatise is: "When that which has been dislocated is thrown back only a little, and it's not difficult to set right again." Here, doctors are describing an initial conservative approach for addressing a partial shoulder (or arm) dislocation. It suggests simple repositioning if possible when the displacement of bone from its joint is minimal and can be corrected with basic man
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	The translation for this line is: "If the dislocation occurs in the joints of your arm near the shoulder blade (shoulder), then carry out a procedure whereby you lift up your malady or hernia, with one hand underne0r on its position over land's tabletop/ladder and keep it there as if carried." Here doctors describe an ancient technique for treating dislocations by manually manipulating the affected body part to restore proper alignment. The phrasing reflects a time when medical understanding was intertwined with physical actions rather than modern surgical procedures, suggesting that
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	The translation of this line is: "Treat the positioning of your feet and pause there where you imagine it at the joints; apply chalk to that part underneath which lies a hernia, so as they can return what's inside with caution until retention occurs without appearing in prominence. Here doctors are advising on how one might deal with suspected inguinal (belly-button) or similar types of internal protrusions ("vertuts") which may become dislocated, using chalk to stabilize the area and facilitate a return to its original position within the body cavity. The emphasis is likely on non-invasive methods for managing
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Here comes the translation:
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual line of text from
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	From the spices used to loosen things in children or for a bone fracture, or whatever kind of injury it may be:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of that comes about and you pierce into the treatment of it for its restoration, driven by successive attempts, death follows swiftly.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then perform reduction in the manner of cause therapy so that it heals quickly by applying an aspirin-like treatment.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we pour, then apply the regimen that dissolves putrefaction and heals what is appropriate to it according to the ointments dried out by the spirits.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation occurs and there is a crack in the separated bones, then you must set their position again, making sure they have what was mentioned earlier about these simple waters that were described at those locations of them.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	E guarda and avoid according to your judgment that which comes from within you as per my preaching; for this is better in accordance with God' extrinsic will, perhaps beneficial not only for eternal glory but also health during these times of ours here below on Earth.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi finely polish the lips of Albucasis perfectly, as per God'setup.
Amen.	Given that this text is written in
