Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi begins speaking with us (or is addressing those gathered). The phrase "comensan" here likely means that someone named Ayssi has started
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	So, children, you have completed this book which I present to you now, as the culmination of your science in medicine and through my lectures (and discussions), it has become evident that you understand deeply this subject matter we are covering today—that is from surgery. Here's what each part means:
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	When the operation is exhausted in our region and at all times of complete privacy, enter so that by your science you observe it; there are only small descriptions found freely among Ancient texts, which I modify herein as errors and ignorance have been locked into them over time. These corrections aim to clarify their intentions (i.dictio) and elongate the understanding of our art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here it is stated that I have seen you following the order of this treatise in accordance with its exposure and explanation phases; thus ensuring readiness for handling cautery tools and other instruments needed for execution as per declaration necessity.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May be the reason why no skilled artisan leaves his tool at his belt in our times, for medicine is a long-standing profession and to excel as its practitioner requires knowledge of body movements and forms of these parts; understanding joint connections and separations, bone structure, nerves, muscles (lacertz), their names, organs' functions, pulsing veins, resting vessels, and sites of internal examination.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through the water of Hippocrates that I hold dear as my name's medicine, it may contribute in a minor way and primarily to the field of healing arts.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We now have it from there in the entrance of this free; who does not know what we have told him about anatomy, will fall into error and serve death if he has seen anything like these things, which are formed herein and taken according to that science and those experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the line-by extralinguistic translation: When a doctor with foliage and expertise made an incision in the woman'se chest, making several cuts into her chest arteries so that copious blood entered where she died between them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor ordered that the patient ingest a stone from a home which had been processed in his/her state; the stone was large and entered into their body through one of the bladder's pores, resulting in death on the third day for this home.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for it to be removed therefrom, and because of the greatness of the stone and due consideration given by virtue of its position in the womb that they will die herein.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another doctor took his salary from our land'supreme duke for surgery; and he brought with him an iron knife that had broken in the patient's thigh, due to ignorance of the surgeon, who worsened the fracture on the ground using heavy blows at pillows and beds.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here translates to: Place the lash according to your wishes, and bind it securely with cord or rope over several days at nighttime as directed by us; thus entering until the thigh is exposed through the portal of entry into loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And he called upon him/her, and prepared the ligature to remove it, thereby achthy peace was obtained from his/her pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even if there has been confirmed decay in the limb, it cannot be restrained and must not wander within where the malady resides under the humour' extrusion (pericolazione).
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor pierced an abscess and it ruptured within days; as its malignity grew increasingly evident under the watch of his lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the head'dict has been affected by melancholic humors; it does not happen to him as whole, but rather in one of his limbs which was previously harbored therein.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For you, it is necessary that the operation be planned in two parts: one for health associated with life and another where there is potential danger involved in major operations.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take up your weapons for solicitude and protection of God, and for the health and firmness of those who are ill.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Even though we have lost our way and are in need of salvation and praiseworththy succession, let us confront the most terrible illnesses that require difficult healing, holding fast to your faith and name so you do not abandon them: for perhaps they may remain with you as a source of glory, placing some even within yourself or at home among your sanctified souls.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When gout attacks some of its patients:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Not every physician knows this illness, so that bad doctors will not name it.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And already you have ventured further in this text by three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins with the division of free will, and first in the primary partition.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the feet, in terms of instruments and metals for cauteries, what is required therein.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	La division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The Second Chapter on Surgery and Perforation, and of Vials, Pus, Abscesses, Extraction of Herbs and Similars to these, all has been ordered regarding the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the cleaned portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third part of restoration and loosening, as well as healing the twist and disguises for these; ordered within our heads above the body weight, and forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of focused heat and acute medicine treatment with recall of suffering.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When he begins dealing with all of it freely.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When you determine the quality of that very caustic and its contents are not allowed in any part of him,
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore say that the language of cautery and its obscurity is long and complex according to science; they are disagreeable in discussion, and I have had enough for having heard much from them, which makes it difficult to follow their discourse continuously.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that the pointed cautery comforts all of the body universally, except for two kinds of matter (the ones at the tail ends), which are parts of its material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex and dry matter of the tail; those who use needles are beneficial for that area, while others apply what is contrary to it, as this moisture or fluid needs treatment with wet cupping (cupping therapy), which relates to its quality and dryness. The nature of such ailments in the head where there'thy water and aridity; suitable are those who perform treatments using watery means for these conditions since it concerns both moisture deficiency and lack of humidification, making wet cupping an appropriate treatment.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Examine that which speaks against it; for with cautery, they are greatly effective in curing all types of dry and parched diseases found on men'thy body parts when you compare the man’s limbs to their humors.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And as for the speech of that person, I have already experienced some signs myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Even if it is necessary to perform cautery above what has already been extracted and exercised during the day's practice at the tool of cauterization, understand the complexity of human nature and how diseases manifest in their bodies, as well as the causes of those ailments and their timing.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May occur in other complexities as well; it is not due to fear but mainly from cold sweats and dampnesses—all physicians agree on these matters, without exception when performing cauterization therein.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And where wisdom dictates that the focus and health of each person determine whether we apply cautery on the body or medicine, it is clear that when focusing sole extrication (cauterization), this instrument affects only the part to which it has been applied and not impacting other parts adjusted for small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine cause a burn to reach that in his limb which he languishes from illness and make it difficult for him to recover healthily, quickly causing an urgent need for treatment (medicine).
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire (likely referring to a heating treatment or device), due to its sublimity and beneficial substance, does not cause harm except when it overflows. And we are aware through experimentation and long-term study of servitude in learning this art about the truth of causes; therefore you are excused from lengthy speech (possibly referring to lectures or discussions). As for now during this break, I secretly tempt your focus on the fire'thy quality—this operation carried out at these joints and through which we expel illnesses. This will be demonstrated with philosophic discourse suitable for meditation in their minds (possibly referring to patients taking notes or pondering deeply).
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And learned men, who understand that it is best in the early morning to perform cauterizations and breaks for healing purposes.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E yeu dic that cautery is convenient at all times, in order that harm caused by water retained within it may be drawn out and primarily when ache or necessary pains occur with quickness so as not to delay those which are expected from malicious ones; for such small harms entering over time far exceed the minor drawback of using cautery.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	So do not sit in your feet, or hips, for they are only valued by the common people and ignorant physicians; hence it is that healing through cautery cannot completely eradider this illness immediately, and causes a delay of consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Even though too much use of cautery may occur in medicine due to the patient'se urge and operation vigor, as well as great power held by their lord/master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is contrary to water; I understand that the instruments of healing are only used when administering remedies for some illnesses, and these medicines do not confer their effects themselves, but it's applied by a physician at the root of the cause, and deepens understanding towards this.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	From here onwards, as the treatments with cautery are considered in medicine, according to what is commonly understood by most physicians and others of a similar mindset.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And those made of gold are better than those made of iron for caulceir (cauterization), and they did not use them except for their equality with gold and refinement of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through which we apply iron-tipped forceps and place them properly for the operation procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in the instruments of cautery, they have ordered this chapter as well within the feet, so that when someone asks for it from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cold and moisture for headaches using cautery tools.
Le capitol primier.	The First Point (or Principle).
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers moisture and coldness upon the accident that is your cause; it arises from excessive body fluid (luxuria), running downstream from head to limbs and joints, along with prolonged sleeping, toothache, gouty pain, universally due to bodily chilliness, accompanied by paralysis, coma, apoplexy, and resemblance in these illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the humors to be expelled through medicinal leaks for three or four nights, according to what exhorts from the malady and its patient' extraneousness (age), customarily.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Return the command of their head to its rightful place and apply that tool between your thighs on an elevated bed, holding them over their chest area for support.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	When you pause your thumb on the back of your hand over the bridge of your nose between your nostrubs,
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Whenever the heat arrives from where it has come, this place attempts to push back with fire (the form of which is represented by the ointment), and soothes.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And place that over there where it is bent downwards, which cramping made her body tightened up little by little; turn around this.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	When applying salt and dissolving that over the location, let it stay there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand over him at his navel entrance, and place that thereon which has been destroyed by the focus of fire or cold medicine application inwardly within him.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Return care is given where there's a snake wound within that it should be healed, indicating treatment of such injuries with medication or other therapedictory measures for recovery in the pasted context:
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when a child is taken out (presumably for relief or treatment), such as holding their legs in honeycombs to make it better and more joyful—this suggests an old remedy where gentle restraint, perhaps with something soft like plaster braces made from beeswax known historically as "honey," was used. Here's the translation
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And when they take (presumably a healer or caretaker) the child for cauterization of the navel within their body, and have the instruments therein to treat any fractured parts—this implies that in some form of medieval medicine practice, careful procedures were performed on infants with particular emphasis placed upon treating internal wounds using various tools or medicinal agents inside.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	When it is necessary for bone marrow that has come out of the bone and requires care, then do so accordingly with its needs/treatment.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Here comes another who arrives at the knife' extrinsically (implying that they come into contact with or use a sharp object), and while doing so enters where strong bones are present before entering where the bones crack, which is considered this form of small surgery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And from that place exhale the humors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If there is an abscess that has been present for a long time, then treat it until it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see these various cautery tools for all, but only in learned men following a different path of fear; and this one, you must provide me with greater health when my head is lifted by the sun's position during our daylight hours together, especially since it belongs naturally to the malady above.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	When it comes to early use of pointed cautery, I find them more saving and beneficial than ever before; from that which has already been done for their health.
Capitol segon.	Capitol second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the pointed cautery of the head (This line suggests that we are
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the headache is chronic and long-lasting, and blood accumulants in the abdomen for a prolonged period of time; using knives, scalpels, lancing instruments, tourniquets, cuffs (bandages), pessaries, liniments, poultices, slings, belts or other treatments—mostly if previously cauterized with one such instrument and not properly healed. Moreover, consider that the abdomen's natural structure is strong; it does not easily succumb to severe force without injury—if this has happened due to a lack of proper care for an existing wound or other cause, then immediately use another cautery on the spot (this implies urgent and focused treatment), as necessary.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that over the top of your head for it is time to apply cautery within where the spinal cord has been divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the tongue and reveal the bone thickness we have counted and treated with a heating instrument in the back part of the head where it is applied—this is the location being suctioned by air (ventoscope).
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand so high that you do not discover the thighs, for when applied to them by this remedy it causes a great pain different from the pains of other caustics on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply this cautery in its place, so that the cautery there will treat the corns on the head and back of the skull, which is treated by such a treatment herein described.
Capitol ters.	Capital pain (assuming "capitol" refers to an
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	The translation of this Latin phrase into English, especially within the context provided by a medieval medical treatise discussing gout and treatment methods, would likely be: "For
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When joint pain is solid or when there's internal bleeding inside the knee causing severe discomfort (implied by "cap dolor sodo"), and it’s a condition of urgent medical treatment ("elh" referring to what seems like an old term for hemorrhage), both should be addressed with medicinal cauterization or, alternatively, using iron. This is done in the context of treating diseases; thus avoiding any further action beyond these remedies (implied by "no aprofieyta"). The treatment involves two methods: immediate medical combustion for quick absorption ("cauterisacio am medicina acuta"), or cauterization with a metal tool, possibly iron as mentioned.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Maycalets are used in medicine to take hold of a pewter vessel and remove the extremities from both vessels for you.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Once you have identified the location of pain on the temple with one sharp lance hidden within its area where bone (cranium) is present, then:
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is inside him with care; it has been healed within its container or wound (the reference being either an incision made for treatment purposes, such as dra
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you were to use some of the prescribed tonics in your bathwater for medicine-combustible substances, here is a possible translation:
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	According to this method of treatment, cautery with fire is used for the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clubbed nail, for the head of the foot has the shape of a bell and stands out prominently in that place where there are moisture (likely referring to sweat).
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Return the pause over the location of pain, and hold your hand—so that the iron needle does not stick out (which has been previously used), twist it slowly by speed for careful work.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that is collected through the stool indicates how much has been absorbed by your body and you ensure your hand over it to prevent arterial constriction which could lead to bleeding (flux di sangre), then take care accordingly so as not to let any excessive flow occur.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you go forth, then perform cautery on the tip of the lancet according to cauterization and be careful not to cut an artery during this procedure that is already ancient in its own right.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quart (Assuming "quart" is
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	From what you've provided, it seems like the text might be a mixture of Latin and possibly regional medical jargon or shorthand from an older
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat emigration-related issues that have been previously discussed, and what has been mentioned about the divisions of diseases, if not properly attended to or treated, sometimes for a disease whose potions (medicinal remedies) we've spoken about earlier – including those meant specifically as cauterizing salves applied externally at wounds/incisions intended for curative purposes and internal applications via the mouth administers of medicine - there is pain along long lines that mark where this sickness (possibly a type or lineation related to emigration-related conditions) lies. You then apply pressure with your hand, restrained by time spent within these confines using an awl – which I interpret as being used here metaphorically rather than literally for cauterization - and ensure that it reaches the spot of pain along this long line wherein resides its essence or core.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the grinding jaw, which must be used for chewing, and that there not be tightness or pain in the nerves associated with this movement, so as not to provoke a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the guardianship and caution of blood flow from where artery begins, there'thy fear in that place, mostly towards what he does not know and doesn't study, then perform the operation hereinwith him.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When recalling the regimen of fluid accidents according to our medical doctrine in this free space.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If from this illness that does not supply the required cautery and if you find it unbearable for your patient' extricated in their head area as we have described earlier, then perform the cauterization there at once, while taking care of whatever is inside to heal.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you come here, administer the one we mentioned in our discussion about hot iron instruments for cauterization; this and more will be better treatments.
Capitol .v.	The given Latin phrase "Capitol" likely refers to an item
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	From your provided text, it appears that you are asking for translations of lines from what seems like historical medical texts possibly written in early modern European languages such as Latin or
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the thorn there is pain caused by a flaw and it requires healing according to what has been stated herein (or elsewhere), but this does not alleviate the suffering. Hence, ignite cauterization with fire; that's which we refer to as puncture for relief of such anguish.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English: Apply points with ignition and carry it throughout all of the body'dictus area or through any given segment where pain is experienced, using a rotating wheel if necessary.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long you hold the cautery of the red-hot iron near where your limb tries to stretch,  
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points are made on the entire body with their respective tools and care is taken for those areas that have healed, then:
Capitol .vi.	In order to provide an accurate translation of this medieval medical text line by
De cauterizacio de turtura.	The process or act of cauterizing a wound, typically in the context provided here would be translated into English
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The wound that is being treated with cautery consists of spices brought in by the veins, as mentioned in our divisions concerning diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid using special caustic that is needed due to dryness or paralysis of nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that particular type of torture and cleaning out feces and putrefaction, so as not to impair your healing process; then take care that the tools for treating this condition are three cauteries: one made from a golden hook, the second small touch with temple movements, and thirdly, use the union of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When applying the pointed cautery for the contrary parts of the sick body section, it soothes only in the healing portion that appears.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is to apply the caustic on top of the head' extramundy part, and in the temples, where its length equals that of the patient's beard growth, keep your hand applying it until sufficient has been burned off.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how it works with a cautery and belongs specifically to barber surgeons; this form I present now.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May there be subtlety so that one who scarcely breathes can do so under you; and when excessive swelling of a few accumulates, take action immediately.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for where it is happening now as healing occurs within this space.
Capitol .vii.	Certainly! The provided lines seem like an excerpt from a historical
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	The line "Capitol .vii." suggests that the following content is likely related to section VII of some larger text, perhaps detailing ancient
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and the remedies we have mentioned apply—if your physician does not observe fever in the patient's blood—then you shall perform this procedure with four types of cautery: upon all their head hair; on both ears at the same time, as discussed hereinabove (as indicated by our previously stated methods); and for any swelling or inflammation ('coguot') within these regions.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The action of the pointed cautery is said to be caused when it is lifted up as per what has been previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And there has been cauterization on the stomach'thy mouth, and it may be worse; but its healing depends upon the water that proceeds from within you.
Capitol .viii.	In this translation of "Capitol .viii.", it's challeng
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The phrase in question appears to be a medieval medical term related to treatment, likely derived from Latin roots due to its somewhat archaic structure and word choices reminiscent of ancient languages like Latin
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	This line translates into English as: "The covering that is given to the hernia during great hunger and pills for chewing." In a more coherent medical context, this could be interpreted as follows: During severe famine or extreme need (indicated by 'grans' meaning large/great in
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	The translation for this medieval phrase would be: "Reduce the head of the hernia and place your hand on it, as described in the section about strains." In modern medical terminology, this could mean that a healthcare professional should apply manual techniques to alleviate or compress (possibly via bandaging) the swolthy part of an inguinal hernia following specific procedures outlined elsewhere
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	This translates to: "And after a few days (or perhaps when it is necessary), then apply the points." In contemporary terms, this suggests that following initial treatment or observation period for an injury—which could be wound dressing in modern medical practice
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	The translation is: "And after the amount of wine mentioned earlier, which has already been discussed." In today's context, this might refer to a specific dosage and frequency recommendation for alcohol (w
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	This line translates to: "And if for those who are ill (boes), then after three cauterizations in the previous division of your head, these will be from the portion above within which is located at the base of the neck." In a modern medical interpretation, this could refer to an intervention where specific locations on someone's scalp or forehead receive targeted treatments for health issues—potentially implicating procedures like cauterization used in various historical contexts. The reference points ("portion above within which is located at the base of the neck") might correspond with areas considered significant by ancient practitioners, possibly relating to vital body systems or le
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And there is space between each of these instruments, and take care that this water which flows comes out properly.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you increase and the thigh allows it, then apply cautery at the heat location; if your addition is greater than usual, then cauterize that area on both toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Return that which has been healed inside it; and apply those cauldrons as they have been given by the hand of God.
Capitol .ix.	The provided medieval medical text seems jumbled between several languages with some Latin
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	This line appears to be a blend of terms from different historical periods and could relate to various treatments:
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the head area and remove what has been said; and return your hand to the back of the neck, where apply a caustic for that place on the top of the head, as well as over all parts thereof (the forehead), and three cauterisms are performed upon the vertebrae of the spine.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the illness of suppression for that foot'dictorate to eliminate those humors there and if the malady itself is severe, then apply four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and insert them within such a way as they may become comfortable from under the chin.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which has been healed inside with olive oil treatment and take care of it; this is also about cautery made from olive wood.
Capitol .x.	The provided line is not in Latin or any of its similar languages but
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This phrase appears to be related to a medical context, specifically concerning the treatment for seizures (epilepsy). Here
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The line translates from Latin-influenced syntax into English as: "It is not the patient with epilepsy that has been cauterized, but rather it's through restraint." This suggests an ancient medical approach where instead of direct inter
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	The provided line translates into English as: "Thus, we cover the patient'dictor’s mind at mealtime and for other care prescribed upon division when excess humors are present and can be tolerated through medicine." Here, it seems that a treatment approach involves covering or possibly healing the 'mind', potentially referring to addressing neurological symptoms such as those seen in certain forms of epilepsy. The term "mondify" could suggest some form of purification process using food (meal time) combined with prescribed treatments that come into effect when there's an imbalance
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	The line translates as: "If the patient is an infant who does not tolerate medicine, administer linseed emollients and digestives serums to this servant of mind at mealtime for several days in order to improve food intake." Herein lies a medieval practice where gentler substances such as linseed (flax) are used possibly due to the patient's age or mild reaction, with an emphasis on gradual dietary enhancement through these supplemental serums during meals for several days. This highlights tailored care
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	The translation of this medieval line into English would be: "Then raise the hairline of the hump and apply that which is a pointed instrument to where there's already an incision made by previous treatment, as well applying another pointed cautery on their skull base, while also cauterizing each kernel at these points." This suggests specific interventional practices such as lifting up skin lesions (hairline of the hump), using precise instruments for making incisions or treating pre-existing wounds and applying targeted cauterizations. The term "cauterize" here refers to a technique used by ancient physicians, potentially involving heat application on affected areas –
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the humors are strong and bearable, then heat those areas with caustics where I have indicated, to cause paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the back and of the two (i.dictate these cauterizations).
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And when it is necessary for a second time of use of olive oil as an instrument (cauterization), then so shall be used accordingly at that moment in its
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the humors are from a child (indicating an infant or young person), then pause and use subtle instruments as directed by this practice/methodology.  
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (Since there is no direct English translation
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de melencolia" translates to "for the cautery of mel
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and moist humors that have become congested in the body, it is then by means of these very caustics applied directly to areas affected with paralysis where healing may occur.  
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excessively declining into melancholy, and the body' extrudates humidity, then drink what cleanses the brain after whatever was drunk previously in division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Return their head of the patient, and with proper handling make them lie down on it, holding that area so they don'thy come out during feverishness atop the head (where resting is done).
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The mentioned joint (likely referring back to a previous context where "joints" or related body parts were discussed) has its malady sexto calenturous and is entirely disintegrated/broken down throughout the whole.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Here, apply balm or poultice; it has properties similar to sheep'dictone (an old remedy likely used for its supposed healing benefits). This line suggests the application of a specific treatment believed by medieval practitioners to have beneficial
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that has been carefully applied over the focus (a body part possibly referring back earlier in context) for warmth measures—this causes discomfort when one lies down on it or otherwise comes into contact with said area, suggesting a treatment meant to alleviate pain upon touching something warmed specifically. Here "foc
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Return that to the neck area at the head's base in its circle (likely referring back earlier), and wrap it tightly so it is well secured or bandaged on; this suggests an action taken for either warmth, compression therapy, or protection of a wound/injured part. The reference to "enfregidat" implies some form
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Wash that area of the groin throughout the week with clean linens inside it—this is part of another regimen, allowing for healing; or if necessary, anesthetize small points on this affected region as directed by law (perhaps referring to guidelines set out in a medical text), using specifically those types of cauterizing needles that moisten the brain upon application. This line suggests specific hygiene practices and various treatment methods including careful washing, rest or compression therapy for healing, along with controlled use of topical anesthesia potentially involving particular herbs (signified by "specia de cauteiris") believed to have this special property when applied evenly. The mentioning of the brain ("cervel am equalitat" translates roughly as “brain at balance”) suggests a concern for maintaining or restoring proper bodily functions, perhaps hinting towards humoral theory where imbalances
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Return that stitch in place at the border or in areas of linseed (gualia).
Capitol .xii.	Capitol XXII. (The "XII" in Roman numerals
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	From the waters falling down into the wound: Cauterization with water descent to treat an injury or ulceration within the body, as might have been described in medieval
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you declared the consumption of water into the wound through your joints during division and distribution (possibly referring to a treatment method), it is then that begins this process: Pouring clean water from above cleanses the head, while protecting against all moisture reaching there. The text appears to describe an early form of hydrotherapy or topical application using water for healing purposes in medieval times—a concept not unfamiliar when considering today's physical therapy practices which also involve manipulation with fluids and temperature as part of treatment regimens, although modern approaches are based on extensive scientific research.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that soapy water is used for bathing over several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Here enters the pointed cautery into all veins and arteries, which are then considered surgical instruments within that distance of the temple' extramarginal boundaries where these operations take place.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	When you observe blood flow during caustering; if at any time there is also blood from the patient, apply some medicine for yourself as it'thy within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	When one arrives with such knowledge that they are outside the arches and abdomen, and caution of fluid flow is necessary;
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases, one or two caustics are applied between the bones of the joint within a few days using different tools produced by certain individuals.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (The translation may be speculative as 
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	From ancient cautery treatments: (This line suggests that the following content is likely to discuss historical approaches or remedies for treating w
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When ancient tears of the veins and arteries are tightly compressed in the region where it is evident that there are too many phlebitic varices (which refers to swollen, twisted veins), we perform cautery on what has been previously mentioned in Chapter XXIII regarding water cupping therapy inside the hollows of these vessels. We also apply cauterization at the head location and two cauterisms are applied within the neck's temple area—two implements for each temporal bone, respectively (the translation interprets "templas" as temples or sockets associated with temporal bones in anatomical terms).
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If there are ingestions of addition (which can refer to excess or imbalance in the body), then burn that entire part above the hip bone on the upper extension of the small cautery instrument.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol Book xiv. (Assuming "Capitol" refers to a
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	The phrase provided appears to be from an older medical text, likely in Latin or medieval vernac0na language influenced by it.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you as the healer fail to properly treat that which we have discussed in division and do not apply your medical knowledge, then prepare three vessels of water; pour over his head, covering it upwards (the top or crown), and use these waters for cauterization on both foul-nose malignancy wounds as well.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And if it is necessary to burn that which has been done with pointed cautery, then apply one of the two lancets over each pair of hair buns slightly.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Guard your tool of irons so that you do not pierce through it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	From this instrument of cautery is this form.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv. (The given text does not provide enough context
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	From the provided phrase "Cauterization of eyelashes in patients," a possible translation into English, assuming it's similar to Latin or medical jargon
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the patient's eyelid is affected by disease or moisture, it will be treated with this specific form of cauterization known as "lunar" treatment. This represents how doctors address such conditions according to medieval medical practice described herein. The term “cauteriza” refers to the act of intentionally burning a part of the body using heat or chemicals, typically used in ancient and early modern medicine for various reasons including sterilization (to prevent infection) and stopping bleeding after an injury—a concept that has influenced medical practices up until today
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you were to perform this procedure as described in the text: apply a small amount of caustic substance (this could be referring back to various forms such as mercury or another cauterizing agent used historically) onto both eyebrow rims, they would elongate. The term "elonguatz" indicates that this action causes stretching outward; here it's likely aimed at altering the
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	According to the amount of caustic applied, so will be determined by each specific case based on individual assessment and required therapedictional needs; this approach reflects an era when medical interventions
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press your hand upon the caustic area; may it be done according to how much moisture has accrued on a portion of the eyelid, indicating that practitioners were cautious and tailored their approach based on observable symptoms such as excessive wetness or dampening (adhurida) which could indicate an underlying condition requiring treatment. This
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.: (The translation of this line is not possible
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the hair turns into dirt particles and fingers pick up the person, use forceps (forceps are tools resembling tweezers) to handle them gently yet firmly.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the skin become inflamed due to an arrow shot into them, they are treated with two types of therapy: either branding or medical treatment involving fire is applied.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you have a cautery at hand (sharp instrument for medical procedures), command the melancholy to go outside, and let it out through those parts where their bodies are currently wet; enter so that they prolong and swell up inside until such time as these patients' hairs turn into one bandage around them, ensuring no more humidity enters while making sure their body hair turns black.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when women give birth and go into labor, the head of uterus rests on the neck (or lower part) of the body as it enters the vagina, placing a hand over the eye lid to attempt this gesture again according to their facial expression shape that resembles a shield made from earth. And so holds also its clothing for hygiene purposes around hair and skin areas where hands are held during labor.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Return your hand pressure inwards undernethy or on powder made of flax over her belly,
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Return the ignited cautery of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Here comes the sentence translation: Return cauterization over the figure that his face forms, little by little through motions guided until it is burned off completely where there was fat of myrtle present, entirely properly done.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of sanity in his work is that you use your fingers to gently touch the patient'thy eyes and lift their hairs with a needle prick.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore raise your hand and place it over the area within three days so that the shield is erected therein.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside has been applied, ensuring its healing.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If any cause returns to them and their eyes are softened, then they will need other instruments for that very same treatment as it was at the beginning.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hair is in the eye lid's corner (the medically referred area here seems to be around or near the eyes), then cauterize that part which has been raised back to its natural place and ensures they do not tear the hair.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery (medicine) be used for this purpose that you command the humors to enter and coat within which are elongated and inflamed, and apply its salve form of myrtle leaves' dressing as such.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here rests upon medicine and apply that little without letting the humoral heat enter where the ardor of medicine bites it down hard like a hot iron in firelight.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	When the atrophy-causing bite is perceived, then apply that medicine which was previously applied to your tongue; when the biting ceases, cleanse with water that has been used for rinsing or incision—if you see the eyelid raised since being cleansed (meaning after it's been wiped), and if there is no return of the bite within where medicine was applied without causing damage during your operation;
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Return the pause over there within which the stone of obstruction has been eliminated and take care that this warm oil or another contained inside it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to observe constant vigilance so that no disease of medicine falls upon the patient, and if your eye lid becomes softened on any day or there's an issue with their fur causing pain in this area, then repeat your treatment at this location where it has been made mollified (soothed), specifically for these pains to aid consumption. Additionally, ensure that they are kept inside so they can heal properly.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one uses myrtle gum. (Or more accurately translated considering historical medical practices and language nuances:) This is the method
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	So you know that human bile varies according to height and size, thus it is the cause of your condition (or illness). This statement aligns with medieval medical belief where they thought different physical characteristics could influence internal humors within a person's body leading to various health conditions. Here 'fayta la tua contraccio' can be interpreted as being caused by or responsible for one’s symptoms, which
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And not if the passage is obstructed to that extent towards where we study this in this text (or work). It suggests a practical approach, focusing on removing blockages or restoring proper flow within one's body as per their studies of an
Capitol .xvii.	Not if the pathway is blocked to such an extent that it affects our study here
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of lancing or curing a tear duct's abscess (or infected passageway). The term 'fistula' historically referred to an abnormal connection between two body parts, often used here in the context
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula (abscess), adhere to what we've discussed regarding the divisions of diseases and do not neglect your treatment; thus, how you conduct the lancing should follow this method: command bile into its thoracic cavity so that it does not spill out from whereever. Keep some servant within those interstices (spaces between organs) in such a way as to prevent leakage or agitation atop these locations without disturbing them excessively with your hand's pressure during the procedure—this reflects historical medical practice which often involved direct manipulation of body humors and used tools like servants ('ministries') for internal support.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return your hand pressure above or below on the patient's body, in an oil balm or poultice of flaxen threads over their skin.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the hot points of this instrument (cauterium), that is its form.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Where it is secured like a staff or sickle blade from one limb where the instrument (cautery) causes pain:
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go, it will enter into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to come out as an attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	May it be better for him in his bodywork.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	When an abscess is opened up, and of it heals through drying out that thing.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If there is not an outburst (meaning a rupture or discharge), then work on that and extract the purge from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place the lit cautery over it (the area being treated), holding that tool in your hand; and a small one of these tools on their navel, to prevent yourself or the humors from becoming agitated, placing this smaller instrument at the site of the nose'dicture.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the caustic enters into the mouth and goes down to the throat (introducing it internally), do so; but if not, repeat the application of the cauterization once or twice a week as per medical practice is required, doing this for three days and then pause over that spot until such time when it becomes dry outfitted with medicated dressings placed therein.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	May it be that they have passed ten days and are not healed? Then place the sharp, acute medicine within so that bone may become exposed and proper treatment according to one' extran (doctor) can occur in their capital city hall.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have from cautery and treatment, behold; but if not, it will be necessary to administer medicine through the nose and reduce the fistula in its nasal cavity as soon as possible at its location.
Capitol .xviii.	The provided text appears as if it is using archaic or region-specific language that
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Translating this line into English, we get: "Cautery of the chipped tooth." This sentence suggests a medical procedure from medieval times involving
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Translation into English: "Chronic acid erosions of the lips, and mostly in children's lips." This sentence refers to a condition observed during medieval times where there was an ongoing issue with lip fissures or cracks that were particularly common among young individuals. The use of medical termin
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Translation into English: "So you treat those fissures with the acid we have mentioned in regard to divisions and their treatment; little cruciate lancets are used according to this form." In medieval medicine, these small metal instruments would be dipped or 'sprinkled' (as suggested by your phrase) with a healing substance—likely an alkali like plant ash vinegar mentioned earlier. The use of the term "cruciate" refers not only to their cross-shaped tip but also evokes imagery reminiscent of holy symbols, aligning medical
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Translation into English: "The cavity is treated according to the subtlety of its form." Here, a skilled practitioner would address an underlying condition—likely some type of organ
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Translation into English: "Place a pause there on those chipped teeth where the lancet reaches inside the cracks." This instruction implies that, following treatment with cruciate (cross-shaped) instruments for tooth erosions or damage ('chipped' here refers metapthyically perhaps to deeper decay), one should carefully halt any further progression of dental issues. The notion
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Translation into English: "Care for that which is healed within where it stands." Here, the physician or caregiver would maintain and monitor any area of repair
Capitol .xix.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise with
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	In this line, the term "cauterize" refers to the process of burning a wound or lesion on purpose (ussando fuego)
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is an ulcer on the uvula or in the palate, and it has become crusted over (esproucada) with age-related lesions (antiguata), a fistula develops; thus you must apply your remedy to that area without furthering its healing – provided there is something we've prescribed for this treatment. Apply the recommended amount of cautery heat, as directed in relation to the location and size of the ulcer (fractura), placing it at the site where fire will travel upwards from within until reaching above your head; then continue with two days or a course of therapy – while you do this ensure that warmth is maintained internally. Apply what we have prescribed for healing during this process, enssuring complete recovery as indicated by our guidance (curas).
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if the disease is removed and healthy again, be content with it; but if not, you must discover where it has eroded its course according to how much will come forth in one'sin examination.
Capitol .xx.	The provided text appears to be related to medieval medical practices for treating
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	From the context of medieval medicine and your line, it seems you are referring to treatments pertaining specifically to teeth (dentes) and gums (angulas). Translating this phrase into English while keeping
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are soothed with moisture and teeth become decayed, seeking medical treatments does not cure them; hence you should pause at the base of your thighs (which could refer to where treatment may be applied or a position taken), apply ignited lancets properly designed for this task. Place these burning instruments nearer over each affected tooth so that its heat can penetrate and heal the decayed areas within, all contained safely inside an enclosure which you will provide (perhaps suggesting some form of protection like gauze or a cloth).
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And lift your hand, and apply the pointed cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here the malady is brought to water with salt and held there by its mouth for an hour, then it stupros that; when the decayed tooth is closed and the soft gum becomes strong and tissue impurity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise written
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	When translating "Cauteorizacio del dolore dei denti," we can infer the meaning as follows:
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or infection (abscess), and if the treatment does not provide comfort through medicine, then two types of caustic treatments are employed: either a corrosive applied at the cow's hooves edge, or one used on open sores.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterize the border that you grip where cows and buckets are in the forge, and wrap it around the extremity of the torch burning inside, and cover that part which has a hot iron at its border with this covering, placing it over the area causing pain until it is burned through.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding until the heat of the focus reaches the root of the teeth (meaning that you should gently push any displaced organ like an intestine/hernia
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If so be thou submerges wool or cloth beneath the border thereof, and places it upon the toothache (likely referring to a discomfort in one'dict teeth), place your hand above that area until the flame of the heating instrument reaches the rooted foundation below wherein pain exists.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Even though you apply cauterization at the focus of blood or iron within his chest where there may be any swelling, so that this heat does not reach the mouth of the malady.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Apply fire to the form of which it will come, and place that upon the teeth so that the cautery becomes hot; apply some drops as needed when the pain is severe or in that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When the patient exhales through that instrument (cause), and lifts their tongue for an hour, then this is how the use of the instrument goes:
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if it is within your power that you are able to perform such action with a hot instrument (cauterize), then do so accordingly, according to what comes naturally for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the form of the cannula looks like:
Capitol .xxii.	Since there is no text provided for translation beyond this line containing only Roman numerals
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	The phrase "Capitol .xxii." alone does not provide enough context or words to translate into English directly related
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external wounds are caused by draining and excess fluids within the body, they do not submit to digestion according to medicine; therefore you must ignite these cauterizers for their form—they have two handles so that one can light it with a stick or other implement. Light this instrument at its extremities where fire is required in order to use each end of the tool properly: extingubate (turn off) the flame on top, leaving just enough heat over the ulcer for relief; then if you wish to continue treatment by inserting into it—do so only until healing progresses.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the swelling is slight, then pause the application of heat according to the extent of the inflammation; and leave it on for three days or until the applied warmth has done its work whereby the fire from the focus (infection) has been extingubated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is ill within him with oil and bandages inside where he may be cured.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And it is shaped like or made into such a tool as this implementer has.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.: This line does not contain enough context for translation
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	The provided text appears to be related to medical practices, likely from a historical or ancient source given the language style that seems like an early form of Romance languages such as Italian and Latin mixed together with Middle English (evident by words like
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes upon the lung area and mainly when it is inflamed (or swollen), then feverishness occurs within that body part, which should be evacuated by medicines known as laxatives to promote excretion of excess humidity. Furthermore, apply cauterization precisely on the affected knee joint's region where pressure builds up or is concentrated for healing purposes in medicine treatments.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	When you do not reach for the points of gout or burn the patient'se knee without a reason, then only use such treatment (implying minimal and necessary intervention).
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And treat that joint in the lower spine with another caustic, as required for its healing.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The pointed cautery of it cuts in the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which came in so it may heal.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide contextual text for translation in this
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	The phrase appears to be referring to the treatment of a chest illness and cough:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When a cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, there is no fever or chills present because it'dictates an ancient illness (presumably pneumonia), thus two cauterisms will be performed on the sternum at locations between the collarbone joints in the neck bones; furthermore, another lancet-like tool for cautery shall also operate around the chest region where there are breasts. These procedures adhere to previous forms of treatment (implying that they follow a traditional or established method).
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, your cautery points will be the very same ones that are called out for joint pain in auricular areas (forehead). The form of these points comes before their use for addressing such pains.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And when points are entered into those places, take care of that which has been put in there to make it heal properly.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now, for three wounds you can perform cauterization on this way: make three such cauterizations.
Capitol .xxv.	Based on my understanding of Latin roots found in many Romance languages such as
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	From the provided fragments and context, here's a possible translation for "Capitol .xxv." However, please note that without more specific text or clear sentence structure, this is an approximation
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's head is displaced due to slippery humors and must return within the hour of their recovery time according to our testimony, then with small movements you can reposition it so that its malady returns above your chest or thighs; furthermore raise the collarbone which lies in opposition at the joint site below these body parts if such dislocation occurs there.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the cautery has two heads; this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And apply a caustic within where that which enters from another, and there will appear the figure of caustic application; for those crucibles contain ashes.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus according to the amount of attempt; this is how it should be done:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some ways they are adjusted according to this count and for these reasons, there are eight types of cautery instruments used (the Latin phrase "cauterismes" here refers to the use of heat or fire applied through a metal instrument called 'cautery' typically
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place your hand over the caustic implements used for burning (the cautery instruments), and with it encourage the humors to settle into a state of tranquility, ensuring that no part of the body is left exposed or agitated until comfort has been achieved.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If dislocation occurs below the joints and it hurts there, then apply a caustic tool over the muscle to cauterize (using heat/cautery), whereby confirmation of healing is achieved as fluid accumulation resolves, resulting in improved health.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitul XXVI: This likely refers to a specific chapter or section number
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Regarding the cautioning of the stomach, this would indicate that in Chapter LXXVI (or Roman
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When humors accumulate within the stomach and are digested beyond what can be safely processed, continuing with your healing methods may result in ascending malabsorption to the upper abdomen where you should extend hands and belongings; apply three types of cautery: one on each side of a caustic tool (suggestive of applying heat directly), two more for both sides at once, within which shape takes form as triangular—these represent healing through the directed application. Moreover, lengthen what has not been adjusted to perform palliative intervention or minor manipulations; this is referred herein to 'poyredura,' a term possibly denoting localized treatment aiming at pain relief and restoring proper function without surgical intervention within these guidel0s of cauterization.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery corresponds to the quantity of both ends of the pubic bone,
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to use it as such a tool for cauterization, and if you want to perform large cauterization at the stomach area according to this form; then that will be a round-shaped cauterium.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is burned with this cautery: and you have control over how much to touch it, as desired for experimentation, and similarly apply such treatment to those points; also take care that what has come before in terms of healing occurs while so treated.
Capitol .xxvii.	The provided text seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical manuscript with terminology that
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	In this line, the term "cauterize" is mentioned in relation to treating foot wounds or issues ("del fietge
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When foot pain occurs due to dryness or moisture within the body cavity beyond its normal capacity leading to excessive outflow and where there is a malady that has water in it which causes discomfort without cushioning, then take care of this condition with what we have provided for drainage. Hereafter three times after applying them above on the chest (which could indicate an area involved by disease), place each application directly onto the foot near where a patient lies down at home.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	When it'dicts about each space between the applied cautions according to its thickness of the said body and where those cautions are placed following the length of the limb for four times.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	No, do not use your pointed cautery for yourself. (This translation maintains a literal interpretation while attempting to convey medieval medical practice wisdom into modern English
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of fluid that is retained in the bladder exceeds its capacity and it remains on your feet; if not present already within you (which could imply urination), then proceed to stand up, as this has extended their limbs which should be raised high.  
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is how the pointed cautery should be used:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	When it is possible for you to use these needles with delicate skill and caution in the art of medicine:
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Ensure you do not proceed further in the cauterization process, and secure all of your fingers together so that it is completely burned throughout the hand where numbness occurs here – be aware of this fact.
Capitol .xxviii.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing symptoms like joint
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	When treating the impalement of a horse, use caution in your actions. (Note: This translation attempts to convey general advice for handling what seems likely an injury situation involving
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is excitement or impalement of the horse and you want to know if that puncture wound affects either flesh (tunica) of the horse or its hide (carn), when it's in the body’dict, mallet abscesses intensify pain.  
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the gown of the patient and the pain intensifies so much that even doctors have tired of curing him/her.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore when the malady is positioned over the skull'supreme part of the head', and you provide cover for the spot wherein pus has formed; here too employs are those very same instruments which were described on another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And in that place apply the caustic and insert it where all of the intestine is cleaned out, until reaching the cyst, at which point when the diseased part becomes inflamed (on fire).
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Return that wound for its own healing as well-tended by others' remedies.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Not that the method of cauterization used here is not one studied in medicine for a long time; it has been effective against many illnesses and may still be tried with caution on this procedure, but we must adhere to these methods as they are beneficial.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of purifying wounds through cautery.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	When you take your hand for the caustics, they appear in the form of a stone at work on the knee.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture there is no fear of wounding you for it heals in the location where a fistula remains unhealed.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" is not provided with context or
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	From scalding of the wound (or incision). Here, it seems like a directive related to treatment involving heat for healing
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you heal the wound (or incision), if you do not apply our treatment method discussed earlier for division and repair, then there are three ways to perform scalding or lancing according to which all these actions are correct; as shown by figures of scalpels on the left side, whose designs have preceded. Here they describe one specific approach: make three cuts (or lances) following the length of the wound in accordance with illustrated scalpel shapes from a figure that has set an example for such procedures beforehand.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Between every lancet or small knife used in foot surgery, and its use is also our own touch on these instruments.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply your hand to the cautery; and inflammation is on its two sides (the patient).
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if it is another cautery method required, then you light both ends of the cauteries used, which causes them to burn in the head' extrication area, where bone marrow resides on top of the thighbone (the hip socket), associated with the malady dark humors.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if it is your lifting that causes the penile position according to the length of the body, so they will be set with cautery as dictated by law (cosmic order or natural anatomy).
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Return both garments into place, fire or warmth in that area where they enter the other' extraneous parts of the body.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return (or bring back) the points of the cautery; and so they are four pieces of cautery used herein.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you go, then apply three kinds of cautery as has been used before.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVII. (The Roman numeral "XXVII
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	From cautery of joints/gouty areas. ("Cauteria" refers to the medical procedure mentioned
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Not in the body parts themselves, but directly on them properly is what should be done with a lancet for cautery (in this case referring specifically to treating joint pain likely due to
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat a wound for healing (presumably the joint or affected area), do not confine your treatment to these mentioned four curative implements; rather they should all be applied according to this method: one as an encompassing cauterization within the chest, another on the stomach, and others positioned respectively upon the legs, pelvis (hip joints or spondyles), middle of the backbone, neck bone area with two additional applications being made over the abdomen.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is suitable for the sharpness of the bone,
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Return the caustic inserted for that it may be healed over time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And when the humors within are drained with water that is poured for their benefit so they may be added to those intentions of cure provided by proper nourishment and sustenance from which you have invited help.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the lancet is what it burns when used inwards as its preceding form dictates, and that very one where it was previously burnt for two olive leaves follows afterward according to their previous forms.
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that this excerpt appears in an ancient or medieval context with language
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	In reference to the treatment of feet and hernias, here's a translation:
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swolthy and filled with thin water between the earlobe and ring finger, apply cauterization to both sides of the foot without twisting it; raise your hand holding the cautery upwardly and do not return it completely thereof, for the thin water retreats.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line into English:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes the sentence to translate line by line into English:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lay sickness has been cured for long time that any water returns from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Regarding the cautioning of abdominal wounds or lesions:
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When intestinal gas is formed due to moisture and needs to be expelled for digestion and retention purposes, these are the processes occurrdict in the stomach and belly (or womb), which doctors treat with pills of healing without fearing complications. Sometimes when a malady reveals its internal gas through cautery procedures—as done previously during the caustic treatment of the stomach, as well as for the small intestine's circlet and four subtil (fine) cautions: one on the navel above abdominal bones or pelvis floor; another below them; a third beneath it all—and also external cautery over great belly hernias.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see excessive humidities and the malady exhales them away, then apply such over the penile area and on hernias, firmly adjusting the cauterises upon the stomach and above the inguinas; this is curative for health without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Given that this text appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical termin
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de emorroyds" can be translated into English as follows:
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When old humors thickened or corrupted fluids are present in the lower back vertebrae and small thighs of two little ones, they are healed by three poultices applied to the pus on their joint spondylosis (small triangular bones), and cauterized below the navel with four lancets.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food intake has not led to decay, or if they have been constipated at times, then perform that great cautery on the stomach as preceded; and another treatment with a lancet over his bellybutton (umbilicus), yet another with an awl upon his chest wound(s) using caustic treatments – apply these instruments for some time until he recovers.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" is not part of the provided text ex
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	And place it in their abdomen, for its treatment through caustic application to the ulcer'thy opening (likely referring back to an inguinal hernia).
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you withdraw heat (from), then light the cautery that was assembled by fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Return the fire within that ache in the groin to its place and ensure it enters where the instruments of treatment will reach, so as for the bloodletting tools (the cupping) can enter into the venous opening from which the sickness comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When there is an excess of fluid or pus, and after treating each one in turn that we have recorded, take care of those you will provide for them within which they are wrapped with bandages as part of their healing process.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you perform a large cautery on this matter, it may restore vitality.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Since I don'thy provide translations for specific Latin texts or historical medical documents
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The treatment of naturally occurring abscesses (which are fires, as it may be translated in medieval language) on the skin involves certain procedures:
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not heed the work we have recommended in that place and the patient is frightened by it, they are healed through caution (careful treatment).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when any one has an ulcer in nature and it is ancient and sick with wet corruption, thus worthy that the accused be brought forth to expose this subtle evil beneath its depth as shown herein described; then take care of how much moisture there at present within.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Return with the cautery that seems like fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Return that burning cautery there in this fistula and according to how much it twists within.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the application of the cautery within which they have been used until those parts are healed for one or two feast days, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Guard your combustion of nerves and veins; or if a fistula reaches the thighs, buttocks, or hernia sac, guard them all here; do not apply heat until the fistula is in solid flesh that you don'thy consider it penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Return care for where it has been healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the place is sealed off and materials have been removed from it for a long time, then you will know that the patient has fully recovered.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not already disintegrated within you, then understand that they permeate your bones or enter through small openings therein; these causes from which memory will return to their place in one'dicts mind.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Given that this medieval text uses phrases reminiscent of Latin with some elements
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	And in applying caustic treatment, or perhaps referring to the use of a chemical agent (which could be interpreted as
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the joints is caused by congestion or heavy breathing, and as a result of this pressure on the spleen (which could be understood within some traditional medicine theories), it becomes necessary to cauterize that area over each inflamed knee specifically with caustic substances. This procedure also serves for memory retention related to these painful joints – perhaps indicating an early understanding, even if rudimentary by modern standards, of the connection between physical symptoms and psychological experiences or recollections associated with them (the term 'rememoracio').
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And when we apply cautery for the second time quickly, three lines of incision are made, and thus they may serve in healing more recently acquired wounds.
Capitol .xxxviii.	The text provided appears to be from an old medical manuscript discussing treatments for joint pain
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	In this line, the term "cauterize" refers to a historical medical procedure where heat or chemicals were applied
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When acute inflammation and excessive moisture prevent mucus from being expelled through the bladder (urine), a procedure to debilitate and soften these symptoms is carried out for pus infection within that chamber of urine, using hairs as part of this treatment. Cauterize therein at its purulent section with one cautery while others are applied on the penile area (likely referring to different parts of male genitalia) and another upon the left side for additional effectiveness in combating inflammation or pus recollection within that space, all part of a holistic approach using various forms of heat application.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Each caustic according as its quantity in the foot; and burn that which is necessary at the lowest part of the leg or on both legs if it is needed.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And when it is time for the pointed cautery mentioned earlier in its procession, then so shall we proceed with caution.
Capitol .xxxix.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	In this line, "Capitol .xxxix.", the Latin-influenced phrasing can roughly translate into
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is frothiness and moisture within the womb (uterus), it's prohibited to insert an instrument for coitation; hence their menstrual cycles are disrupted, causing them pain as they attempt intercourse when either a cauterization has been applied over three instruments at the navel or two on location and in between these points.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (This line appears nonsensical
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	The translation for "Cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua" into English, based on the context of medieval medical practice and assuming a similar construction to
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture makes the joints of the ankle expand and these cause pains in that location, it is called "coyship" when compared between them due to their extension over each other.  
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is being torn apart here (in it).
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Now when you cauterize the wound on the patient'dict lower body with a scalpel-like instrument, make sure that your hand is firmly grasping it as if in struggle during its movement around the affected area; thus ensuring that the part remains warm and does not fall off.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	If it is related to the form preceding in the process of cauterization of the stomach,
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not with you now, then apply three such large cauteries as these for the cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When you apply the points according to the entire length of the intestine, and take care that it heals properly.
Capitol .xli.	The given line appears incomplete as it seems like just an excerpt or annotation
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Caustic treatment of the sciatic nerve." The phrase refers to a historical medical practice where substances with caustic (
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is in the part of bone (possibly referring to spinal issues like sciatica), and it's caused by blood/fluid accumulation or excessively thick pus-filled disc protrusions, curatives are those we have mentioned before which do not exac0mphasize; these remedies for the overflow of body humors into swolthy pillows (possibly referring to herniated spinal discs) - apply caustic treatment there.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The use of cautery in that place is for two purposes: either as a medicine fire or as a focus point (likely referring to heat application).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And as for the spaces where each incision is made, consider its thickness and whether it be small or large (cauterizations), so that nothing obstructs them afterward.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May some precautions be taken with the caustics on the wound above the head of the anus for that there should be four cauterizations performed.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize at the place where form was previously directed during the cauterization of the displacement of the ankle; ensure that it forms a complete circle and burns out all parts of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how scarring occurs with caustics when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thighs.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May it be extended into the thigh, and on that location there will be applied two caulters for treating the pain caused by inflammation; one of them over the wound area to address this discomfort directly, and another placed under its respective limb part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the pointed cautery' extrudes depth according to the length of the needle used for it.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the malady causes pain to extend into this place of the feet where it is felt, then here you will apply cautery at this location for three or four points, if necessary according to that which is indicated therein.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the womb causes pain deep down in the groin area, then here we use this pointed cautery (pointed instrument for controlling bleeding).
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Even in the entire process of cauterization, you should not end with burning the nerves or large vessels without reason, and for that purpose here I am above the abdomen where they are unprotected (or perhaps hidden) maliciously or contractionally.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And when they have already seen one of those which were cauterized on the sore spot and last in the cauterization process, a flamed bed within wherein the tumor reached the skin, with penetrating fire that ruined entirely the affected part (the foot).
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When there is an accidental fall from behind due to stomach (belly), and call it waterfall death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts and needs treatment according to this method, then do so with caution (using) one of these techniques for each part.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Return it to the fire within where it darkens and sparks appear; place it over the division of the joint, with malady above pressing down on their backs.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So then you will burn that area with three cauteries in one sitting.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that thing for three days, apply bandaging to it and return the outcast (likely referring to an abscess or infected area) within four days, taking care of it until healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh children, of this particular type of cautery we have used for the fearful examination of him/her, and so briefly did we find those things which inspect over him/her.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May those who are suffering from it use them here and deprive that person of their place here.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries be attached to medicines that you will make with a perforated armillary sphere containing the mercury from the door of silver; its length is like two nuts or rulers, belonging to them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the spaces between them contain as much of their body'dict bulk; and they are hollow above and below, containing each other in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place your hand over the part of the thigh where the sick man'dict sits, and position yourself there as well; also take a basin full of water with you between two circles (as if holding it), allowing its quality gradually—the little heat from that—to enter while suffering him for about an hour until he stops clutching his throat due to the morsus.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	When you lift your hand and wipe away all of its moisture, it concerns the water tail from the entire body'dicted by watery humor excesses in Latin medical terminology typically used during medieval times:
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Return the legion back to that border within which the blackness of rheumatism has retreated for three days and rest on it for those same three days, afterward running over it with a padded walker—this will restore health in due time.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside has entered within where it shall heal.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the coccyx or inguinal region, make it stand in water as long as it is felt at the anterior pubic bone.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how gout manifests itself (the term for it), and I have already written about this in the treatise on medicine correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and acid neutralized into one portion thereof; pierce the new wave through which the division of today has passed, as much as it enters here in this worldly place.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here is the line-by-line translation of each medieval medical treatise sentence into English:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E so de las medicinas alcunas are the ones that are cauterized with sulfur and salt, mixed together as they were heated for me.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Even a home from ancient times performs the operation and care for which healed ankle and sciatic pain relief are to be greatly desired, without needing further treatment; four days of rest according to recommendation restore that very intimate in baths and massage with their own hands.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if there is pressure from certain stones (gallstones), and if they are not expelled vertically (naturally), it is taken forcefully as a fresh stone; the stone is crushed into a few grains and placed in the belly where there is pain, or on the thighs, or knees, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When it settles for three hours or according to how much humidity the malady releases from congestion,
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Return that in the bath and when the patient' extrinsic part is rubbed off, insert it back into the body so that there should be no more pain and healing can occur.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Be aware that you do not cover your body with caustic substances but rather facilitate the elimination from the body through these remedies.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Escorides say that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it stimulately his blood; and these are its remedies: wool robe taken and olive oil impregnated with antidotes, placed between the toes of the foot and among the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Return the barbed fork dry and rusty into where it is burning coal, placing your pause on wool or linen within that which has become drawn tightly; hold their hands in this manner.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return the water internally and do not stop until the venom from the knife penetrates into the thigh, then rest to alleviate the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this operation of cauterization is called caustic probes (or perhaps more accurately, "cautery tools" or instruments for burning). Here the term 'maniere' could mean technique and ‘cauterium
Capitol .xlii.	And this specific method of cauterization is referred to as caustic probes
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Regarding the treatment for joint pain, it's called burning therapy (or perhaps more accurately "cauter
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in the lower body due to causes such as blockages or impacts and also for reasons akin to these, through absorption of moistened impure substances. Here 'dos' likely refers broadly to various parts below (perhaps not strictly literal 'two'), suggesting multiple factors might contribute to joint pain in this context. The term ‘infusio’ indicates that the treatment involves some form of dissolving or soaking up these harmful humors through moistened substances, which could be a poultice made with water and impure materials believed by medieval practitioners (and as per
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And it is not in these operations of burning, but rather a specific kind that we find effective for the expulsion (or dissolution) of impure humors which are believed to be causing harm and pain as described earlier on how they can enter through various blockages or impacts. Here 'es fayta' likely means is
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So it is through the use of poultices that have been prepared with impure substances (or perhaps more fittingly as understood by contemporary standards might be, 'irritants') and similar in form to these obstructions or resemblance causing pain within three lines below according to their teachings. It suggests placing fingers into each line where the poultice has been applied while also employing cautery if necessary – guided not just by necessity but considering both the tolerance of humors and health status as understood at that time, in accord with medical customs then practiced (or perhaps more fittingly modernized to 'consider patient's condition'). Here ‘malaute’ would likely mean a conglomeration or mixture believed responsible for disease within; medieval doctors might think of it metapzically as impure humors, and the text outlines their treatment approach in line with what was understood by them.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is necessary for a burn treatment with pointed cautery points.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, then perform three or four cautions with a chisel in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	In order to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol .xliii.", I
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The phrase provided appears to be a Latin term related to medical practice, specifically referring to the act of coagulating or sealing (cauterizing) with heat in
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 During these recurring illnesses, we apply cauterization to the child; and in children, this practice is called "commensation," which means applying heat directly on their body during daylight when they move around.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And in the lower back and neck vertebrae of him/her that has already begun to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you press and try to prevent it from spreading, then apply that pointed instrument in a circle according to this shape.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	That applies pressure with the cautery over the entire region of the spinal disc engaged in movement.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cauterization along the spinal cord at the points of puncture either two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are the points made by them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for the location where it has been healed by what we have administered.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May there be caution that cautery is not applied in a bleak place but for muscle spasm relief.
Capitol .xliv.	The given text is from an ancient medical manuscript that combines elements of various languages
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Regarding the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain:
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore when gout is cured by the healing of its cause and not recurrences are left behind, then apply bandages to prevent further pains.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you are cauterizing that which exits in the bowels through the joint of the foot and leg, as if with caustic instruments (cauterization).
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	That is the form of this tool: (likely referring to a pointed instrument or device used by doctors)
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery for that purpose.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If pains penetrate into the abdomen or other joints and there arises a movement, then it is necessary to apply caustic at that location using one of three or four lancets belonging entirely to this cauterizer.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you need lancets for these lancets, then do not press your hand on the instrument beforehand; send only the applicator of the urethra therein at once.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters into both hips, then apply the mentioned cautionary measures that we have discussed in this chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the limbs and it calls for sweat, then prick into the circulation of the humors as they turn within themselves, pierce those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there remain pains in the joints, then a point is made on the circumference of each node and around the navel area.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If joint or muscle pain comes on during the courses of days in the hips or thighs, then doctors will perform cauterization throughout the entire body with all their tools.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if the melancholy is not expelled through good diet and medicine intake, even then if a proper treatment with this instrument (cauterizer) cleanses it, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	In this given medieval medical text written in a language that has some similarities with
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	The phrase "Capitol .xlv." seems to be an incomplete or shorthand reference, potentially indicating the
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is an opening in the intestines, and you place a cautery adjacent to the navel (referring back to "atela al genetiu"), then instruct that which belongs within it should be removed from its daily activities so as not to exac0dy further damage. This suggests using less strenuous tasks or causes lenient enough to prevent worsening of an intestinal rupture inside the body ("la fenda deyssende del sieu ventre").
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Here it goes: Return the prolapse of the womb between your thighs and on their chest, commanding that it enter through an opening or appears as a hernia/protrusion (or belly swelling).
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return that which has returned, and attempt not to break it over the bones of the limb whose tip resembles the extremity of a circle at these lower divisions of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the hot points of this instrument:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When it is time for an urgent request and you set up needlepoints.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from protruding outward.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' extradural (possibly referring to 'maloat', similar to lumbar in English) and their thighs, with a cushion under them; another servant has been placed on their legs while another is positioned on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the flame of the intestine during your cautery, to ensure that it does not burn up on the hernia or cause a great harmony.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you understand that when using the cautery, you do not touch the patient' extrinsic parts (limbs), and thus should not perform your operation on them.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it is necessary for children' extrication with a small and precise needle as per their size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the area of the cautery within three days or until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that for its care; let it be with others in wool within until healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The joint is inflamed in both thighs for forty days until the place and its inhabitants are sealed off.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When the nourishment of him is pausing according to the length of his healing time, and that which was a hernia does not protrude outwards without urgent care for recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time for removal after forty days, administer the dissolvable ligature gently, and keep that in their hands for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	When joint pain is caused by overwork and excess of meat and drink, and with strong use when this entire healing regimen is applied,
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And those who were first healed by this trilateral cautery device have been seated for trial:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And there is a line that ascends through the groin and descends from it above (above), another below; hold your hand with an awl needle as one of the first thrusts, which may be better for lithotomy procedures:
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi. (The original text does not provide enough context
De cauterizacio de torcio.	In this line, "Caute ratione," the term 'cautere' translates to '
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When twisting or striking the members causes pain that persists for a long time and does not relieve from medicine treatment, it is said that one should apply cautery to the point(s).
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	When using instruments for all body parts according to their magnitude and smallness, as well as the condition of expansion and development within them, areas of twist and pain in it are considered.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it heals through the first lancets (cauterization), then be; but if not, repeat over him those same lancets directed towards that member which approaches to the urethra (the opening for urine and semen in males), so that further application of these instruments may lead to the cure of this malaise within it.
Capitol .xlvii.	The provided medieval medical text is in an archaic form of Latin influenced by other languages
De cauterizacio de lepra.	From this single line, the translation into English would be: "On leprosy treatment." Here's a
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Translation: "For the treatment of leprosy using caustic substances for substantial healing if caused by decomposition of fat and melancholy." This sentence suggests that, in medieval medicine, a specific type of cauterizing agent was used to treat certain cases of what they referred to as 'lepra,' believed herein potentially arising from internal decay (fat) combined with emotional distress or depression ('melancholy').
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you intend to cauterize that part (of the body), consider if leprosy is present and has been cured by the water we mentioned earlier in division, neither here nor there today; fear for corruption encompassing all of the patient's body and their complexity. Cauterize it on the head where a combustion occurs (scalp), after taking care of both breasts at appropriate times from life; touch behind two calluses each, one between shoulders/backstrap held by servant, another under arms or chest area: these are all parts that should be cauterized.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the last of your lancets to enter where pressure is applied into the bone, and their scrapings are displaced by air from it out; then burn over the wound according to what was requested earlier.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that area with these same caustics we have in our cap; on the extremity of the nose, two caustics are placed—one above each kneecap. Two caustics are applied to both hips (hips), and two onto each spinal column at those points where leprosy appears (the sacral vertebrae). A large cauterism is done on either of the hip joints, a burning treatment over the shoulder blade; for all kneecaps there are two caustics applied. Two burnings made to both feet's ankles and one each upon every toe-joint (and thus in total three per foot); onto muscle groups where leprosy appears as well on tendons, with these same cauterisms used—two for the thigh joints/hip sockets; two over knee joint areas. Additionally:
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Guard your nerves that are over the ankle so they do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases they are cauterized with a hot lancet on the bones of the pelvis and mouth of the stomach, and another over the womb (uterus).
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	E understand that the more you adjust the cautery, the more it can heal and provide relief; likewise, know that gout does not cause pain in the caustic itself when held as your hands do now with these instruments on his body already numb from our treatments.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	Wherever the cautery should be large or small according to the parts and joints, as prescribed by the tools of our instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the points made of lead, charcoal and other remedies within which it shall be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii. (The original text does not provide further context for
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Cauterizes in amazement." This phrase seems to suggest a method of treatment or medical procedure that
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or sleeps and requires healing by physicians, apothecaries, and attendants—and it does not heal on its own accord—then cauterize that affected limb according to the greatness of the member's injury or smallness. This line translates a medieval medical practice where extreme measures such as burning (cauterizing) were used for treating wounds, particularly when conventional treatments did not yield healing on their own:
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And if it enters into the hollow of the neck with a small instrument (cauterizer).
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is inside with care so it may heal.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes bleeding has occurred within the body or in the feet and backbone vertebrae due to nerve vessels' leakage of that member, causing pain; this condition is then stopped by cauterization.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not press upon it, but rather that one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body and nerve exits throughout its movements.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of purplish scab formation that it is a process of cauterization (or burning). Here's how each line translates into English, maintaining
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When purplish scabs are ancient and do not comfort the patient through their dressings (medical bandages), then cauterize over that which is already prepared as a small amount beforehand according to what enters into its cavity, where it has become moistened with bile and blood color changes. Here's the translation line by line:
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return that particular care with flour of wheat and lentils ground up in oil and mixed together along with cloves or yarrow, each separately a portion taken partaking all combined, applying it on linen cloth placed over where they rested while being healed.
Capitol .l.	Given that "Capitol" in this context does not provide
De cauterizacio de cranc.	For the phrase "Cauterize of head," a more accurate translation, considering historical medical practices and assuming it rel
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When the cancer spreads and affects that organ or part of it, then they perform a circular incision in its circulatory system as if being turned over by their own movements. (This sentence is translated with consideration to medieval medical context where cauterization was used; however, modern translations would be significantly different due to advanc extradural hematoma treatment options are limited and must often rely on a combination of therapies rather than surgery alone because
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	They observed that it was already cauterized at the back where they performed their treatments thereon day; I may not have seen anything yet, but feared it might be an ulcer, and yes indeed some signs had appeared by now. (Here we see a description of diagnostic observations made after attempting to identify or deal with medical conditions such as cancer.)
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	When it is placed a sharp instrument that has been cauterized in the body'dictum or on this spot as we have mentioned before (as here with needles and hot irons),
Capitol .li.	Capital (this) refers here as an indication or point of
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	The term "cauterize" in this context likely pertains to a historical medical practice where heat, often from heated
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any abdomen (adabiliato) doesn't ripen in time, or due to excess fat deposits, poor health conditions of the womb (malaute), or because too much has passed with insufficient sanctity and care—then it is necessary to promote its maturation; therefore, cauterize herein where small punctures have been made for this purpose. Afterward, apply oil thereafter which will satiate the area needed during ripening.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the operation of this tool, then heat it for use as a cautery; keep it in the place where medicinal substances are administered until they pass through the catheter.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you place the points on that spot where they were inserted earlier, to ensure the leg is elevated; and pay attention to maintaining what has been healed there.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol .liii.: (The translation may not be entirely accurate due
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Based on your provided Latin-like text, the phrase "de cauterizacio de corrodent
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	The provided Latin-influenced text translates to: "Corrosion wanders in the limb, which is acted upon similarly as dry wood burning at an open flame." Here's what each part means within this context of medieval medical understanding:
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, when you see the spot where he suffered with a lancet (cauterizing tool), lightly ignite the lance tips slightly, and then apply large burns as appropriate for that location where there is decay.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Return and cauterize that which has entered in all parts, removing completely the corruption thereof without causing any further harm or damage herein.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Here it goes: Overlay that for three days, and pause over the cauterized spots until all the scars have been completely removed and there is no remaining corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	When that ointment is applied for curing it causes flesh growths.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	May three days pass if the flesh is born in which there is no decay, then be well; otherwise, repeatedly perform the cauterizations on what has been torn apart in those places where it was ruined.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	When acute illness requires medicine in its place of caution (catheterization), it means that certain pills are used for urgent treatment at the site where caution is needed.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	May occasionally use pointed forceps made of metal for gentle suction of purulent discharge from the joints.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And in it you already have applied medicine for its acuteness at the division, and therefore take that when they exhibit signs of urgency.
Capitol .liii.	The text provided seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Regarding the cautery of fingers and similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Movements regularly towards the lower parts of the ill-humored body cause a leaning to the side in these areas; and for treatment are two types of burners used herein—one at the focus point, one on the tail end (anus) where they hold their hands.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the focused area for cauterization be where sparks are produced by fire similar to pain' extrication (pun intended), which is made of fine iron as per all parts containing the keyhole and its subtle grooves, so it can effectively treat or remove the ailment. 
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Return the flame to that lock and turn your hand over the needle within the keyhole, so that the needle reaches the depth of the keyhole.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Lay it in for three days until the beginning of bleeding starts.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return that waxed and ground salt applied there, apply it over them for a night; then those impurities removed from their reasons will be gone.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the place that is anointed with fresh meat within which it shall heal.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it is not converted (i.e., if the treatment has not taken effect), and continued pressure applied to these cauteries with water or metal/iron needles, holding your hand on top; take a small amount of spring water in that utensil, wrap your hand around it tightly, twist back and forth this compression by your hand until done (usually for about an hour), then release the pressure. During all these actions ensure to keep the tip of the needle within the groove of the bolt; otherwise direct the water outlet from there towards the head nut; wait until the effusion is minimal, just after a pinch with that little spring-water device and afterwards retighten it (usually five times).
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if it is necessary for them (the patients) to enter into these things, then carry the others over all those parts of their body where they have pain in their limbs.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Return care for those pus that are removed by the knots of the joints, which occur in the flesh when it is encased within ointments.
Capitol .liiii.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English
De cauterizacio de tremor.	In this line, "Capitol" appears to be a Latin term that could relate to the treatment or
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling is due to inflammation of the nerves or fever as a symptom resembling other causes, it's time for treatment: you should apply four types of cautery on each vertebra between which one cauterization has been applied; and with cauterizations in their palms (likely referring to hands), over their chests, or upon the stomach area as well.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the shaking of it stops and hastens the healing of the sickly ferment,
Capitol .lv.	The text provided appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical termin
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	When it comes to cauterizing a wound on the body, or specifically "cauterization of flesh." Here's what that might
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When pus-filled blisters appear on the body after an injury involving flesh (albati), it indicates a severe infection that requires immediate treatment, such as applying caustic substances with materials like myrrh tree resin or long mastic to cauterize over each part of the abscess. This could be applied directly at the focus point where pus is concentrated ("es foc"), near an ingrown toenail (where it might become embedded underneé), on a chronic lesion, or within deeper layers like subcutaneous fat tissue ("cauterei lentecular").
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	At times cauterization is applied to the patient'dict process of expulsion according to this methodology; and it does not cause complications or disturbance among those excessive faculties, leading them back to healthiness.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	May it be that this pain is an indication for purging through enema.
Capitol lvi.	The provided lines from the medieval medical treatise can be translated into English
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	This line translates to: "Cautery of a flowing phlegm by incision with an iron knife." This sentence likely refers to the medical practice during medieval times where treatment might have involved using heat, such as from
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	The translation of this line is: "Guiding away the phlegm flowed from where it enters or by incision/cauterization in a limb part, and then seemingly healed; however, it's difficult to maintain." This sentence discusses an approach used during medieval times for treating certain conditions—possibly related to respiratory issues like coughing up phlegm. The process involves direct intervention with the aid of tools (like iron knives or other forms of caution), followed by a seemingly successful recovery, although maintaining this state was challenging according to medieval medical understanding and practices.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	The translation of this line is: "When you seal the hernia with copper at its boundary by an iron knife'thy (their term for physician or skilled practitioner), and pause over that spot until it ceases to be where those guided phlegm flows into, preventing further leakage." This sentence describes a treatment method used in medieval medicine involving the use of metal instruments—copper here might refer to actual copper tools rather than figurative speech. The practitioner is advised not only on how and when but also intends for this procedure to halt or redirect phlegm that enters through an area, likely associated with a hernia as mentioned earlier in the text (requiring its return into place), which could be related to respiratory issues where fluid accumulation occurs. The use of
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	This line translates to: "Pause with the caulters of olive wood—light and substantial in number (suggesting tools crafted by hand)—and blow upon those within that are akin to flames." Here, 'caulters' likely refers to small metal instruments used for cauterization or perhaps heat application. The use of the term "olive" suggests these were possibly made from this type of wood
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return from those places one small or large second location and creature where the artery was broken upon that vein festimanted you put it, so that with cautery will be obstructed and confined that vessel.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the opening of the artery when you move and extract the cauterys, then take another lashing with one of those prepared for the focus area immediately, thus preventing further escape of the sanction within it.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	When you do not burn away (or cauterize) the nerves here present and those elsewhere in your illness beyond this part of it,
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	When arterial flow is blocked in these places, it's not possible to restore the blood there unless one of four actions are taken: or use cauterizing tools where we need them; if extraction cannot be done, when limbs come out they will be burned and restricted herein, either by nails or ligature for strong compression, or those pauses on their bodies which medicine intends to restrict the blood flow are firmly applied with pillows made of stuffing.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer proper restriction of the patient lie down and with firm pressure apply cloth or position to prevent fires caused by burning wounds and impostures from causing discomfort; they do not ease but rather harden them further.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May if no doctor or medicine is present, then work at the indicated spot on that vessel as we have it here with us today, understanding the great constriction within that patient'thy part divided by swine (referring to a localized inflammation possibly caused by pork consumption), and not being removed from its cavity; over there is rinsed in boiling water of thick foam causing this person tightened up inside it, as may be necessary for cauterization or medical treatment.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Commences the second section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncture and blows, and of bloodletting and poisons, and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are terms of Alcuzzy or Al-Khawzzi (Albucasis being an Arabic term).
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Here we have described in this chapter all the illnesses where cutting is necessary and those related to medicine, fire-treatment, occasions, causes of disease, as well as the tools needed for these cauterizations; moreover, it orders the chapters on raising (likely referring to lifting or addressing) a patient'se head within their feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When this process takes place in this chapter for the sake of drawing out what is desired by that physician, when necessary upon their request.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And when water (or urine) comes in excess and you find that it is the first occurrence of drainage here for cautery,
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For the sake of caution that is taken during this operation, which takes place here and where evacuation occurs (which contains life), attention must be paid to bleeding from veins or incision on ulcerations/existing wounds or pure extraction processes involving insects or stones removal through incisions.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	From all these things he accompanies fear and trembling in his body, which leads up to death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deveis vos manieyar d'homei para mmanejar malatias.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	From them comes the one who suffers from his illness and is filled with fear of death due to the swift flow of humors associated with their sickness, which prolongs the suffering that signifies death itself.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	From these humours come what gives you health and said by him/her who possesses it; such goodness is beneficial for well-being, but the sickliness caused by them brings harmful consequences.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so when you consent to this from which the malady comes about your body; let caution be greater than conceit and not presume any cause without certain science that purifies it from within you, following a virtuous sequence of praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in healing all your illnesses of prediction and indication herein contained, it is there that you will receive help with obtaining fame and memory; praiser and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, by God grant you understanding and do not deceive or harm your bones; for it is in my care (or hands).
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And so it is ordered herein by chapters as preceded in the chapter of cauterization for head treatment within the feet, that you may be attended with what they require from water and such material which has become necessary.
Capitol primier.	Capital First.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the healing water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness moves continuously among children, and when the newborn'thy head emerges from his body.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Whenever there are bad influences due to anger that have not been cleaned or purified (which is akin to an unclean cause of disease), then appropriate measures must be taken.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May you not see this illness in children; and all those whom you have seen with hernias who died, I have witnessed their suffering herein.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is added between the navel and bone, or it's added on top of the flesh there:
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation is taking place and there's little moisture between the vertebrae and bone, then cut into the warm spot at the back of your head where a fissure occurs in the lumbar region; this forms the seam (spine):
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if moisture increases and ulceration becomes greater, here are two cracks according to this mannerism.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is excessively on you, it means that your lips are opened up and water gets squeezed out when you compress this liquid at the parts divided into sections, which is not what you want to do.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut into the warm spot at the head and create three openings according to this methodology:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And apply the finger to remove all moisture from inside; and tighten cracks in sheets and wool, placing water and oil within them throughout the day until evening time, when you will strengthen the sinew with a little dry food (dried meat or puls), ensuring that the body is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and draining fluids from sanctus and mocha the malady through this flow of sanction for the expulsion of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Given that there is no text following "Capitol .ii
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the vessels wherein they are held by the fingers, called them ligatures or bindings (hilare).
Capitol segon.	Second section/Chapter (assuming "Capitol
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When blockages or obstructions occur in the hips or chest and it is ancient advice not to refer them for medical treatment, then care will begin here within those two arteries from which this initial intervention starts.  
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you intend to insert those into the patient's head where malaute races them upwards, and rub down that area with hard fabric for it causes arteries to open outwardly, also tighten their collarbone under the rough cloth; consider each pulse location in relation to these positions of touching fingers. And such areas are concealed as long as they remain within chaste individuals.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the splint into the artery and divide it at points below those parts of the body in question.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	When the length of the internal organ is two fingers adjusted, when any vein within it expands due to excessive pulsing flow, then this jumps repeatedly.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May if the lancet does not appear at the joints, then measure with your finger three fingers' width on the auricle (earlobe), apply oil for lubrication and insert into the mouth to swallow it downwards.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the amount of wine consumed is considered (quantity), do not drink too much today or tomorrow, and only consume as much according to what appears in the activity of the spleen and liver function of yourself.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	When you consider the patient' extraneous matter within bones (the term here could refer to pus or other substances causing an infection), and if any remains on the bone, divide it off such that it does not develop into osteomyelitis sequestrum.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return strength to the body with wool and silk garments, and take care of that which is inside these linens so it may heal.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III.: (This likely refers to an appendix or
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the arches wherein are found within the temples:
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient acute wounds are exposed to moist agricultural environments or due to the quality within our joints in the temple regions, and as medicine does not comfort us with its palliatives here, we suffer these illnesses outside temples, either through external bleeding into those places, or cauterization of that blood therein.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The labor and removal of those humors from the patient'thy hair which are in their temples; understand that these arteries appear on your pulse when they show themselves to you, but remain hidden due only to forceful movement:
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden from you, then tighten the leg of any cloth around your thigh; and apply heat to that area or immerse in water until the rheumatism appears before you (the doctor).
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take hold of this very stone (the splint), it is thus shaped as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May it be that if the artery is subtle, then encircle that area with a thin veil as far as its extremity and insert one part according to the quantity by which their limbs are elongated and contracted; thus no flow of blood will occur unless inserted.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Return or expel the sanctity of vengeance within three times into its cavity (i.se) retreat and remove it from over the place wherein resides, holding your
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the arsenic is great, then you must place it in two locations at opposite ends of faith and cordage (or rope), so that nothing goes into decay during its solidification process, bringing forth a flow of sanctity within three times.  
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And apply pressure on the excess that is between two ligaments, and have it done at this time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish to, apply the pointed cautery inside the mouth of the needle and ensure it is in place where that specific operation takes effect.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better if the malady has fever or complexion boil than these causes that help with dry humors; therefore it'thy best in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	While you work or continue your labor, when that sinful fluid of the arsenic comes out, then immediately take measures to contract that sinful fluid, whether with a cautery instrument or where it pools (the placebo effect), and tighten your grip so as to restrict that sinful fluid.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If any cause of these is not present with you now, pause there where the sanction has congealed, and brace that spot until it cools down from severe chill within which the inflammation rests, and when its strength returns as usual, then proceed further.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When the leech is put out of circulation in this incision it causes you to cauterize the vein here with these two lances that have been previously prepared and placed at both attempts sites, allowing blood flow from one end until it reaches the bones, preventing them from being consolidated due entirely to this caustic.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how it'thy way of using caution or restraint (cautery):
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	E is the sharpness of both petticoats (or skirts).
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Even if the patient' extrices or spurs are sharp as any two hatchets that fit together perfectly well for cutting joints and we will not cut down on their flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when in these there is any thickening, heat accumulates therein and the flesh detaches loosely.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety and has been lightly placed here.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Where there are spaces between two thighs, the quantity of the said bulk is present.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quart. (Assuming "quart
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of sharp and sour humors in joints.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acid is retained in those veins which are above the patient's chest and do not cause any discomfort for healing purposes of medicine, their belly expands as if they were ants walking with gait on its front side ambulation, and their hair grows outward due to moisture caused by tears; ancient physicians take care in curing these issues from this operation using sponge-like methods.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	When you command the malady to pull back the hairs on their forehead, and position your incision three grooves apart from each other along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure is two fingers: one finger away from the nose's position in the forehead area, and another as small as a little movement of the eyes (lacrimal glands), then this refers to three different parts.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	When you have reached the entrance of both lips which are two parts apart, extend your jaw muscle constantly.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If in any joint space there are three days of adjustment needed,
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have an appointment of sponge or dry clothes for these purposes, they will serve as dressings and absorbent materials to clean the wounds.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And insert between the two sharp limbs of it, which is its form:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That is from the departure of spirits into the second insight.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return the joint so it doesn't enter into or protrude from either side of this bed and use a cutting tool called a cautery on one end while holding another instrument that is not being cut by any part, which they call "cutellar.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	When the bone of that gout must be carved out and touched to where the hollow has entered into the joint crack, take hold on this entire thing with your fingers until it reaches the fissure migra; then separate all those veins descending from the head downwards.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May joint inflammation continue from the entrance of water in the coda (tailbone), and apply water into the middle crack between the other two cracks.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	When I apply a sufficient amount of heat from the sun'dict (or some other heating method), press on the hardened areas of the joint with these hands.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return the pause in any crack of bone or joint and a pause over those grains within it found between vein and flesh, where they are mixed with oil and wine; watch that it does not become an abscess (boil).
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And in the third day, apply great heat with hot water or an oil bath and take care that water is applied on burnt liniment made of rosemary oil and others inside where mucus are healed.
Capitol .v.	The provided text appears as if it is from an old medical manuscript with
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the treatment of wounds for catharsis and healing, derived from parts cut off at the head (capital). This line suggests a medieval or ancient medical practice where specific sections—possibly limbs as implied by "del cap." which could be interpreted to mean
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When catharsis occurs and continues, the humors of excess are exhausted in these parts, leading to their restoration; moreover, when care is taken for them—the ulcerated eyelids (palpebras) along with hair loss from illness or treatment at this point above the head can cause acute pain that penetrates deeply and intensifies continuously. This line indicates an understanding in medieval medicine of humoral imbalance leading to specific physical symptoms, wherein cathartic measures are believed necessary for healing as a result of damage done by leaking venous parts below the head (preon del cap).
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is: to command the humors that constitute its nature, and inscribe in that location a small fissure on the forehead'thy place of origin (and insertion therein; within bone structure), thus allowing you to withdraw them. Hereby, the bone will be revealed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all phlegm or dry cloth and restore what has been removed between the patient'gy mouth lips, in either the small crack of the tongue or under their linen clothing.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	When it is above on the breast and back, under oil for that reason not to become an ulcerated wound:
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the application has decreased and inflammation begins in the flesh of his navel (belly), at that time, take care to apply this powder made from flour wheat two parts and beeswax four parts mixed together; when you have obtained it with your hands as if taking some bread dough and candle wax, then cover him using its paste and administer in these plagues according to the flesh'se natural course.
Capitol .vi.	The provided text is already in English with some archaic expressions or
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	It seems that you've presented an incomplete line of Old Spanish, which can be somewhat challenging to translate directly due to its historical and regional variations from modern languages like
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The given text appears to be an Old Spanish extract regarding the treatment of joint pain in hands (indicated by "las aurelhas"). Here is an attempt at translating it into modern English:
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	So when blood enters the ear or another cause seems similar to those causes that do not fit into the ear, and pause the ear at the window, if you see blood from it, then administer its removal, and make turns for healing wounds with this method; and oversee all patients' needs until their recovery.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place pressure in some of the veins or woolen bands above the artery'dictorials (possibly referring to limb joints), and extend the artery towards the parts below, as these movements are directed here for treatment.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not expelled naturally, then administer its removal through the use of a small surgical tool with which this act involves.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is a wound that has burst forth (rupture), beware of it; and if not, administer its removal gently under the supervision of one's handful in just few small touches.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	So if there is no blockage, then use an arsenic tube and insert the extremity of the tube into the ulceration in the groin area, sealing it with wax and oiled substances to ensure that only the tip of the tube protrudes.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And if it is necessary to remove from below (the belly), when we have sufficiently gathered strength after having rested and fed well, then do so accordingly with the force applied for extraction.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If there is no wound in this condition, take warmth or cold device with which the needles are pressed tightly enough on your hand and pause it at the tip of the finger; then cover that area carefully wrapped as applied.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	When applied it enters into the weakness of the artery and removes the artery from moisture, respectively.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	So if there are not all causes accounted for as mentioned hereinabove, then take up that which has come forth immediately to apply caution or restraint on the spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause is grease in the artery and it inflates therein, then apply treatment and removal of it; however, if you do not obey my advice, take a gentle tight band according to this manner.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer that which was caught in his abdomen, where it appeared under his ribcage (the location of the pain).
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you think that it is already moistened by the breath of gold and rests in heavy pains, stop them from exerting their excessive secretions or movements below as we did yesterday when removing him/her.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May be in the water where the malady enters through the throat's hollow, and fills up its own small cavity there; if you are wet from this fluid (implying ingestion or absorption), it will become illness within itself, but if not, take pebbles and stones along its length according to that which is inside of your aureolae [throat], place them on the spot where the water entered in your throat's cavity, throw one stone upon another over each other until it reaches there. If you are already drenched between their thighs and placed cushions undernethy (patients), have servants position themselves on both legs of a patient, holding hands together:
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that all water enters through this place (probably referring to a specific part of treatment or procedure where fluid exchange is necessary).
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water infiltrates through the opening made at the gate (probably referring to a treatment entrance or incision site), take one end of it and insert into the earlobe, extending the other end inside where it can be ignited for use.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Here comes the first source sentence:
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When an animal is extracted from that hole, if it's a small creature and hops around like this, taking care of what we have discussed in the division; when it comes from a large body causing discomgy to arise within one's chest, then they administer its extraction by hand and knife, placing the cause outside all other causes present in that hole.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	May occur during the extraction of worms born in the artery, when you treat that water which we have mentioned earlier as part of division and fluid discharge processes without providing comfort for your treatment, it is necessary to observe the vein towards the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Therefore, if there is any cause of worms present here, extract them gently or carefully at once; and if no such cause appears, take a quick-drying catheter from below, which this shall be the form.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the artery according to the amount that suffering allows; apply suction therapy there and perform regular movements until all parasites are expelled from their hiding places (the worms).
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	May you not obey my instructions while on the catheter with wax inserted as we have discussed; administer these remedies that have already been used in their treatment of parasites within the channel of administration.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is through your discharge that you release the remedies in this vessel, which form of tool from which they come out now becomes evident to us.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E there is one made of silver or lead, struck quickly in it and placed on their chest.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	So it is necessary when one ascends in the throat of this continental catheter here present, which indicates that at some point during its use or insertion there may be an ascent within the instrument being used for medical treatment (probably referring to a procedure involving suction). Here
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the sponge and wrap it around your limb downwards carefully; place oil or some plant extract (or any of these medicines in the catheter — that is to say, within its channel) into the indentation where suction occurs above. Attach this item below at the site of contact with you and express through touch how quickly it dispels warmth inside as the oil/extract comes out during application, allowing for an immediate cooling sensation which affects both thigh (the patient's limb) areas in a soothing manner.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When poultices are applied in the auricular region (the ear), they shall be burnt over a small flame, or rather apply heat to them briefly with firelight.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	When you observe that what causes inflammation in the beard is not too harsh, for remedies applied to the beard do not suffer from it.
Capitol .vii.	The provided text is already in English with slight variations that could indicate regional dialects
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	It appears there's some confusion, as the phrase "de curacio de opulaço de auréla" isn't directly
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	When children chew on the lymph of breasts that have not yet been emptied (presumably during breastfeeding or nursling), and this action becomes noted among adults as well—this can sometimes be found in the milk duct where there is no suckle, occurring occasionally even afterward.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when you crush in their stomach area, which does not comprehend the clothes, it is among the major difficulties of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you pause the artery of the malady at its juncture and observe there,  
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Therefore if you observe an obvious swelling, apply pressure on that subtle spot where this form exists.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If in the limb where it is small and sharp (indicating pain), one of its parts are acute while the other not, and if there's two ligaments for which reason they do not harm the patient;
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Therefore, if the swelling is caused by raw flesh in the thigh or limb of him/herself, then cut it delicately and make an aggressive incision within where all the meat can be restrained completely.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the uplifting is in the region of the armpit, then apply gentle heat to that area with a small flame and insert it into the skin there; place it within the chest'dictating an action whereby warmth (possibly using some form of mild heated object) is applied for comfort or potential therapeutic relief in this specific body region, according to medieval medical practice.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	So if the patient' extruded humidity from their abdomen through urgency (presumably of expulsion or forceful release), it indicates oppression, which should be alleviated; ensure that you do not harm the nerves of his/her arms and legs.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the sentence for translation:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you cool the flow of blood if it rises excessively and settles upon the forehead; use another remedy that restricts the flow of blood as mentioned in the text on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	In this translation attempt based on your provided text which seems reminiscent of
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	When care is needed for the issue that occurs in the eyelids, it refers to addressing conditions such as blepharitis or other eye lid problems requiring medical attention
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When the issue that occurs in the eyelids arises without warning among humans (or animals), sometimes these conditions may develop spontaneously and can become dry at times as well. Here 'athezil' refers to an ailment or condition affecting the eyelids, suggesting symptoms like redness, itching, flaking skin on
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So that you take those things to treat or cauterize them with fire (which may involve heating), and separate these materials from their essence if needed; afterward place your hand over the specific spots where they were tied, ensuring no residue remains attached there. In this context, 'athezil' again points towards an issue affecting eyelids which requires immediate treatment with heat to remove foreign objects or substances that have caused irritation ('espatum'). The use of fire
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain comes from the flow of bile (indicating possible jaundice or a blockage related to liver issues), then you should perform delicate cauterization on those things that require it beneath, which likely refers to directing treatment towards areas affected by excessive cholesterol buildup
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best form of treatment is to return the sharp instruments and those that have been used repeatedly after removing any remaining cause for these issues (implying an infection or obstruction); once they are cauterized at this spot, then those causes will be burned out completely so as not to come back. Here 'cauterizacio' refers to a method of treatment involving burning which was commonly used historically before the development of modern antiseptics and other methods; it implies that after applying such heat-based therapy ('comburidas') at specific body sites, practitioners believed they could permanently eliminate harmful '
Capitol .ix.	The provided text is indeed in an archaic form of Romance
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This line appears to be discussing some kind of eye-related issue, likely referring to something that comes into the eyelids ("palpebras del hues"). The phrase "cura
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	This line translates to: "Movements made carelessly in the patient's eyelids can cause something that is assembled within its strength and rigidity; when it becomes large (or severe), a call for help." This suggests an eye condition, possibly chalazia or hordeolum ("grandeissa"), which are small bumps on the edge of your eyelids caused by blocked oil glands. The text implies that if such
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	This line translates to: "The addition (or accumulation) of thick moisture on the surface of your eyelid in and out." This likely refers to an eye condition where excessive, possibly pus-like
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	This translates as: "So the matter is that you consider whether the large size (or growth) originating from your eyelid and spread throughout the body comes from moisture, which they attribute to humble origins." Here a doctor might suspect an infection causing swelling or inflammation ("mauguda" refers to something fluid-filled like pus), possibly conjunctivitis if it's centered around the eye. The term "leugiera," suggesting simplicity and commonality, implies that such conditions are not uncommon but should
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	This translates as: "Thus about that fissure along the lumbar (backbone), and take out what is whole throughout; also suspend those parts which are thin and separate, to prevent them from escaping when you withdraw." In this context, it appears a medical professional might be advising on how to manage an issue related to some form of separation or detachment ("fissura per la latitut" could refer to the lumbar spine; "onci e abscindeys aquella" suggests thinning and potentially separating
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	May it be that if you are not dressed at the beginning of your illness and do not put in until only when necessary (when barely able to open one's eyelid), there will be nothing noted for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with stitching; take care that it heals properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little (of medicine), you will not come upon evil through that which remains of the old anguish (healing substance).
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the great size is declining at the edges of the eye lid surfaces, then open the eyes and suspend the large size for an hour or more as you decide, and if that which was opened by incisions returns entirely to its place, do not notice it through any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And apply the beginning or start with sea salt water washing; and care for the location wherein the body'se internal waters are contained, to heal it within them.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.: (The provided text does not contain enough
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From beneath the eyelid." This phrase in English conveys that something is originating or being found underne0r one's eyelid,
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is grays that are generated in the undersurfaces of the palpebrae (eyelids), primarily affecting children, worsen those pains and contribute to their cure; they cannot bear witness to sunlight as these droplets tend towards them." This translation suggests a medieval understanding wherein certain formations beneath the eyelid—possibly conjunctivitis or another eye-related condition treated during that time period, are responsible for causing discomfort in children. They believe this 'axcirnath' aggrathyens (worsens) these pains and is a contributing factor to their healing process; furthermore, they think the affected cannot tolerate sunlight because of it as if droplets or some aspect related with them are drawn towards exposure. The medieval context suggests an interpretation based on humoral theories
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	About their mouths all the time and about when they sleep; over their droopy brows which are already moistened with a swelling or impending inflammation in the eyes, you notice them once you approach that spot; whereby if you perceive it as thick discharge being present therein." This translation conveys an observation from medieval times regarding individuals who might have conjunctivitis. The condition affects not just their mouth (possibly relating to symptoms like excess saliva or frequent snacking), but also manifest during sleep and is noted by moist, swollen brow rims that suggest eye inflammation/infection upon approaching the area around them eyes. Here humoral imbalance seems linked with these visible signs on their faces indicating potential conjunctivitis needing attention or care from a healer in medieval practice. The language used points towards an understanding of physical symptoms correlating to internal health issues, as was commonly believed during that
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May enter the portal where you cut through the navel until reaching the area of inflammation; in these days, swollen joints proceed along a white line according to its shape.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Thus remove those clothes in which you have wrapped around the upper and lower parts of each section, twisting them between the right and left sides until they are spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you make sure it does not reach through the crack for the spine and ribs, hold that position at all times.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May it not appear in your belly during the incision of the fissure, but adjust a small force within which worms can pass; and remove that substance where we have already placed them, taking off heavy linens from their abdomen and placing these light ones there. Then rest those limbs above water so they may pause and refresh themselves with these soft fabrics.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	So that when salt and pause enter into the cavity of the crack, what remains is what comes out from it in terms of moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is inside therein so it may heal.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May you soothe in the place of a sore with caustic treatment, and may that which is applied inside gradually withdraw until healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (This line appears nonsensical
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating Spanish into English, but it is not accurate due to poor grammar and spelling
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the patient's eyes, their natural hair is adjusted quickly as a form of illness and excessive eye wiping causes harm to what has been referred to here by touch (presumably indicating some sort of pain or damage). The curative actions are outlined through four methods: with cautery needles; according to the treatment prescribed in acute medicine, which should be detailed within this section about sharp treatments ('capitol de cauteri'); hair extraction by means of insight and suture (implying a precise procedure); or via cannulas as directed here.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so that you stop the flow of bile in the throat; take your left hand and place it over their eye socket (using your right), if converted/effective then B is well; otherwise insert a needle into where the liver has been pushed down from undernethy, push the needle through this point below the eyebrow line—where hairs are located—and pull back the thread on that hook to turn it into an arrow.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Return the eye muscle to its place within the orbital socket of the larger tear gland and extract it with tweezers or cloth from under the eyelid; afterward remove the lashes softly with a powdered substance, such as fluff from a pine tree.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Even though it may be that the figure is according to the quantity of eyelid elevation, for these people different humors are divided among them depending on how much their eyelids have been softened by this action.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	When you have applied firm pressure on the scrotum over the lines which you have drawn, it begins from within between the greater and lesser lacrimal (tear) channels.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair split is as large as that of a king'suponously), then it suggests severe inflammation or possibly an underlying condition requiring medical attention, according to the medieval context where such comparisons were common in describing symptoms. Here’s the
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Apply the ointment to one of the two angles of the chest or where needed and apply all over it; adjust your lips as if brushing wool silk delicately (suggesting a gentle touch), rinse off any residue, especially excess from fields that might be too much above on some eyebrows. If you wish to do so with the ointment for these reasons: otherwise, leave it alone and don't intervene further unnecessarily.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return the stitches of the wounds within three to four days, and take care as needed.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, bind the wound with thread and care for that which drains and constricts it, whereupon your finger will be taken away from its covering of mud and clay; perhaps suturing is better Then thus apply these old methods of treatment anew.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	May it exert pressure on the thighs, and it is good work without fear in there.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another symptom in the head region occurs, wherein their eyelids are covered as if with myrtle leaves and lifted up three times each separated by this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to have instruments available, then use an iron with thread in which has been heated and place that into the figure's fire; also take up one of your pins or needles (the larger ones), placing them above where tears would be formed naturally. Arrange these pinholes evenly among the fields you are looking to balance, lifting both upper eyelids equally with elevation and raising the entire jawline as if in shared restraint when having company together for treatment.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the mouths of worms are adjusted with suture and that which is inside heals,
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May you treat the apoplectic or crack in your mind and appearance, but with wax and oil to soothe it all down below where one'se self is situated.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And sometimes even with your touch on their eyelids, they have converted (their pains), and so you may use a surgical stitch in such cases if necessary.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxiness arises in this form as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and convert the eyelid and divide its form as I have described; apply pointed cannulas or fine needles under them according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their lower jaw joint, which correlates with the position of the shoulder blade.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the limbs of each divided section, there you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Aproximate you to the subtlety beneath what excessively overflows from the eye's palpable lid, and compress the splintered ends of several divided parts subject to strictures, let it stay placed for a few days until the spine affected by rigidity expires due to neglect or dies out when touched; thereafter return within which period doctors will intervene.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then strike with force on their thighs and take care that the wound inside becomes healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When secured (or fastened), the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you make these types of catheters according to this method:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e has quantity of length neither more nor less; that is, it should be measured precisely as needed without excess or deficiency.
Capitol .xii.	From what is given in these lines of an ancient medical text written with elements from
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hairy part (presumably referring to some aspect or structure associated with a lump) on the belly hurts when touched, it suggests discomfort that may be indicative of an underlying condition affecting this area.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the non-natural hairs are hard and sharp (dull), causing pains in the belly lump, it is time for operation where you must gently lift up this area with delicate touches while being cautious of a slight give or yield beneath as if there'dictely yields under gentle pressure. Furthermore, adjust your limbs accordingly and keep movements subtle to avoid exacerbating the condition in any way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And if it is the length of a thumb'supon(taking into account that "palma" can refer both to hand and sometimes foot, we understand this
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And if you wish for another subtle thread of cloth beneath them briefly and hold their limbs (i.dictate "extremities" here). Thus wishes one in this situation. Here the text advises on a gentle action to handle or support someone's body parts, likely referring to assisting with mobility when necessary without causing further
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Hold the swelling at their head on top of them so that your work is acknowledged; it's a subtle and minor operation here emphasized by ensuring comfort for both patient and caregiver while addressing an issue discreetly, as implied in this line. The text suggests using one part (likely the sheet or cloth) to press against swelling at someone’s head gently when they are lying down—a method
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Insert the needle into the prepared part of the skin that requires adjustments (likely for medical procedures such as bloodletting or acupuncture), and guide it gently to penetrate inside while withdrawing from beneath naturally, maintaining a delicate balance between intervention effectiveness and patient comfort. The line provides instructions on how skilled practitioners would perform invasive techniques without causing undue harm—by inserting the needle carefully into an area prepared for treatment (possibly under localized numbing), moving it as needed to achieve therapeutic effects, then removing it
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Retrieve the skin through beneath and insert that into alignment (likely referring to aligning needles or other medical tools with some precision), ensuring there are only a few hairs present—this line suggests maintaining hygiene while preparation for further treatment, possibly acupuncture or similar therapies where hair removal around the area of skin penetration could
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And draw your hand over that part inside where his pupil has been pushed out by tears in the eyelid, which is its natural state.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	May it be that if you don't withdraw the arrow and there is no exit for the piercing to go through your pelt, draw back the arrow into one of the divisions where you have previously lodged it so that once drawn out again, it won't find its way upwards.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	When you see the will of God, as it appears and hurts every part of the body and loosens its joints for two or three days until the pus adheres to that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If there is too little hair, then adjust one of the natural fur for that purpose and raise it up so much as to enter into those spaces where they naturally extend themselves; elevate such when necessary.
Capitol .xiii.	Given that "Capitol .xiii." is not in English or
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When treating the condition present below the eyelid, touch it with your finger.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When one blinks and contracts their eyelids (either right or left), due to the solidification of grain or segmentation/cauterization, it is called pleurisy, which can be natural or accidental; this pain results from the consolidation of grain or segments/cauterizations, or because they resemble their malformations.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "May it be that during the operation in him/her, you cut through that solidification and separate their lips, pause there where between them is a veil of linen cloth for it, and bind those together while they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	Here comes the line to translate: E non coperto che utilizzi per curare le cause delle quali scompaiono, contienovo; quantunque tu faccia ritorno alicalecratizzare la pus maladia che nessun tempo mai ha il fuoco.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	When used as a mollifier with fenugreek and the water in which these are cooked or ointment of diyaquilon (a type of liniment), it is dissolved by heat among its oil drops, and submerged into this vessel; therein it heals.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	When it comes to your health care, make holes at every possible place where the body is not solidified according to how much food you consume.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation which we have described is not any correction of humoral imbalance that returns the form of the place after exposure to cold focus (emphasis on heat).
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	When care is needed for the eye chalazion that appears in the corner of the eye, it implies an issue with a small lump (chalazion) which forms within or on the eyelid due to blocked
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This chalazion that appears in the corner of the eye is itself not called acrocyanosis or any other condition—there'dictly no known inherent or incident cause for it within us ourselves (in our bodies). It may be due to external factors we have yet to identify. This suggests a need for careful observation and possible medical consultation, as pinpointing the exact reason could help in managing treatment options effectively if required.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	It may be due to an external cause such as a wound, injury (from trauma or surgery), foreign body presence like splinters from wood shavings in the environment of lumberjacking workshops for instance, improper use during cauterization procedures by medical
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation involves taking a sharp tool in your hand and placing it there on the skin (presumably where the chalazion is located). You manipulate such that fluid from one tear duct flows into its counterpart, entering through both sides of each eye's corner. This description suggests an approach aiming to facilitate drainage or medication delivery directly at the site in question using this tool and perhaps a technique associated with it—possibly some form of puncturing for therapeutic reasons (such as cauterization).
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Return the flesh to the parts below the belly button and above it, where that is attached thereon; then incise into the thickened thighs with your knife.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	So if you return the shape of the eyeball as it was before, be; and if not, take a knife and pause at that part which is split open, then turn back to restore the form of the eye'dictum (the original Latin text seems incomplete or corrupted here), but with this instrument fix those cracks in the skin of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Here come the extremities of their bones have cracks at two angles of the joints where they occur and are formed by them there together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek letters: the footpad (landa).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Return or support that part of the body according to its size, which has been hurt today due to how much it was used yesterday; this is indicated by redness under the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here, adjust the separated parts and bring them back together with this thread of wool; also take care that which we have mentioned in our soothing remedies and within what is needed for healing.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If there is a tear or incision due to an operation or cauterization, then you must make the cut straight across on the eyelashes as previously indicated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	When separated at the mouth-lip junction as we have mentioned before,
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary of the speech on gout treatment when it is removed or after a short while during operation, which has been prepared in various forms, and that form here refers to poultices made from arsenicum (arsenic).
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	Here the skilled craftsman prepares for any necessary action in each manner possible to return the figure back to its natural shape or according to that, and this humoral imbalance as required by the operation and instruments at major positions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitolo XV. (The word "Capitol" seems like an
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the eyelid to the conjunctiva and/dictorally, or on the cornea: This sentence appears to be discussing a range of anatomical locations in relation to each other within the
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs among men in your house so that the eyelid is firmly attached below it and movement as well as natural functions are restricted; thus if you encroach upon its outer membrane with force, lifting or extending upwards: This sentence describes a situation where individuals experience significant discomfort around their eyes. The 'consolidation' could refer to the tightening of tissues due to inflammation or infection that restricts eyelid movement and normal activities such as blinking (natural functions). It suggests an urgent need for medical attention, implying a potential ocular emergency like severe conjunctivitis.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And if your incision is needed, it will excoriate that attachment for ease of return according to its natural shape and heal completely the entirety.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Return your hand in the saltwater, which you use for washing them therein; or steep it in water where juniper has been dissolved within that water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And separates between the eyelid and the hair at its base, places it on the moist lashes in a folded piece of cloth for three days as curative measures.
Capitol .xvi.	Certainly! The provided lines appear as though they are translating concepts from
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The text appears to be a mix of Medieval Latin and possibly some old French, with additional influence that might suggest regional vernacs or older forms of languages like Italian or Spanish used at the time in medical texts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	The passage translates as follows: "Know that the nail is according two manners; it may be nervous or like fine white ice congealed under pressure—when touched with a force, even just a touch for an instant causes immediate detachment and removal from thereafter. It will no longer remain.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter unless from the greater tear duct where they gradually cover the sight and prevent light and movement of breath.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the madness of action in his head cause the humors to rise up to his chest and above it, and handle their heat with your hand, holding its tongue at the tip of your finger or on two doubled pieces of bone (possibly as forceps), grasping that substance there.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here comes the translation:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And if you seek that within his belly from above (inside), then do so at the back of him.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Here is the line by line translation:
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when some of the blood has reached its full extent or is firmly fixed in position like this bone (the spine):
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And ensure you do not touch the transparent skin (the scrotum), lest there be an opening in it and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Place some salt or quicksilver in the foot poultice, and let it stay there for another day; take care that what is inside can heal.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the lancet is not sharp and you cannot insert the needle into that spot, or if it has fallen out of place therein, then this specific type of lancing instrument will be cured by medicine itself, and heals as long as care continues in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that one out, then work the thigh of the malady and gently insert a fine glove (quill) under softened flesh as per this form.
am subtilitat.	am subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If it is rare and constricted in that area, then the essence of your body flows from its cold head or chief bone today into tomorrow' extramundane fluid (humor), mix with what has already flowed inside this day; pour backward within tonight.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Return your operation over that reason within which he is cured.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge of the tear gland, if present in great harm to health, is suspended for an hour; and examine that which comes from one particle thereof, not examining it further lest you allow fluids (humors) to flow out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Return it down into the teary eye chamber and apply ointment of sulfur for healing within which it is restored.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (The given text does not provide a clear English
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	From the insight of allopathic medicine and born out of meat-adjusted diet,
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some times in the heat of old flesh is born red meat, and it overflows inside where it covers the pupil or approaches its cradle on the lids, gathering at the edge of the balustrade; thus formed:
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	When the operation is in you, so that your thigh rests on your belly; and with the humors of it collected from there (in a cup or basket), apply them throughout this flesh carefully cut for the purpose, and bind up the wound until all has been finished by these bandages. Hold tight to prevent any part not treated within yourself being drawn out during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Either your finger is in which you insert those or small hooks that they collect underneasse, according to what we have recommended for placement inside the joint of the toe.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your understanding is complete and the entire flesh has been cleansed, then pour salt on it or let steam rise from herbs and similars used in corrosive medicines; pause over the wound area within an album where one secures with apostomatic cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of strangulation and if the lord cautures (treats), fear apostema (infection or gangrene) may occur, treat that infection immediately with what yields to it so that such infection ceases when exposed to that treatment; repeatedly apply this remedy while within which healing occurs, until they appear adjusted on the body where pain is felt.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even though you remove the entire cure of the humoral imbalance in the body either naturally or accidentally, use iron tools and do not insert your hand into any part of these operations while observing that this member is suffering from it.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (The given line does not contain enough context for
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	La traducția în enghezielă din propoziția dat foarte direct și presupune semnificații sp
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Cuvintele latine ale propoziției sugestă un contex mediteran și implică descrierea procesului în care sabelle (vasolette) sunt utilizate pentru a curăza dolori pe hiluș, precum și o restricție de acest act. Traducând-o în enghezielă pasiv și explicativ:
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary for you to assess if the patient has a strong illness here and there are not other diseases than what they already know about their condition; then gather that which sickens them in this place.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And when you command the humors that are out of balance in their jugular vein, place it either one or two inches below where your judgment tells us to be. Another centimeter-sized piece should also be placed under those veins according to this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	So that they may gradually enter into a position as follows:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And secure those veins with threads of finesse and subtlety, washing them away hour by hour until they are no longer swolthy from the humors within and agitated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Even if you do not read the humors in the limbs of the spine; and if your operation during daylight occurs under the sun, ensure that only those veins are engaged which must be involved in the procedure itself.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it all, then draw the vapor up in the cold cup or request that so be drawn to ensure that any remaining moisture is purified from within.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of that in one hour, then apply the fluid that exudes from its painful place on your hands and leave it there until the pain subsides and assure treatment by means of application (catharsis).
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Once applied repeatedly until the mattress is healed (when the patient's condition improves).
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how these instruments are used:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. (The given text does not provide further content
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	In this phrase, "de reduccio" can be translated to "of reduction," and "arriziato
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat arising pains with cautery or acute medicine after their description and before they heal themselves, it is not within the body but beyond where wounds develop fully; remove entirely the moisture that's in there which acts as a sustenance for bones. Translation of this medieval medical treatise line:
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover bone and its decay or impairment in it, the form of this is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is hard of nature, and its head made of iron or alum, which returns with the act of taking it out through small or subtle holes made by a chisel.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When the cushion is placed over that which has been crushed on the bone, turn it back between the thighs, and gently press your hand in small increments until you know that this crushing damage has been worn away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When some humors are retained (meaning when there is an accumulation of waste or dry and painful conditions in the body), restore the location to its causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So that the location is consolidated and good flesh has arisen there from illness and disease for forty days, without renewal or puncturing of it in that place, if you know this, then one can say that healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If not, then it is in the body and must be reduced to its shape as that of a nose; according to this method: if you find two pieces of iron or acute medicine upon discovery, take them accordingly by their form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the iron rod outside of it (the patient), and its shaft inside to that extent has been extended within the limb' extramity, repeatedly so.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Thus restores he the place with dry, purgative remedies as soon as you take them to use.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and location are hardened, causing matter to flow back into the body (the abdomen), it is then that I observe signs of urination there.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX. (Note: "XX" is typically used as
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	The reduction of prominence in size refers to the process or action taken to make something less noticeable, prominent, or significant. In
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hump is at its entirety and does not suffer from damage to clothing or diminishment through action; when one loosens up the phlegm (as it may build pressure within), following that, take breaks for coughing in the chest area after proper treatment - apply oil and aloe vera on hands/feet, ensuring thorough absorption. Afterwards, pause over the hump with liniment composed of acacia gum and aloe (and also possibly include senna or psyllium), which provides relief; then massage vigorously around the hump area that has been pushed out by pressure - this can help in repositioning it back.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	When applying pressure between them according to the quantity that he needs it for relief,
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Return strength to those who are drapped and fortress in stricture; iterate the use of suction cups on their secretion, hold them steady all day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If maintaining joint mobility is achieved, then it will be beneficial for that which causes pain.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And bind up the wound with bandages as we have discussed today.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has already been reduced, well and good; otherwise, repeat the application of plasters on the pus and swelling until healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line appears to be an identifier or reference
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the depth of the profoundness of the uveal layer:
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the covering of the eye is disrupted and it protrudes outward like a grain of sand in your hand, look at its form with this tool (presumably an instrument used by doctors), then perform the operation as if you have helpers here, which means: place one needle into the part already affected; insert another double-threaded needle from where tears come out, allowing it to penetrate and secure following their arrangement - firmly position both inserted needles at this joint's location of origin with your hand over there, lifting up that piece in alignment with the threading pathway as tightened by these actions.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Return the needle and pause over the stuffed wool felt, letting it enter where the thread is in the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	When it is necessary for health (cura) that water which comforts (conforta) what'seemingly resides within the patient, be administered/given.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And some measures join together all parts within the enclosed space of the bedcloth fold at the adjusted height above ground level, pierce through the delicate membrane that expels pus into the bubo'dictly (abscess), and allow moisture from under the skin to drain out immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength inside where it has been healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii. (The given text does not provide enough context
De curacio de alconati.	Based on your provided Latin-like phrase "Curacio de alconati,
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called "alconatia," in fact, it's not the one described here as resembling water flowing down and causing harm—it seems to be another condition altogether being referred to for care or treatment ("Curacio de alconati"). The text implies that while some diseases might manifest with fluidic symptoms akin to running water (possibly indicating edema, effusion, etc.),
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	This statement suggests that the action (or "maniera") to address alconatia involves clearing away any excess fluid ("malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada"), dryness, and darkness within it—essentially purgation techniques common in medieval medical practices. The intention is for this treatment to:
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not come down in rain (meaning if there is no further decrease or improvement), you know that water (it rains) must arrive soon.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	May it not be prepared yet the descent to health as we have said, then let the malady seep between your thighs and apply a subtle sponge undernethy and moisture over there where the cornea (the outer layer of the eye) within the crown-like part of the eyeball is located, until it comes out of illness.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when you have taken it out (presumably referring to medication or treatment), then draw in the water tail where you've mixed honey and already drawn beer, here is how we proceed:
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return it is for other causes within that should be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.: This line appears incomplete or potentially out of context
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	The phrase "de la curacio de la aygua descendendent del huel" is not immediately clear and seems to be a mixture of Italian words which
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	The sentence in question appears to blend elements of Spanish and potentially archaic or regional medical terminology:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	When you make a seat between your legs on the bed and hold their knee with it, they feel strong pressure or strain (literally "stringent").
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your hand above the patient'thy left eye lid if it is their left side that has water (tears), or on their right shoulder blade if it belongs to the right side; this indicates an imbalance of humors.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	1. Return your right hand (or left if the humerus is on the opposite side) to its cavity: Place your right hand inwardly towards your body'thy chest or shoulder area as needed according to which arm you hold, whether it’s typically positioned above with a hueled hip-right/shoulder for some individuals and below at left (hip-left)/chest.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return pain of any magnitude above the crown due to excessive weight on top of head within skull' extradural space, and place your hand over that area with vigor directed at it by you.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Returns into the abdomen's cavity and feels that it has already been reached due to flow (possibly referring to some fluid or substance entering).
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "When the midriff of the chest measures from the eye within the pit of night, it is where you see through the crown of bone; if this pupil sees the hollow.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Return rest for one who is tired; therefore, if water descends, provide that other refreshment before anything gets weary.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	So when it is secured and does not descend, then extract the easy way out (meaning apply pressure to halt bleeding), twist your hand over that area so as to dissolve in water a small clear crystal of salt mixed with clay and lye; also keep applying pressure outside where there's swelling or bruising using wet wool dipped in oil infused with egg white, holding the affected limb.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we now rest upon that which was consumed from this book of humors today.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not heed my advice in the midst of your hardship – for it is to those among men who are burdened with this heavy load that I refer, then grasp his spine, which bears this weight (the form):
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus pierces through that joint, and does not extend your hand into the wound too deeply, nor to an underlying delicate place below it all.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then return (or bring back) the intestine or hernia into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And then return (or bring back) the intestine or hernia into its cavity, and place your hand over it to prevent any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And when his body contains water that regulates its nature, so it does not weaken the head in either the fourth or left side of the entirety.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And if it follows its disposition into the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which has gone into darkness in that obscure night and lift the moist vision; there are some causes herein found, return them to daytime by noon (5 o'clock).
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Not when you make it in the hour of treatments or immediately after applying the infusion,
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	When you remove water from them for a long time with great and powerful looking,
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May you lance an abscess with a cauterizing tool if it swells today and correct that which gives way to the abscess in water.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you take away the sight of him and place your hand over his face for several days until he exists in the dark nighttime, it is through this that his skin will be regulated by daylight.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return its state from that humidity greatly and converse about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You know that a student is not exempt from certain occurrences during the operation, and if you are skilled in it, then so be it with your performance of the procedure.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from those of them who have the art, and they say that there is a focus in the area where water comes out through which piercing occurs.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Even though no one has seen such water in our land before it was used here and none of the free men among us have previously handled this water, there is a possibility that this new (water) may bring something different or unexpected.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of medicinal herbs used for that which he does not know about them on those occasions.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These are the pains of iron or steel by nature themselves and these points lie outside their subtle triangle formation; this sharpness is its form as well.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.: (This line appears as a title or reference
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From flesh, nothing in the nose." This phrase suggests that there is no trace of meat within someone's nostrile
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are variously birthed or formed (carn/tissue), with no known cause leading to their assembly as Scorpio scorpions, or polyps; and this malady is called Polypus because it resembles that piece of flesh depicted." This translation attempts to convey a somewhat complex understanding from an old medical perspective. The phrase indicates the spontaneous development (nascidura/birth) within nasal passages which are not associated with any known external cause ('motz pes' translating as 'stone burden', possibly referring colloquially to symptoms without a clear reason). These developments, resembling creatures like scorpions or polyps (
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And in it is blackened flesh/cancerous growths of dark hue and within the same (nasal passage), there are not such fiery red-colored flesh." Here, a doctor describes finding disconcerting conditions: cancerous lesions which have taken on an ominously dark color inside the nose. The statement contrastingly notes
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in these (blackened areas), there is neither fraudulent flesh nor cancerous growths; take action to separate the nasal passages and expose them to sunlight, plucking out bezoars from within those blackened places." This line directs a remedy or treatment for an implied condition—perhaps suggesting that by cleanse (separate) with light exposure and remove any obstructions like stones lodged in the nasal passages ('bezoars'). It appears to advocate early intervention through non-invasive methods, as was common before modern medical techniques. The term 'le malaute sezer' is a bit cryptic but could refer to expelling or clearing out
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Extract that from the essential parts, and insert what you have understood of those spirits under wherein thou knowest all flesh remains; if any reason within can cause an atrophy (cessation), then take heed to remove such with one of the subtle instruments which make it easier for intervention upon whatever causative factor arises.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May you hold the lance or sudden accidental touch of an apothecary' extrication tool if necessary; for bad (evil) abscesses, tighten and seal that which has been detached from its socket and all cavities within it.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Return its position in the nose with the nostril's cavity and water or air,
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	May if your nose is open and you proceed with moisture inside the mouth, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate a second time after covering, you will understand that there is no meat in the feet where bones have not already come up due to ascent.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore when you encounter faithful objects that obstruct it and semen exits at the moment of arousal, count each intercourse interval as one or several days, and introduce blockage to any extremity of the penis inside its sheath (penile urethra) due to which obstruction is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Put that which smells out into where it can enter the nasal passages and sit on its goiter, for those who are habitually exposed to these odors may cause this malady in oneself if one wishes so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Extract the fever, place your hand over the nose area with a cold cloth as needed for up to three days or until all the blood that has been broken from the veins is cleansed.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	In the heat of summer when its cause is present in one'se nose with a metal tube inserted for several days until it heals.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be that there arises a need for treatment intervention; use this one then.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how it's done with the tool used by those who make poultices and medicines in honey.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which resembles a small candle), so is its appearance and the flesh similarly affected.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, use a closed cane inserted with the tool maker and its flat surface exposed; hold it in your hand where these hands rest (the thumbs), which will catch whatever fluid or causes that flow within them when pressed by the instrument.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here are the translations for each line:
Capitol .xxv.	The provided text appears to be from an ancient medical treatise with influences of
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	It seems like you've attempted a translation but made some errors, possibly due to language barriers or misinterpretation of the original text which
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When we breathe in and out regularly, the tongue rests between the cheeks of our nose within which days for observation by a doctor may be significant enough to note such behavior as potentially relevant or indicative of an underlying issue.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which water you introduce into his body for its appearance, and take everything from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand over the location or where the burning medicine is located; this will extingdict it in that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	May it be late for your insight to enter, then consider if you have lamed out, hard, of dark color and with little feeling; do not touch that iron which has afflicted the skulls; these movements are directed towards those affected by this malady due to great cunning.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is of yellow discharge and not of a cold color, when itching becomes possible throughout that area, then evacuate the pus and incise with great care where there's fear for one'thy age; cure the spot by what exits outwardly and constrict within so that may be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text appears as if it is meant for translation from an archaic
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	This line translates to English as: "When the continuity is dissolved through flies or impostors." It seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical text discussing conditions where something (possibly worms, indicated by 'plagas') disrupts the connection between parts of the body such as the nose and lips/lips. The
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	The translated line is: "When you discover a break in continuity within these structures (referring to the body parts mentioned earlier), few will recognize this operation unless performed on barbers." This suggests that recognizing or diagnosing such conditions was considered beyond most people's expertise, except perhaps among those who worked as barbers during medieval times. They might have been more knowledgeable about surgical procedures related to
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The translated line reads: "Therefore, when any cause of that is fresh worms associated with the seam (possibly referring to infestations or infections), then adjust your lips' teeth for stitching up this opening/wound, and carefully treat what inside has been healed." In a medieval medical context, it indicates an approach where barbers might be called upon not only for their cutting skills but also possibly some form of first aid related to skin or superficial wounds. This could involve cleaning the area (implied by "mouth's teeth") and suturing ("stitching up"), with a particular focus on treating any infection
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	The line translates to: "If the lips of continuity have already been separated and there is any healing present inside (possibly a wound or infection within), then cover it with barber's sanction." This sentence implies that if an opening between parts such as nose, lip(s), and perhaps another body part has formed ("continuity"), the treatment might involve using some form of antidote provided by a local healer (the "barbers"). The term 'covering' suggests bandaging or applying salve to protect against further infection. This highlights how medieval medical
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here the translation of each line would be:
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the thread used for suture be to add continuity or use needles with which we have previously applied in stitching the abdomen, or apply it along the thighs together with you and I know how.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: This line appears to be referencing an entry in a
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From the removal of those causes that come into the lips during disputations or arguments:
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Movements frequently made at the hardened appendages of their lips in parts of their bodies, and some are children while others are adults.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So that you close the lips and any openings of those hardened parts throughout the body, apply lubrication to the location where fluid has accumulated inside it so as not to constrict its area; likewise wash and treat this place with water or other remedies while healing is taking place within.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The exact meaning of "Capitol
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the adjustment in the flesh to the gums:
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great pain of the tightened flesh where I formerly touched it, leading to its swelling and inflammation causing you distress; consequently, if one suspends or touches that area in turn again on their gums (incisors) inside their mouths and under pressure causes them discomfort.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return your pause (hand pressure) over the area where it has been crushed or other powdery/excision treatments have occurred, holding their hands.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then you shall incise it immediately and cauterize it thereafter; for the cautery will not return to be used again.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol XXIX. (The given line is likely Roman numeral representation
De razo de dentz am ferr.	From reason to iron, this phrase suggests a logical or causative connection between 'reason' and 'iron
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the edges of teeth from different parts and at forum are adjusted with sharp points, streaks (possibly referring to incisions or grooves made by these points), some black veils/lines can form within that go down into the gums; they may be citrine lines or greenish hues indicative of corruption.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So that you make a space between your legs and stop the head at this point on the neck (probably indicating stopping pain by placing hands over it), rubbing with teeth where those sharp ends appear, caused by blackness and citrinitas among others inside which no cause of harm will penetrate.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if you are in the part of digestion at that moment, pay attention to it; otherwise, iterate the process on those areas again tomorrow and the next until they return to their original state as per your wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Be aware that teeth require various types of clamps and shapes according to how you prepare for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For this reason the area where teeth are located is another part of the same cutting place, and these forms of cuts must be prepared by you beforehand for now:
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. (The provided text does not contain enough
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth." This phrase suggests a context where there is an intent or effort to completely remove
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Treatment of the tooth's pain at all times during its total removal, there is no reason that supplementary care will not support it throughout this process; for substances within are considered justification in the extraction." The text discusses taking measures against dental discomfort associated with teeth pulling (extraction). It reassures that additional interventions or medicinal agents present inside could justify further treatment, ensuring comfort during tooth removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the leg is swolthy to eliminate that pain which continually causes it and hinders from achieving relief in a healthy joint; once you have eliminated this cause of discomfort, we already witnessed progress thanks to the efforts of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore when you need to determine which is the painful tooth and understand what it hurts like, once identified where there may be any movement within the periodontal socket in which the tooth'dictates rooted entirely, ensure that this part dissolves from the gums of all parts; then apply cold compresses or fine ruffs gradually inside until they come together.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if there is no exit (for treatment), take one of those instruments immediately and use it quickly for the entirety, in order that removal from this pain may be hastened as part of consumption/treatthy at mealtime.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be if the tooth is dislocated or decayed, then complete with cloth that which has been torn off there and tighten that part of the delicate thread under so that it does not come loose during your contraction on that portion held by you.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	When you work with extreme care in the circuit of all parts of the gums and guard your strength so that it does not weaken those areas or break them, return over the thighs due to its cunning nature which is greater than the first pain experienced by him/her.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And wash away its curative action is with water or vinegar poured over it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a flow of bile that comes and goes naturally, attend to it with gentle movements; but if you do not confer this bile, then apply cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers are those by which the tooth is prodded away from both sides of an extended mouthpiece or short arm with a small manubrium, so that they will not be doubled when performing these tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When they enter for times of a large limb inside that when you first insert them, they should not be folded and placed outside the limits excessively thinly stretched out.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVII. (Note: The Roman numeral "XX
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	From the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need the extraction of a tooth that has any cause for falling out, then pause over the spot where it rests at the edge of the border per day or two until the place is softened; and insert some anodyne or thumb pads from which stones are assembled into the beak of a crow or glove, shaped like forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The external parts of them are pains stitched with a reed or a scalpel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my treatment with these forceps or tweezers, then I will bite down on the root and remove all flesh from the tool in which it is lodged; this little instrument has this shape.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	E for a small extreme extension of an organ and it is not beginning to crack or split apart.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the lancet is in need of a hole to be drilled, then it will suffice; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms include at least one heavy-dutgy shape such as a triangular drill bit.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it's trilaterated and has subtle distingy parts.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will help with this tool which has two levers like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments that we have prepared for incisions of the teeth; it is well-made by this tool created within an hour, and herein lies its form.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the distorted or shortened limb's extreme part, which is any swelling and not caused by such that it should break:
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you understand that these tools of teeth grind are similar in form and likeness to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisan in his craft cause harm to himself according to what he means for the operation and various illnesses; these are ailments that ancient ones did not address or pause their instruments due to different forms of medicine.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are cracked, or if you press them, then treat it where appropriate with instruments and forceps that we have mentioned for extracting teeth roots, which is how this should be done.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And whether there is any swelling, even small, and if it's tightened or bound by the mouth so that no bone escapes from where its hole has been made; restore the location with appropriate medicine for this matter.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be if there is a bone fracture, then extract that piece from the crack and its blackness (implying bruising), and take care of it so that it heals well.
Capitol .xxxii.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating archaic or historical medical
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	When it comes to the care of teeth, experts place great emphasis on them as essential components for overall health and well-be0ne functioning.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are so prominent in their natural form and primarily on the female breast (which is highly regarded), then it's clear that one must consider: if they serve nothing else but as placeholders for other dental structures, such removal or connection with them would not be possible. Hence, we anchor our understanding here; moreover, even though there may no direct association to another set of teeth (dentition in this case), you should examine and treat it using the instrument whose form suits its purpose – much like a hawk's talon, made from Indian steel with an acute edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your tongue is where you examine it for a period of days regarding the hardness of teeth, and that they are not otherwise affected by other conditions in the mouth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an evident opening in the bone, then apply this Indian steel from which it takes its form to close that gap.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines back into place in the foot, and rub them with alcohol-soaked cloths.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is one part that has been broken and the tongue protrudes outward due to this cracking of flesh, then take care by trimming what' extruded within it (the sore or ulceration), making sure not to cut too deeply so as not to damage further either the tongue itself or speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol XXXIII. (The original text does not provide content beyond this
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Regarding the restoration of badly damaged teeth, both gold and silver are faithful materials used in their reconstruction:
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you press the teeth in front of concussion and removal through percussion or extraction, and blood cannot be drawn from what holds it (presumably indicating an injury to which substance), then that very day's medicine will cure your wound, for no time has passed when silver does not harden therein.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Return and let the blood circulate within that portion from which you begin to treat, tightening your hand so as not to make it dull or unsophisticated.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	If your string is where you must hold together the teeth that do not escape, then it means this part should be strong to maintain its function and purpose in keeping everything intact within the body'donor of pain or injury concern here). Here we have a situation requiring strength (perhaps referring metaphorically)
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then insert the external teeth (or foreign bodies) of the string using forceps or probes into various places in operation and convert these inserted elements along with them at locations between healthy tooth(s) and decayed ones, so that they do not cause damage to the tongue. Here we have a procedure involving delicate manipulation during surgical intervention (likely dental repair), where specific tools like forceps or probes are used for precise extraction of foreign objects from around teeth with care taken not to injure nearby structures such as the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Return that liquid poured in with Roman manner.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loosened or hernured (joint), hold that one or those with steadfast care throughout the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is how the teeth and the straightness of healthy as well as diseased teeth are linked together, so often times these ways.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns the tooth or restores it with any of our treatments here in these locations and they regain their health together.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Not until an expert craftsman and wise man arrive is it so.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv. (The provided text does not include details for
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	From the ligament by which it is in the tongue and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament from which the tongue occasionally takes some wayward movements or is naturally inclined to do so due to an already solidified condition caused by parasites that have settled in it.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation in him is to gargle the malady'dictor's mouth; his head exists within the throat, and raise its tongue, then incise that particular nervous strand according to where it should be released from the patient’s oblation (recitation).
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	May there be any hardness or swelling in that area, and it is for consolidation of pus within the limits you have already cut with your lancet to separate the disintegrating nodule, then give anoint oil (unguent) and divide what has separated.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	When there is not a crack in the skin of the body and you split apart asphaltum (a type of cautery) and sancus fluid, do so here carefully to avoid injury.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May you cool down the flow of phlegm that has been sitting in a walled area; may if it is pus (sick humor), then burn this location with cauterization, which will bring about expulsion to the outside as needed.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return that healer for other causes within which it must be cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating or interpreting some aspects of
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	It appears that you've given a fragment in Latin, which roughly translates to: "After extracting the cyst from the tongue
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	The given Latin text translates to English as: "Sometimes the cyst, after extraction from the tongue due to a prescribed name's prohibition against its operation (i.dict), is inflamed; and while this occurs inside the mouth, it swells up."  
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in them (the patient) is that you grind teeth from inside the groin ahead of sunrthy and observe for atrophy.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you perceive it as dark or black and hard, without the melancholy humors taking offense, do not touch that which is near your skull.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it declines to whiteness, in which moisture is present, then place the onion undernethy therein and insert that thin sponge throughout; if wind enters during your operation time, cease immediately saying three times 'vinegar', so as to restrict the humidity.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have treated him until he has been washed and cleaned with water, taking care that the other treatment is also carried out inside where his health will be restored.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The provided medieval medical text appears complex due to archaic language usage; however
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the removal of ringworm on fingers and from that which does not exist in the palm, as well as from other such afflictions.  
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When gout attacks worsen in the joints where the humors that have turned sour and are called golden veins (probably referring to inflamed blood vessels or arteries), which healers recognize as they become black, dry, with little sensation inside—avoid touching those areas.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is requested for the color and size to be large, do not touch that with iron through the flow of bile; leave it inside so that it matures therein. And if you must extract it, then forcefully remove it yourself or have someone else do it for you.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or bluish hue and subtle in nature, then that one should be considered enclosed within itself.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Either it is pain of silver or gold quality, delicate as silk.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you realize that it is the tongue and show them their ulceration, taking hold of it with your instrument, allow it to stay in place for as long as possible until you can remove what remains from those parts beyond.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another that pulls any cause from the tunics (fabric), and upon it implicates this very tool you are using:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and they are assembled with forceps; however, the external parts of them are twisted, so that if any one among those is in pain on the other's end due to sharpness (likely referring to a medical procedure or condition), it begins therein made with iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May it be that this tool is not with you, then cut out the bone from which these are formed: and if they have been forged on one side but not on the other, remove them accordingly.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And you have made an incision, following this method of incising set forth herein, and apply the poultice soaked in water from which humors are bled out.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it happen if there is an outflow of phlegm caused by cold foods such as barley gruel or hazelnut milk and other substances that are reasons for the restricted flow of phlegm, then take care of what enters to restore health.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And at times other worms or similar parasites enter those thigh areas and are inserted there as described in their mouth'dictions, internally within these regions of fatty tissue.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had swollen so much that there were measure intervals within which one could only pass through two cracks.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you fed my fistula and let me rest upon one of their chests, then extracted it; from that large piece I removed another part understood by the other two, and forced its mouth shut, after which I kept me in that position for the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return (or return) the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; it was not running from there but only by little streams.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So it is the gout of that woman, and immediately drink water, and take food as well, so that they will not cease to inject these attacks caused by the humors for a long time; until that place where this insidious condition persists within its duration.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So you should engage and cauterize the swelling of him/her here, then move on with action; thereafter I shall walk about without fear that God has taken care of this matter from me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In translating this medieval medical treatise line by line into English while taking into account its
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Given the context of a medieval medical text and attempting to provide an accurate translation with some understanding that these languages may share Latin roots, I'll interpret each
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When arthritis affects the joint of the hip (hip), it is not necessarily vertical or straight—indicating a possible misalignment; and if infection sets into thickened swol0bly rounded areas, they are called "boil." Here 'catarr' likely refers to an inflammation consistent with arthritis symptoms.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When you have recovered the fluid that we mentioned in the division, and it does not interfere with your treatment, take note: when a scab forms roundly (which means forming into a circular shape), make sure to gently remove it; if it's long or red/black like blood from deep within, which is close to its source location, continue applying pressure on the area where you placed your hand.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you turn that second as directed by the white and long (which may refer to a patient's pulse or tongue appearance), whereby you separate the chest and press on the tongue with an instrument of which process determines its form and fixes one-tenth in the new position, and pull it outwards along two instruments for inspection at the site of two nodules.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When it is not inserted there but what has been adjusted to the patient'thy own proper condition, if you do insert into them may your speech flow more easily.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Returns back into its cavity the inguinal region (the area around the groin), using that which we have introduced within it of water for two nodes; and takes care of what is healed inside there.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient's abdomen is terrifying due to his fear during cauterization, and handling of the cautery instrument in him only represents sharp water acute pain, then you should stop at the top of the belly with your hand, placing it on the tongue (the part where we mentioned holding hands earlier), which holds this tool used for today's procedure. Holding their hand comfortably and completing what is alive; meanwhile, make sure not to press hard or too subtly in that area using the instrument of sharp water acute pain here described as such:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your mouth with the medicine on it so that, during these hours within which you are using it, it will become blackened and numb from the bite of medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, prick the wound and cover it with this over the extremity of the blade, immerse the covering in medicine, place the ray on top of that covered by the thread whereby said material adheres to within which threads inserted therein; apply such quantity so as if desired for cauterization treatment similar to gout medication. Allow it three or four days until dry and falling off has occurred (which means healing).
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you have indigestion and proceed through medicine'thy healing journey, repeat that treatment regularly; apply cauterization within the loop of the uterus at its beginning in the body boundary, cleanse whatever is present therein with water as part of medical practice, wash it thoroughly with rinse water, and treat from above downwards towards the navel for healing.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This remedy for healing is placed with care and put in a place of fearlessness, beyond doubt or concern.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some days she is cured by the water that was applied delicately with cautery and incision, for healing in this manner: calendula, yarrow, sage, rue, Arabian scabies, chamomile, crushed herbs to these plants; adjust all of these causes or some of them into a decoction, submerged in boiling water, with bubbles rising. The broth is then ladled out gently and poured into the bath area where there's an ingrown toenail above which rests a cautery instrument made from metal following this practice: silver or iron nail.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the patient'thy throat whereby the steam puffs up over the tongue, and by which the tongue becomes obscured/diminished in visibility.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Here returns it over that motion made while dry, and ensure you do not perform this healing on the appetite of your body; too much adjustment will worsen his affliction with maggots, but if done properly by caretakers under watchful eyes, then one can manage.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be that you do not have this instrument present? Then take a can and compose outside the exterior of him/her an enclosure made of wood, so that the mouth of the malady is moistened, for the wooden hood prevents vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii.: (The provided text does not contain enough information for
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the removal of thorns and water that clings to the sole, as well as from other causes: (This line suggests a medieval medical perspective on treating foot pain or discomfort by removing irritants like thorns stuck in one'thy shoes ("golay
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Persistent sticking or prickling sensations remain on the sole of the foot, possibly due to a thorn or some other cause: (Here we are interpreting "motas veguadas" as persistent discomfort and potentially identifying common sources such as embedded objects in
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 And thus you extract the visible water from those areas and place your tongue on top of it (on the foot), to deduce that there is indeed moisture present within these lesions: The text describes an empirical technique used by physicians in medieval times, where they would visually identify signs of excess fluid or "moisture" associated with painful conditions such as gout. By feeling for wetness on the surface (the foot), and possibly using their tongue to enhance sensation ("putting your tongue upon it"), a doctor could confirm the presence of water accumulation, indicative of
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	However if the water (moisture) that you see cannot be hidden within your foot and is being vomited up following consumption of spoiled food, this indicates a link between these issues: The moist condition inside could come from rotten meat in one's stomach causing nausea leading to expulsion ("vomiting"), or by drinking dehydrated water (less than normal), dried leeks/lentils, parched pears; and potentially sea sponge that has absorbed saltwater. Herein lies the strong connection between these problems: Once identified as a cause for vomiting moisture from within due to spoiled food ingestion leading back into your foot (which is being treated), one can take measures such as feeding on fresh, clean water and possibly introducing sea sponge devoid of saltwater. This suggests remedial actions might include hydration with pure drinkable fluids or consumption of unspoiled food sources to restore balance in the body's humors: In this text, a medieval physician describes how certain external conditions can manifest as internal symptoms and recommends dietary adjustments alongside physical interventions like massage techniques using natural materials (sea sponge) for treatment. The aim is often restoring fluid balance in the body by ensuring proper hydration with clean water, avoiding spoiled foods which could disrupt one's internal state leading to symptoms observed elsewhere—like moisture accumulation causing foot pain or other ailments: This insightful methodology emphasizes understanding bodily functions and interconnections between dietary habits (specifically
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If not through examination of these causes have we discerned them, then use a tool made of lead as per this manner.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is a large stone that enters therein, and within its cavity you insert it to ease the patient's discomfort.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Elevate your head in their position and ensure that the touch of your hand on their throat or back does not cause them pain where bones meet flesh, as this is what I intend for my treatment to achieve.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even if the malady enters therein (enters into that place), due to its science of understanding the cause and location associated with it, they will enchant in their jaws (with instruments such as cupping or leeches) according to how much has been prepared for them inside the designated opening.
Capitol .xxxix.	Given that this text is in an archaic form of Romance languages
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the sanctuary taken for the grave (or tomb).
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the bloodletting fluid we have mentioned in the division of cure and medicine does not comfort you, consider that time has come for treatment at the heart'dictorium (an area related to balancing humors), use what you already own as your instrument.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you happen upon gout again, extract that small or subtle discharge under careful attention.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract from there, then take a concave canula and insert that into the groove of the humerus, placing a heated iron in the concavity of the canula until enough (so long as the swelling has died out and stayed away from the groove), and prevent it from entering the limb for the duration of the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not for the fistula (opening) that we have created, then let us drain the swelling in the groin or under antimony with the same tool used in its suffocation during cough syrup preparation.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another maneuver in the smoking process of that which they do: you grasp an oily substance within the flame and cover it with something (likely a metal or glass) on top, wherein there's a hole through which smoke passes; above this assembly rest below for heating. You hold your mouth over the end of the tube to ensure that smoking is not drawn into one’s body while knowing when you have reached sufficient heat at the site of ingestion (the stomach), whereupon it suddenly catches fire, causing pain or injury upon realization.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not already done so, then repeat the subfumigation motions, and prevent the malady from drinking, eat salty and acidic foods, and do not drink water; as it is necessary that this regimen be followed strictly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool with which you take out when seen; it resembles pincers used sometimes, but there's no curvature in it here.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The given medieval medical treatise text in Latin-influenced language can be translated line by line into English:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol XL. (Note: "Capitol
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the speech is captured in fragments and sections of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The pegs move as spices do, from movements of the hands, according to what they remember in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	So in piercing and cutting through their flesh with their hands, of which one is for the special appendages they have inserted into themselves; because from these moisture imbalances arise diseases.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second sign is that it occurs in the places where acids accumulate within the body, and such an abscess at the head is different from one on the belly; each of them requires surgical intervention for treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May some of which have not been pierced but are properly timed healings in those parts, or as an accompaniment to their illnesses at that time.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other such instruments that are dislocated when crossed and not mature according to their purpose, as well as those intended for joints, which become a cause of contraction in that limb; or an apendicular (appendage) perforation if it occurs within the maturity period thereof towards the main body part; or inguinal one, and if you delay its penetration until it ripens therein, then this will not affect the prepuce nor elongate to the segments of the anus.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the hour of the puncture for the abscess, and so it is when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	E understand that it matures when the pain and fever yield, and reduce the decrease of speech and heartbeat, as well as the swelling at the site of abscessation, along with other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	When you know where the abscess opening is occurrcing, and purulent material from healing of elevation comes out,
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Through piercing the flesh or limbs, if spider bites are in the parts of muscles or feet, and on joints such as knees and ligaments, even where no reflection occurs; these places use puncture according to that part which has been reflected.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a muscle tissue, then you must pierce it inside until its digestion has been confirmed two times over, and if you perforate that area now, it will extend the leg of the patient and harden their lips and increase depth there.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May one insert an apastula as directed by the flesh or body'dictum, or according to what is necessary for that member which ingests it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When administering a small incision, and for large or broad dissections according to the variety of the sizes of the incisions:
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other objects are involved where the cecum has been conquered and excised (or removed), when it hurts that there is bowel movement or inflammation, similar to what you have caused with acidity in blisters and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who are seated and have three angles; they sit similarly to the shape of a pine tree needle or like the apices (tips) of an arrowheads.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From those parts where it is administered in round and moon-shaped doses, they seem similar.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May it not be possible for someone to pierce these surface lion'seals without much effort; when you do penetrate them directly and simply on the surface, or flatly enough so that only a small force is needed.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has gathered pus already, do not attempt to remove all of it at once; take out one portion from that area today, treat this part inside tomorrow, and extract a larger portion on another day until completely healed through gradual treatment.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly when the malady is from too much bile or phlegm produced by a man's liver and spleen—or if it concerns an old person, pregnant woman, or sick child who cannot cough up their illness for escape—the animal spirit within them strives to leave through disease excretion. And you perform the operation then.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Guard your actions with great care and place your tool where you pierce these thorns, making sure to avoid infections; consider if the worm of the thorn is small or flat, then attend to it accordingly—either for yourself or as a healer'dict. If the thorn is large, and there are fissures within your tool used for piercing (perforacio), pause often at any place where we gather together until help arrives.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess there is detachment of part of the colon or if that area has been concave within its circuit, then sew it up with wax thread or linen cloth as when you have carried out pans and rags; keep moisture inside by day three, and process those two things to cure what comes from the bandages used for healing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you experience a surge of blood during your operation, then administer cold water and apply them where the clothes are tied with elastic bands; place it over the area where the blood flow is directed to prevent excessive bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, it is necessary that you maintain your diet and care regimen as recommended here in our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter time and the location of suppuration (abscess) is a joint or in muscles, then warm poultices are applied with oil and vinegar caustics, while they press these onto the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are meaty, then cover that you pause pulpils at the beginning with water and oil as we have said beforehand; also ensure to remove any abscesses therefrom and cleanse them for their treatment in whatever way has been agreed upon. Here'dictation breaks down into modern English line by line:
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	So it is necessary for the knowledge of universal treatment methods, possibly following as I have distinguished each type of ailment herein discussed in terms of their specific curing processes at individual sessions.
Capitol .xli.	The provided text seems like it could be translated from an old or archaic
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From the section where these worms come into the chest (assuming that "cap." refers to a part of the body, possibly head given historical anatomical terminology).
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the chest region worms are present and their bodies contain segments with protective coverings (tunicates), which in turn house internal organs; these serve as living structures for them. Here, "codena del cap" refers to a location on someone's body - possibly near or within the neck area given traditional anatomical terminology where 'chest region' might not be immediately clear due to language differences between modern and medieval medical texts
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are full of moisture similar to lemon (lime), which suggests that the worms or their internal contents have a wet nature due to this liquid substance analogous in texture and possibly taste/odor to lime, further indicating some level of fluid presence
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And they contain moisture similar to lemon's juice (implying the liquid aspect of their internal structure), and together with them there are stones that form part of these worm-like structures; also contained among those parts is stone or hard substance, suggesting a bony component within what may be parasitic creatures. This indicates an understanding in medieval texts where they discussed symptoms related to infestations by entities like t
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the entirety of all these creatures (the worms), and in their removal there is no fear; provided you carry them out without using a surgical instrument like forceps, which indicates that manual extraction was sometimes considered sufficient or safe for removing such parasites. This reflects common practices before advanced medical tools were available where simple physical methods of treatment could be preferred under certain circumstances as per the understanding in
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And it is the operation of these items that you must fear for its shape and which appeals into us while ensuring that they contain within themselves.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If you count moisture (humidity), then divide that part into segments according to their length on the surface following this manner.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begins in the section of .B., and enters into the section of .G. So that when humidity is expelled, scrape away any moisture containing it, without leaving behind any cause for all this dripping; as soon as some cause returns from among them, return to scraping at that same spot until no more causes remain visible.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And repeatedly rub over that spot, as gently and thoroughly as possible if you are inside it, making sure there is no injury for which this layer may be; then heal the flesh within where such treatment has been applied.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If a ganglion is inflamed (apostema), then proceed in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	am section has the shape of a crescent, and cuts are made between its lips (or segments) throughout all parts, and your intention is to extract that portion from within the dress (tunic).
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your cautery causes disruption, then you must return it immediately and report the first aid taken today.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May occur in other openings on the head as well, just like when capillaries and nail beds appear in children'thy limbs; their entire layer is surface-level.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	Pause it in those parts lower down on their bodies, that the disease may be drawn up to those higher areas.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Return there is care for those who need it back here in healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii. (The given text does not provide further context or
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	This line appears to be a fragment from what might have been written in Latin, which historically has had an influence on medical terminology due to its use by early physicians and schol
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	This line translates into English as follows:
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	These spices from these stones are motions, some of which contain moisture, and others that are harmful without treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that state of good disposition during the treatment, the color of which fluid is proper to the color of the navel and mottled throughout the entire body without being attached to nerves, veins, or arteries (or prone), take note: place a pulse taken from just above this line on top of that line below it; observe all over the surface of the wound, then pinch between one's fingers either here at once in their mouth with numbness required for those points.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	Es possible that a vein or nerve is not inserted.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	If the spine does not cause gout, adjust your hand inside it or quiver up and down to disturb the humors in the uterus; if this is not necessary because there'thy no need for further insertion—if you do have to incise vein or artery during operation, then pause on shards of glass or other powders that flow out from sanctioned elements. Allow resting time until inflammation subsides and the lesion heals; afterward apply lubricating plasters so it can start being mobilized again.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanction has detached.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation within which you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if you are inquiring whether there is any other small bumps or swellings present that could indicate a cause of these pains elsewhere in the body, then investigate those and clean them thoroughly.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the region of great scrofulous sore (which may refer to a swolthy growth or abscess associated with tuberculosis), then do not insert that scrofulious matter into its natural place within your body.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	From before when that faithful friend stood strong and allowed itself to be harmed,
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Now complete the treatment of the wound you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that scrofulous stone entirely, make sure the mouth and cheeks are adjusted with it just enough so that not a single piece is extraneous.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May you find that there has been an excessive spread due to the greatness of the scrofulus, understand its cause and treat it accordingly; apply stitches as instructed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the scrophula containing moisture penetrates here and above this place of ripening for you to hold it down with a deep puncture made by perforation, piercing that which has been put below your body'dictor (which could be analogous to an instrument used in examination or treatment), prevention occurs as if we have already spoken.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And administer injections of wine mixed with wax and ointments to those areas, so that the rotting rot (rotten humors) dissolves from decayed flesh.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you wash and purify the soil again after using it for cleansing purposes, then take care of that raw animal fat within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	In this translation task involving medieval medical terminology that draws upon Latin, Italian, Spanish
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	The provided text seems to be a mix of ancient Roman and possibly some regional dialect or archaic formulation related to medicine (possibly from Medieval Latin). It is challenging without more context
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The translated text appears to be an attempt at understanding ancient medical practices with some linguistic creativity:  
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the writing of those speeches.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May men have an inclination that is avoided extraction of the pill, for when it comes to them not being painful in all their veins and major arteries here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	May occur in those who have had caustic treatment in the mouth or with gauze/forceps when the disease is not in the anus, causing loss of parts that are felt due to cold extraction caused by cautery from the part where epilation occurs.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want to draw out the fluid (asceticum), I will make three or four small circles within each circle of asceticum, as much in that space between two circles for quantity so that the section is flesh and not cartilage; this area is suitable for a piece (seccio). Here no meat nor bones are present.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor fears gout, then extend one end of the catheter for only an inch and open it until it reaches the channel; this may prevent bleeding if any comes from that cause at all.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And if it is necessary for any child to have been withdraUBTEN (possibly a mistranslation or typo where "ubert
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the hour grows late in which I tease you, press together your lips against my chin and that single touch will gently stimulate the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Here arrives the treatment that makes flesh within it heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	For the command of water to lead out the evil trapped inside it; and this is for three days; hence we order that same water hereinforced within until cured.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when you have seen what I saw for him, a servant holds the chair and mattress on his chest bed, placing one part of lung'dictum therein; thus calling upon his healing, and pressing down as if from moist coughing, uncovering dirtness and applying it to the clean lungs which were once full.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So they admit that she had not inserted a vein or lumen into her and let the breath of the youth flow through it; while treating her until the focus was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it does not occur at the commencement of service, then return to moderate days for recovery and restoration of their health facilities.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now you are told that there is no fear in the section of the epidermis (epidermis refers here possibly to skin or outer layer). Here's a translation line by line
Capitol .xliv.	The provided excerpt, "Capitol .xliv.," appears
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Now you are addressing the section on absorption where decay occurs in the groin area and an inguinal (inguinal refers to a condition involving abscesses or swelling around one's testicles), it is called; hence, referring to hernia as pertained specifically here. Here’s the
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This common swelling term "aposteme" now refers to a serious inguinal (inguinais relates again here possibly to the groin area), it is abscess and occurs mainly in women'dictio: The commonly used word for this type of severe abdominal condition, which tends to occur primarily among females. Here’
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it falls into one of two categories; either congenital or incidental (congenital means present from birth and here would indicate a condition that could be inherited through genetics
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	But in the case where there is nothing to cure naturally, what can we do? Here's an elaboration on imp
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is like those that seem as if they are small bumps (nodes grasses could refer to benign lymph nodes or similar non-cancerous growths), and another looks more ominously like an abscess originating from a vessel blockage, which instills fear. Here's further explanation: These accidental types of inguinal conditions may either present as small bumps on the skin that could be harmless lymph nodes or swelling around vessels caused by inflammation due to occlusion—each potentially causing concern for those affected and requiring medical attention, especially if there's
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And only when it is necessary with iron that they should strike him who is small, which means in medical terms referring specifically for the treatment of patients considered as 'small' or less robust using tools like an iron instrument under professional supervision by a doctor (met
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you investigate that which has been said about him and if you disgrace his semblance of grease nodes (likely referring to cholesterol deposits or xanthomas), without suspending any of the veins, then cut out what lies between those points as they do with nodules; but if not, examine everything that comes from within where healing takes place.
Capitol .xlv.	The provided text is in Latin-influenced Medieval language with some Italian
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	From the spice of herbs." - This line suggests that they are discussing or using various a
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 "About branches, we have mentioned all the spices in their division." - This line indicates that they previously discussed different types of herbs (spices) and organized or categorized them into divisions within a certain context; possibly for culinary use as was common during medieval times when precise
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 "Where you recommend how to distinguish between nodes and efflux, there is doubt." - Here the speaker expresses uncertainty about where or when one should differentiate 'nodes' (which could be referring metaphorically to parts of a plant used in
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Thus you say that efflux is warmth and fever, intense pains subside when the boiling overflow ends—and decay ceases where there was previously heat." - This line appears to be from a medical or philosophical text discussing concepts of health and illness. It suggests an understanding in medieval times about how excessive bodily fluids (or efflux) can cause symptoms like fever, severe pain, but when these overflows cease—often after some form of intervention to 'settle' them or remove the surplus fluid — there is relief from such conditions. The
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May not be warmth nor fever nor pain, and this code contains that which is within one'dictor’s possession." - Here the speaker seems to express hope or conjecture about a remedy (possibly encoded as 'ciphac leon') held by an individual ('one dictor'). It could
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And as for the color of the body, and its consumption is like an apple or cheese; whether greater or lesser in quantity, these are considered spices/fats which contain moisture, whose colors correspond to that portion detailed in division." - This line appears from a text concerned with dietary matters. The speaker refers to various food items (potentially fats and humidified substances) by their effect on the body's color when consumed ('as if like an apple or cheese'). They further elaborate that these components are categorized within divisions—probably sections of a larger work detailing dietary principles. The mention suggests specific attention to what food items might affect bodily moisture and health, consistent with medieval medical literature focused on humoral theory where balance among body fluids was
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So then, when you reach the stage of healing this node, which is rejected by it and sought after with strength for restoration as will come forth in its form that comes next to appear, insert into it what has been asked for accordingly.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here comes the line for translation into English: And place your hand last according to the measure of the size of the ulceration, and push back the protrusion and consider what has come out in its traces.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of fluid that comes from any source and its flow reaches the skin surface above what I have mentioned in other applications, then proceed as follows:
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is not movement of moisture from the traces of intercourse, you know they are fat (indicating an excess condition related to obesity or lifestyle in medieval medicine).
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it has a shape of a sickle according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Here comes the sentence: As you have learned, and with caution placed thereon, cleanse your entire cranium at ease, and if possible, protect its skin or sac; take care to remove that disease from the head.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, such healthy body cannot be extracted anymore and must therefore be taken out immediately before any cause of harm comes up again.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If any cause from Rome arises either a little or much, then return according to their manner.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you again find a small part of the patient' extraneous and grind down some sharp corrosive powders into it, press on that which is setting as an abscess with this substance, and cure what has been healed within while doing so.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is great (the pain), then you touch the patient'se lips with your hand and heal that which contains water within them.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May it pulsate here or not, if so and pulsing occurs at the place of bleeding that is wine and water poured for two days or three inside where worms prevent their proliferation and allow their expulsion by boiling in a pot; then return to separate what has been torn from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	The given text appears to be from an old medical treatise with archaic
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Based on the fragments of Latin-influenced medieval Spanish provided, here is a possible translation for "Capitol .xlvii." However, since this phrase lacks context and additional details about
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The provided Latin-influenced Spanish phrase appears to be discussing the forms of intervention and perforation with regard to three specific substances or elements that are central ("alcun") in importance from which they originate (and thus must "migrate" or come out) as well as their smaller counterparts. To provide a more accurate translation, additional context is required about the subject matter being discussed and what these 'substances' refer
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The provided sentence fragment in Latin-influenced Spanish seems to be discussing how something significant ("alcun
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	Based on the given context, this phrase appears to indicate that it is describing a process whereby an important element or entity migrates from
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	This fragment suggests discussing how something smaller ("intromies" likely referring to particles or granules) move. Given the context
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	The translation of this fragment into English could be as follows: They are iron filings (or small particles), from afloat or fallen limbs; they enter the cavities within the body and thus ensure their proper functioning, referring to a methodical way in which these tiny entities can help maintain health by being present inside bodily structures. This translation assumes that "faytz" refers to
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	The fragment provided seems to refer to experiences and the names of those involved in them ("nombres"), where one is being called upon or summoned (likely within a medical context). A possible English translation might be: These are forms related to experience, their name known; among these figures, there stands out someone who should heeded.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	When three spices are used greatly in gout treatment—ginger, garlic, and pepper—they have much medicinal value. (Here 'espesies' refers to the mentioned spices
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The phrase "La forma de experient gran" seems incomplete or incorrectly transcribed as it does not clearly convey meaning in English and
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 It appears that the text is referencing another form of experience related to ginger (migier). However, without more context or a correct
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The phrase "La forma de experient pauc" seems incomplete and somewhat nonsensical as it stands. 'Pauci'
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 The text seems to discuss the experience of apendicitis and its symptoms, such as ulcers (which could be interpreted in a more modern medical sense as 'fistulas'—abnormal connections between bodily points) or buboes ("bubos," often associated with certain sexually transmitted diseases like lymphogranuloma venereum). It suggests that these conditions occur among the appendix and
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 This sentence appears to describe the treatment or symptoms related to appendicitis with sharp pains caused by various materials—potentially referring to foreign bodies like large needles made of metal (possibly used in ancient medical practices for procedures, which might be somewhat analogous today as abscess drainage). These could include iron tools ('eram citri' likely meaning 'iron,' given the context), and when it comes to handling these pains or foreign bodies with instruments like surgical needles—silver (argente) is mentioned. This text reflects historical medical practices where metals were used for therapeutic purposes, including possibly drainage of abscesses related to appendicitis:
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	These black experts agree that there are openings (fistulas) in the cavity where they ascend and return to their place upon these reflected images above them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	So with three kinds of medicine—those derived from their lengths and those made by others, according to the quantity of fluid in the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the great experience bone:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of experienced excrement (medical term for fecal matter):
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of small lead experience piece:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the joints are from various kinds, some as simple and without a curve themselves, these include three types: large, small, and grains (or pebbles).
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	From those of you who have applied force (likely referring to treatments done by practitioners), and from three kinds/specifications.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	When joints have these curves, they belong to three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From these three curves they have it (referring likely to parts of the body), and from three specifics (possibly referring again to aspects or characteristics).
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Everything necessary is at that place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single seed, shape of limb:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of simple joint movement:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of an ordinary joint or limb: shape as it is.
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of large joint:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of anointed oil (medicinal salve), shape like it is used:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of anointed oil few drops, shape of leaden tablet:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of an egg has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of an egg has two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of an umbilical scant with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an upper limb has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of anointing has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an umbilical scar has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of knives used for cutting and removing nodes and implants, made of three kinds: those made of iron, mercury, and few in number.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of scalpel few:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The sharp and non-sharp external parts of them that are not paused in such manner, but rather painfully experienced during the incision process to fear injury to veins or nerves; for these they heal their malady and bring tranquility with a little heat which the thickness must undergo through excision.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of poultices and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as they come in different sizes.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of large stone:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of gout migration:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of maid with little flesh:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	When they are pains of bone and flesh from where it seems, these drugs come into play.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When it is in the exterior mattress pierced with a splinter and hidden within that area where your parts are divided and separated when you move about, as if one were seeing or feeling them while moving.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of stones used for stone-crushing between the thighs (where we do not see through holes made by instruments and where diseases are hidden), there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those things.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cough are those by which the flow of blood is withdradig from its course, and they come in three kinds - large, migrating, and small. The forms of humors (or wind):
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are pains of lemon acidity, round in some length, and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these spices of vinegar draugthyers must be grated and poured out in small quantities, so that by this drainage the ascent of phlegm may hasten when first medicine is not applied.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to dislocate the entire body part, and only in meaty locations such as the hollows of their cushions and thighs, like those on meatier joints, and similar for breasts, belly (abdomen), and testicles.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Here are the translations line by line:
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some joint pains are round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The provided text does not contain enough context or
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	From the care of men's breasts composed of women, this phrase suggests a focus on breast health and possibly related to nursing mothers who are caring for their infants. Here is an English translation
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some cushions are puffed up on the chests of sleeping women (or possibly men who nursed), and their breasts become swolthy; thus assembled in a manner close to one another for comfort or practicality reasons – emphasizing both tenderness ('pellutz') associated with breastfeeding/nursing, as well the closeness of care.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who takes it in, cover that which you have ingested according to this form, from line B to line G and cleanse the swelling entirely, applying the dressed living flesh of an animal prepared for medicine inside, adjusting its lips with those worn next to your body, and heal whatever is within that has been purified.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May if the breastbone bends to parts and is softened by its own warmth as it goes down into the chest, then two fingers are placed on each side of your body's curve, resembling crescent moons where one holds onto the other – this forms a line similar to .B. and .G., with the larger line containing the smaller following this shape; here we cleanse the area between both lips under which fistula has formed (a condition in-between two labia), stopping the leakage, administering what was previously mentioned regarding sutures and powders required for healing – provided that it becomes cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the inspection of the fluid that wants to infiltrate due to malaute' extrication and flux of blood, then observe how mud puddle underneath covered by corrosive oil which dissolves what is inside it causing further damage. Here take care for whatever has been affected within so as to heal it properly.
Capitol .xlviii.	Given that this text appears to be an amalgamation of different languages with a
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When the piercing comes from touch, it tingles or causes sensations in those areas where they are applied/placed.  
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Areas where pins come from spices of skulls, hard ones that contain a hair strand within them
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	From those containing moisture; and from those that contain moisture which are inserted according to this figure: the line of G to the line of B. And when all that infected fluid has been drained, as in the case of disease illness, then complete with a bandage and insert it into the patient on other days.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Return the stock or wound with an appropriate and sufficient amount of oil until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the putrefaction of spices in the nodes and swellings occurs therein as we have discussed in this section about swellings, then divide it upon that very spot.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	When the child is expanded so much that it burns and hurts upon touching, then apply treatment with caustic as soon as possible now.
Capitol .xlix.	The provided text appears to describe medical practices related to conditions such as joint pain (possibly
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	When you injure yourself by a slip or fall, likely due to slippery surfaces perhaps wet from rain:
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arrow is broken and the spine becomes solidified over it, wherein inflammation and abscess are found along the artery or vein: when an abscess through a fractured arrowbone extends into the body core; and as you palpate the swelling in those areas, you feel stridor there.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that person is affected by a vein in the body, its symptoms appear at the extremity of the limb.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	When it comes to those who are afflicted by the inflammation of their gallbladder, divide them into sections along the spine; and cut out the section with incisions (or remove), and extract the gallbladder so that it is revealed from under the tunics.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Return and apply pressure to the location where there are two ligaments holding together what is inside in it (the body part being referred to), thus extingujing all that inflammation which exists within; this breaks down the adhesion or apatite.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return the medication in which healing is generated, and administer that same remedy inside where ligaments are repathyed – applying an appropriate ointment for it as needed when they have been cured within;
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess due to a vein clog (suppurating), then you take care of the place where this has happened, and apply your best available means for treating such as infection at that site; insert therewith the needle which you have previously handled carefully into the location indicated above, ensuring it penetrates deeply. Then double enter to withdraw one catheter while applying pressure on (ligging) the abscess with a strand of grape vine from two parts of its extremities at dawn; as was mentioned earlier in this text regarding treatment for such condition.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear removing the thread, then insert it into that small piece of gauze near the initial stitch and tighten the sutures in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	When the abscess is dry within its place inside you (the patient), as soon as it enters therein, then cut away any excess of the tongue'supreme,' and release what has been taken from him into that location.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the pressure over him who was immersed in wine and oil; apply the treatment that he feels is effective for cure and bandaging inside where it should be so that his wound will recover.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital of apothema where you feel pain due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Ayssi when you have a carbuncle in the armpit and vein, seemingly also having an apoplectic condition of nerves that comes upon touch or with excessive friction, apparently so as well.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is pain in the limbs of those who assist or on the heels (or anywhere where joint pains are felt), here we have to address:
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess in the head of the body and on the spine, which does not go towards any parts below or behind at once.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So that of those who are encapsulated in the joints, it will soon be withdraзу against contracción (contraction).
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that person who is in the head or forehead by a spleen be at risk of having back pain due to displacement (or misalignment) of bone and cartilage structures, possibly indicating
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	May those who suffer from scoliosis have their vertebrae fractured and separated at the level of the pelvis (or lower back) by excessive curvature, as described in this statement: They are prone to experience serious skeletal issues due to the severe angular deformity associated with spinal
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is severe, then you should suspend them on the bed, and expose that person to fresh air (potentially as part of an early treatment practice), apply pressure where needed, mend any wounds with sutures promptly, and attend to their health until they have recovered: This line suggests a primitive approach in treating what appears to be significant spinal curvature or deformity by using restorative measures like bed suspension for fresh air exposure (which may provide some relief) alongside direct care of any resulting
Capitol .li.	The provided line seems fragmented and lacks clarity, making it
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	This phrase appears to discuss a case of apendicitis (appendicitis), where pain is felt not only in the stomach but also around or near one's mouth, which might indicate referred pain commonly associated with
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Endeavoring to understand the internal causes of pain that afflict those who suffer from appendicitis and spreads throughout their bellies as well as other parts of their bodies where similar fungal organisms live—organisms whose tiny roots penetrate deeply, touching even the large intestine's cap (presumably referring to a nearby structure), with mouth sores in these individuals further complicated by small lesions and magnified discomfort.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And those lips were turned outwards and separated, with moisture flowing throughout that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I have incised these and stitched one in each foot, sixteen times and the other five times.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is fearful and restless (and you), keep your mind sharp with iron-like focus; perhaps a fresh piece of lead can be used as well, which we have mentioned earlier in this text; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another sentence to translate: And adjust in the narrowness of the iron rod; therefore, do not cease hammering large nails into a piece until it is separated and stops moving by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If his limb is of great size, there may be no cause for fear and concern in him at all, mainly when he is inside the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you divide the mass of it, and properly apply cautery so as not to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return there that which should be healed inside, for it is necessary care for what'suposedly resides within and requires treatment or recovery. (Modern English
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Watch you don't assume a part that is dark in hue, with little feeling or spirit attached to it; for therein lies the cancerous growth which requires immediate attention and care. (Modern English)
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When recalling from memory at this time of day/evening or nighttime (the original Latin word "cranc" here refers to 'day' and its antonym could be understood as '
Capitol .lii.	And now, it is evening, the moment for recall from memory at this time
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	In regards to nurturing one's sense of prominency around the navel area (translating "de cur
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminence of the navel is pained due to motions or fractures in which it lies on the abdomen; and when you lift (the text) where there are other ruptures occurring, as well as from blood flow within veins or arteries according to what has been mentioned hereinabove.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If there is a crack in the coccyx and through the skin' extrusion appears similar to body coloration; it also causes pain like that of a lion, and presents itself under various circumstances.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the expulsion of the hernia, then with what we have recorded about that individual who has water within them (indicating imbalance or excess fluid), and once you perceive this situation as necessary to return everything back into place; immediately do so. And when he/she returns in such a way, they are greatly honored for bathing thoroughly and vigoristic exercise.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If due to moisture, it is like a lion and will not be hidden when pressed with your hand, nor constricted or contracted.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanction, then you appear with this black decaying ulcer on your thighs.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is through flesh nothing happens, but a severe and hard swelling occurs which remains for some time.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then handling of him/her becomes like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And when considering the operation on it (the patient), take into account whether the navel's prominence is due to an abscess, a vein, or swelling; if so and out of fear/pain as taught in the classroom where I have previously mentioned scalpel use for abscesses and varicose treatment.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the umbilicus is by the intestine or tent, then command that it hold its position extended outwards, and on your sign you attempt throughout all parts around the navel where you have placed a cushion; also direct over those areas between your hands which are upon their legs, placing another servant above them, as well as below their chests (holding two servants), surrounding with sponge in the umbilical circuit on the location of the attempt. Also extend outward that portion designated for apostema at parts beyond its grand uncus; and place your fingers within the ligament strength or weakness underneess, according to where you have placed a servant (holding two servants).
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:  
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the fabric (referring possibly to skin or membranes), then take that one and apply it here; also remove any excess from there.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your instrument or vein, surround that area, and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those fields strong enough so as not to pierce the abscess formed in manicure of fingers, which you have made openings for penetration with these sharp points on these inserted nails; hold firmly onto this abscess by placing it into four parts using these very same two needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to proceed, place the needles and insert them where it will suffocate (presumably apply pressure) the extended flesh and cause bleeding internally; when inserted discretely without causing pain, ensure that such treatment is applied with care so as not to disturb the moisture within wounds treated by ointments.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel's prominence is due to fleshlessness or dampness in it/them, then you must treat its abscess with water and purgatives that remove humidity from within them, which causes this condition (abscess), and care for the area where the treatment takes place.
Capitol .liii.	The provided line appears incomplete or nonsensical without additional context, which makes
De curacio de cranc.	Without further context, it's challenging to accurately interpret the phrase "Cap
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the division of species and in what manner doctors use medicine for their treatment, which prevents them from suffering fractures through such care; it has been discussed how a brain (or head) caused by an organ or wound is treated medically to avoid ulcers developing there. Here comes the first source sentence translated:
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Here come the ancient remedies that can be applied in this place, which are also found within their breasts or belly and similar to those of limbs allocated for expulsion, mostly when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and ill (not to be touched), you will not heal the patient here nor have I seen such a one before, nor has anyone come this way previously for help with their health issues.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is when you allocate assistance as we have discussed beforehand, it's because you precede and lay on the patient with warmth to purge some of the black water (a reference possibly to pus or other infectious material), and apply heat if there is a swolthy replection manifest.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it be that if you have contrary action of thick blood in the vein or artery, then anesthetize that area where the flow of thick blood has ceased; and take care for such treatment will serve as another cure once healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capital (likely referring to "The capital," indicating the beginning of
De curacio de ydropici.	La frase in italiano, "Curazione di irideciti" suona
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 English translation: "We have preserved the herbs of yeast from water in a division and each spirit of any given herb's healing (medicinal) care.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	When one is cured with iron alone, it is not the species of calcareous substance nor that of tympanists and phlegmatics; for these are deadly to him.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herb of ydroptic tympanistr with medicines and it does not discomfort your patient, consider that if the malady in the belly has been cured or another similar ailment elsewhere (in the body or abdomen), look out for because fear arises when you treat them.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Might you find the thigh's excessive vitality and realize that it is merely water abundance in itself, neither child nor old person being affected; if so, lift your legs upward (raise them) to express their bellies above themselves with hands held high over heads. Squeeze out the water immediately after touching near the pubic bone as quickly as possible while using prickly sponge thorns in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Such acute parts may have a splint on them, possibly with some small sections attached piece by piece to ensure that during the operation nothing enters or is inserted into the hernia sac, and you hold it there.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels," which translates line by line into English as follows:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of watery humors is due to illness in the foot, then your team should be on the left side of the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of it is due to melancholy (which refers back to a previous context or symptom), then your team shall be at its rightful place/position.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	When your team is above the chest where you want the humors to flow, so that they do not run excessively towards this place unwarrantedly.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Return through which hole I shall pierce so that the stone may reach its destination in the water place.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that outside of it and insert an implement with which this is formed.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it appears to be a fine silver syringe; made of either silver or lead/ivory, where at the lowest part you place a small plug, and on each side there are three such pieces; its sharp end is according to the feather quill'dictation, as often done:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	When in the external cavity there is an instrument placed, when it enters into water, that immediately goes on top of the instrument, then evacuates the water from this hour as much quantity; but if you do not remove all at once what has entered with the liquid and remains inside him within hours, he will die due to his malady'sup through resolution by its spirit animal or five curses (appropriate for death) that come upon it.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May expel from there the amount of his semen according to its quantity and as per your understanding, relating to the position of his ejaculate in the testicles and his healthiness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Extract the instrument, and pour water which causes it to be retained by that throat from where the distention is above, according to your manner of action for penetrating at that second place with that needle-like tool.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return and adjust the instrument for another day if you find that the humidity tolerates it, extract a small amount of water each time at midday out of fear (concern), ensuring not to break through its essence.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	May you fear the waist, and let a large quantity of water flow over it, so that healing occurs in sand at the base, compressing tightly with cloth while waiting for long periods under sunlight; this cures him who is ill from dry medicines once healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	When it comes to the abdomen, apply cautery on the stomach and phlegm will ascend out of it as has been previously reported in water (or another fluid).
Capitol .lv.	The text provided appears nonsensical in English due to its apparent
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	It seems like the original Latin phrase you've given is related to pediatric care for children whose bladder has not been perforated, possibly referring to a medical situation such as an enema or catheterization procedure in children without causing
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	The text appears to discuss a medical situation concerning children with intestinal contents present in their mother's womb, and whether the head of the fetus has not been punctured or is still within its proper location. Here are potential translations:
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore a corset maker shall pierce it so thinly as if made under the sternum delicately, according to this manner.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Return your pace in the tumultuous one of lead and thread that you have there, holding it under those conditions for three days or four-and-three-quarters (translation: Return your balance during this turbulent time with a delicate tool made of lead and thread held as per these instructions for three days or four-and extralaterals).
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When one needs to void or pass stool; return that as well.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not stop the stone, then it is possible that the urine will flow over this area and does not heal properly here.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that which is used for treating the dislocation be iron from our tools as mentioned, and it should remain so for several days until its effectiveness is increased.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When those are not in their place and they fall downward, causing pain among them, which is natural birth where the penis elevates to above the pubic bone so that urination cannot occur at body parts below; it'dicts no generation of seed therefrom because sex does not reach upwards due to this illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When you are performing an operation of flushing out the sickness fluid (sanguinis fluxus), some drops will cause pain; pause at this point in the blood where you have drained it, and take care that if they become healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Given that "Capitol" likely refers to an ancient Roman law code
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	When the white discharge occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and due to decay, erosion, or sticking together (adhesion), it is called an "albacid." This refers to a medical condition that involves inflammation often accompanied by painful lesions on the glans (head) of the male genitalia. The term likely originates from Medieval Latin where similar descriptions were
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 Continuing with our translation, we have: "When this white discharge occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and is associated with fleshy (fatty) tissue elevation." This line explains that when an albacid or whit
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 "And from this one, it can be either benign or cancerous (malignant)." Here the context is about distinguishing between a non-cancerous and potentially dangerous condition related
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	This sentence translates as: "Not cancerous (benign), which requires delicate handling and removal of the whole mass within it; then place that part in Egyptian oil to immerse thoroughly while administers a healing ointment inside." This line suggests procedures for dealing with benign masses, involving careful extraction or excision followed by treatment possibly using specific types of salves (e.g., from resources like the Nile region) and therape extraditional remedies to promote healing within these localized abnormal growths in male genitalia that are not cancerous but may still require medical attention for symptom relief or cosmetic reasons, according to medieval understanding of medicine. It reflects an approach combining physical removal with topical treat
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the white discharge is cancerous and of darker hue ("lega color"), then you must apply caustic preparations directly to its base (the head) or root, respectively—implying a more aggressive treatment approach for malignant conditions that may involve cautery as an option. Here the medieval medical treatise is suggesting specific physical interventions where removal and possibly chemical burns are used in attempts at
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May the foreskin be on the head of the penis and one part is cut while another remains intact until it has been brought into communion; then take care of that detachment, as long as you are holding onto it to ensure it does not retract.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Even examine the genitals and foreskin blackness and corruption; hence cover what has already become darkened and is at risk of further discoloration or decay, applying layers upon that area with honey mixed with crushed fresh wheat bran and herbs finely ground and powdered.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return that healing care for it is within where such curative measures reside safekeeping.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May it be that a flow of bile is necessary, then administer luna-shaped cautery as follows:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	When two types of treatments with sharp instruments are needed for sanitation and purification when it becomes corrupted:
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the gallbladdon is corroded and destroyed in an instant, then insert a bronze tube into the flesh of the prostate to allow the bile flow through that channel.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuce at the head (and this adherence is not removed circumcision, but rather on which it attaches; and when you cut away such an adhesion therein, dissolving the sinew and removing completely the head of the foreskin), comes a situation where one must scrape out hardened tissue within that area until all remnants are removed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to reach those exquisitely, then have you scraped the spine or penis slightly for some cause of pain at the head and base (of the penis), and so when slight, a sharp lance perforates through its subtlety due to force.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	When you separate the foreskin and head of hair under it subtly so that other humors do not stick to this area:
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Return is given its proper care within that it has been set firmly.
Capitol .lvii.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing remedies for
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	In the context of a medieval medical treatise, which may use language influenced by Latin and other regional languages like Italian or French due to historical interactions between these cultures (especially given Italy's central role in Renaissance medicine), here is an attempt at translating your provided sentence
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Translation: Circumcision is not solely for continuity of disease management like other plagues; however, with our intervention and willful action directed at these children suffering from such conditions (implied diseases), we must assign them to the better operation/procedure using a less painful method.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So it's said that ancient Jews did not perform castration among free men, and they didn't use leather or felt straps for restraints until experience dictated otherwise; this led to the majority of artisans abandoning circumcision as a practice. They now rely on hemp rope and linen cloth used in new cleansings (bathhouse) procedures, holding onto their uncut bodies' flesh.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already tried all these methods and found no better improvement than with the knife or thread in wound dressing, where some threads flee from below the pubis, others beneath two tunics, and tighten their grip on flesh like glue within a cut.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati," which means "Where there is a purification place where this pain occurs due to phlegm." The following parts of the text can be translated as follows:
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	When blood enters during surgery with a sharp iron and spoils your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English would be:
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the manufacturing that is made with threads and nails for footwear ensures fitness; as they are proportioned correctly like their sharpness corresponds to the day' extricating my experiences—two levels of hardness, which when measured accurately according to a comparison in time results in compression on the heel shaped by these elements without error throughout.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	When that joy in all of this action is possible for your intellect, then do so with it.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Here comes the line to translate: E propice l'occhio signato ai piedi di fede dobla, e pospon portando la giuglia posta sopra allora un piccolo secondo filo, posto al ginocchio del detto ponteggio, ed inserito anche qui tra i due fili.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of forceps is thus defined:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	They are slippers and the others being joints that should not be extended beyond the length of the bones in contact with each other, which is equal to the combined lengths of two hands grasping them together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	May errors in understanding are very hard for me and I must delve into the essence of it all; if a portion is needed from you, then understand clearly.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, when you spread that of your hour on the wound at hand with your finger nail in even measure.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then remove that one and incise that one.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed for three days and the purple mark of inflammation appears quickly after application, then apply water to allow the applied cautery to recede gently, cleanse that area easily, and prepare another remedy as you have done beforehand.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Guard your head of the collarbones, for not one drop shall touch you.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Then care for that water which solidifies from the dust particles found within the passage of these particles.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it has entered through the navel and adheres above divisions below (referring possibly to an obstruction or foreign body within), one should observe without inserting into those areas directly.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	E may heal that which we have brought inside for its cure.
Capitol .lviii.	Given that "Capitol" seems like an ancient Roman legal document or reference rather
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	From the context provided and understanding of Latin-influenced medical terminology, here is a possible translation:
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Restrain urine in the bladder is considered a symptom due to excess bile or gallstones, stones or fats, and seem like those mentioned by healers for curative purposes during division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and retained within you for a time already spent at the base of the bladder (where it has been held), then allow the bile to come upon your thighs, causing them discomfort.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And place the patient'supine on their back and lift up their abdomen from underneath their hips as much as is feasible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So when the bladder neck contracts from within its stone at the back parts, allowing for complete emptying of urine.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If it is not dissolved by the water we have mentioned, then forcefully address this pain through an instrument to which you call a syringe (the nature of which will be either silver or subtle lion' extrication), with delicate and long tubing similar in length to that of one’s palm plus thumb. The needle is discreetly placed at the top of their head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When you lay the patient's humerus on the foot and bind it with leather strap or wax thread, using oil and honey as a binder.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Return the wool or fleece little by little into the small piece of linen, as urine washes away the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Apply that and apply it for urine drainage using a catheter, without ceasing until the bladder and malabsorbed fats are alleviated.
Capitol .lix.	From "Capitol .lix." it is not possible to directly derive
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	The text appears to be a medical or surgical context, possibly from the Renaissance period when Latin was commonly used in European medicine alongside other languages like Italian and French. The phrase provided seems to concern an enema (enemas are often referred to as "clisterics") using instruments that must correspond well with it ("acordants ad aquo"). Here's a possible
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When bladders are ulcerated or abscessed (ulceracio and apostema refer to the conditions affecting internal organs), or when they's constricted with a catheter in place ("coartat poyredura"), one must draw waters and medicines into that area, for which instrument will be referred to as "clamp-device." This is how treatment should proceed.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sino (but) when in the exterior of it is silent, then it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that situation, two from one group occur at times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the meal is rested where it has been called upon and its second quantity that rises from there when drawn by causes of those humors, once pulled back again after being expelled; furthermore, whenever such as occurs over a long period, phlegm accumulates in their vessels during sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of crabapple into the moisture, and pull it towards where the fluid is pushing against the bladder wall; this action will draw out the moisture from there.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place it within the external cavity of the bladder as soon as we have prepared in the urinary tract; and push the moisture into water that flows out from there, which liquid will then cause the urethra.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape under which the bladder is distorted, and that form is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is of silver or silk (from which I have given him the appearance of a small feather), and quickly sew them together with thread.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return (or bring back) the limb of the patient's right leg into its cavity, and place your hand on it so that the limb does not protrude outwardly
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand on the bladder over where the moisture spreads within this cavity, especially as that moisture has already come into contact with it (indicating perhaps urinary retention or an infection). This line suggests some form of manual therapy aimed at relieving discomfort potentially associated with excessive humidity affecting the bladder inside a certain area known here as "the cavity" within which moisture has entered, possibly due to medical
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	Then take linseed or another form of the plant and make a circle with it; pierce that entire circumference (likely referring to some kind of poultice made from these seeds); place faithfully in those disruptions, causing them to revolt back into position—and for as long as you wish. Leave there until any moisture desires and flows outwards, at which point pause; continue adding layers so that even the water within is drained (implying a method of treatment or poultice application where heat from exuding fluids assists in healing). This line suggests an early form of hydrotherapy involving linseed compresses used to draw out moisture and purportedly promote bodily "revolt," which could be interpreted as relieving the symptoms causing disruption, possibly inflammation or edema.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lx.	The text provided is in an archaic form of Latin with influences from
De extraccio de peyra.	From the stone." This line suggests a medical procedure or context where something, possibly relevant to treatment
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	In our division of the stones and their cure as medicine, we note the difference between those formed in the kidnes and those formed in the bladder, and these symptoms." This translation indicates a discussion within medical literature about different types or origins of 'stones' (which could be interpreted metapthyically to mean any kind of lesion or abnormal growth) that might appear as part of certain conditions treated by medicine at this time. It distinguishes between stones associated with the kidneys ('ronhos', likely referencing renal calculi, commonly known today as 'kidney stones') and those related to urinary bl
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have the stone in which this operation takes place." Here they are referring directly back to a specific case or instance where an operative procedure is performed on what has been referred to as 'the stone'. The context implies that
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone formed in the bladder specifically refers to one retained within the bladder." This clarifies further, specifying what kind of stones are being discussed – those that develop inside (or get trapped) in the urinary bladder ('vesica'), distingu
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	You shall see therein a manifestation and abbreviation." The speaker appears to be guiding someone (possibly students or learners) through some aspect of the medical text, indicating that within
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore say that the stones formed in the bladder mostly concern children (or infants); and from his urine it seems as if water flows within, appearing on this ground—and because of these humors he becomes ill; its urethra is scraped by gentle movements like a flowing stream. Herein we find that for treatment at the forum or gatherings certain measures are taken." The speaker here elaborates further into clinical observations and therapeutic practices related to bladder stones, particularly in children ('enfants' suggests infants), which is inferred from urine 'looking like water'. They describe gentle actions used on urethra (the tube that carries urine out of the body) as if it were a flowing stream and suggest interventions for these conditions during medical discussions or teachings at present locations. This ancient text blends clinical signs with treatment methods, characteristic of medieval medicine where observations led to practical treatments in an era before modern diagnostic tools existed.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the cleansing of children from within that age twenty, and difficult care in their limbs.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May also migrate through these waters among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that from which the stone is larger and the cure less gentle; if it is scanty, contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when you arrive at the treatment of that, cover it with wax from the candle where it exits through those holes which are under your belly buttons; thereafter this hole may sometimes be restricted to prevent the poisoning (or blockage) by urine deposit.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Return its position to the hips and thighs (and knees), as well as mindfulness of excess and gout in order that the stone may descend into the bladder' extrication or jump a few steps away from location, indicating pain management strategies for kidney stones.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Return the cautery that you have prepared among yourselves, and let these things be of his own at their respective times, so that the bladder as a whole will descend gradually into its divisions at those times.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Through proper inquiry, examine that which is exposed herein fully.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Thus if you feel pain in the space (which could mean an area of discomfort or swelling), then immediately take your hand over it to protect yourself.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you have not yet touched the patient'dict total body manipulation today, then apply oil as indicated for the left side if it is an infantile malady or a mixture if they are fully completed in their puberty and insert that into their butt.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through the finger enters that which stays in the mouth of the patient.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that small one goes into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Return them above that spot they touched upon it and remove them from outside the location where your section lies with you holding onto those parts.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the servant to press on your bladder; and order another minister to extend their right hand over the parts below, stretching outward towards each section, holding in place of which is where a cut (section) takes place.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return your position into its cavity; this is how it enters here:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and split the water between the knee and thighs without going into the groin from the left side; over that piece of flesh is placed one section above in the belly, forming a transverse section so that this section becomes wide enough to be cut according to the amount needed on said skin piece, but not exceeding it, for long as necessary until you can no longer extract what's therein from within.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you understand that there is some part from which it [the patient] must be treated, for the treatment here will be difficult due to water (humors).
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid it resembles a lion, is round and made of yellow bile for its purification;
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that which has bones or margins (i.dict "angles and borders" here referring possibly to skeletal structure), adjust within the crack/fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not a surgical extraction available (foro-getada), then you must craft an intervention above it or where the strangulation occurs, with tools that are handled carefully to treat the affected part without causing harm; otherwise, immediately employ delicate instruments for bending the extremity upon which pressure has been applied.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do so on that one (the patient's body part being referred to), then increase the treatment slightly and if you see a flow of blood coming out from there, remove it with sulphuric acid poured very strongly.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	May it be that the stone is within one of them (the patient'thy body), then lead your hand to her mouth, and press over this place; and propel a small amount hereof; so seeming as if they are drops from bodily fluids.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If there is much pain (or suffering), it is ignorance that has led you to insert this large piece into the bladder, where one of two causes may be present: either it remains or continues to distill urine continuously, and thus the place is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May administer the removal of it within which has gone out (possibly referring to something expelled or broken), either by a tool inserted into its cavity where that thing is extracted, in case of fracture repair.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with the juice of Aloe and dragon'dictum, tightening it up afterward.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply pressure on that cloth steamed with oil and vinegar (or wine), to make the application of caustic stop.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the bowels above the belly onto its cavity and do not pull on the ligaments inside until tomorrow.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air escapes, apply water and oil to the area where it has escaped, taking care of these with liniment or unguent until healed within them.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	May you cauterize an ulcerated wound that is raw and decayed, just as if the sanctity of your bladder has been frozen solid; through it urine flow cannot pass (and this fluid is prohibited due to its expulsion), so insert a catheter into the wound and extract that sore.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the line for translation into English: Apply warm water and salt on it, contrary to all other species, this is what you apply within that which heals inside of them.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	In the hours of total healing, when you both attend to the hips and adjust the placed remedies over the location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and it' extrudes within the bladder, wherein lies; urine extraction therefrom hereby forbidden. Herewith doctors heal that man who approaches a section due to excess fluid (hydronephrosis); this has already been done for him, and now you must take hold of an iron knife shaped as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From beyond the body cavity lies gout in a pipe (or cane).
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Return your position firmly and place it here for their stone to prevent its return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	When iron is inserted into the vein, piercing through whereby the needle enters that stone (the lodestone or kidney stone), quickly done by the one who inserts it.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Revolve the cautery in your hand slowly over that small stone, and insert it into such a way that one from this enters the other's body cavity; when the urine is thus expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	When you place your hand over the area where it is broken off from the bone below and there forms a fracture hollow (where pus may come out), that wound becomes infected with uric acid; however, the bladder heals well at this location.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not within your reach for any reason that prevents you from doing so, then take a finger or two of quicksilver (mercury) and place them under the stone; another piece on top of it beneath the skin, holding their hands.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	When applied directly onto the skin in that area between the knee joints.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that back (or out of place). In this context, it could mean returning something
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Rest the ligament and purify the swollen joint with which you have been dealing; this occurs in the earth (or environment). The sentence suggests that a physician should not only restore or adjust what is out of place, such as an injured ligament but also cleanse inflammation occurring
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	No need for immediate ligation of the stone in the bladder lest it returns; whereas another time when you remove that same thing from above (the ureter), then the sling comes back to its place and retrieves what was displaced down there, presumably a kidney or related structure. The sentence here advises caution regarding ligation of stones in bladder-related structures—as immediate closure might prevent returning dislocations that can happen when manipulating urinary tract obstructions like the stone (ureter).
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary to lift the kneecap upwards towards their parts or return them as required, and take back what has been said previously together with those who have helped you here,
Capitol .lxi.	The given text appears to be from an old medical manuscript with archaic language
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	From extraction of stones in the female womb (or gallbladder, if assumed contextually related). The term "peira
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in the woman's womb is seldom produced or formed there naturally. This suggests that stones are not a common issue within this specific context of female
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If there is indeed a stone present in any of them (possibly referring to the womb or gallbladder), then it's difficult to cure and forbidden for those with excessive passions due to potential risks involved. This line indicates that intervention might not only be medically challenging but also contraindicated based on a patient’s temperament, emphasizing the
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is particularly easy to handle for those who are strong and vigilant (likely referring back to medical practitioners or individuals with a certain disposition suited for handling
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is easy to find a woman who can extract it when directed by her physician (metgyne), or if from among women there are ones skilled in this art of extraction and care for stones, typically related within familial ties as mentioned earlier (`havenz maritz`), suggesting that expertise might be passed down through generations. This highlights the significance placed on specific skills when dealing with health
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The gentlest ones are those women who know this skill of stone removal; mainly through the operation itself (`ma`), indicating that hands-on experience and delicate handling by skilled practitioners is key to treatment in such scenarios. This reinforces the importance given to expertise
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth point is that the location of stone extraction in a woman's body can be distant from where the stone itself resides; hence anticipatory measures (like seeking out skilled practitioners) are necessary due to this complexity (`temor`), underlining caution and preparedness when undertaking such procedures. This further details considerations for safe practice as described in medieval medical texts, illustrating a thoughtful approach toward treatment despite the limited resources or understanding of anatomy at that time.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	May it be necessary for you to induce flow into the body, then take hold of a female midwife'se tool and use her with little force applied.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	May you lack it (possibly referring to a treatment or tool), then seek out the surgeon' extricable and subtle instrument, or present a woman matron serving as an expert in women’s health at this location of practice.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So that she does this present now, and commands her to fill all the water you give her, from inquisition about the stone up to the contentment; which causes it if the woman is virgin or desires fertility, placing what belongs to them at the base of their body (the vulva), where they wish.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if you choke that one off quickly, and then commands it to enter back into there.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If there is no vein present, then the matron commands that her servant inserts it into the cavity of the illness and places their left hand over the bladder, stopping its movement with a good compress.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if it is the case that they worsen their condition, bring them to rest in such a way as not to reach the point of rupture until reaching the threshold of the hernia within which time has passed since its onset at high intensity.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And place yourself insensible to that position of the humerus joint and center the pin in that division; it shall not be removed from its bony anchor by sudden movements hereby done.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Here comes the line to translate: And let that section be few at mealtime; and place your hand over it as you perceive pain, adjusting accordingly according to how much of such motion has caused this state.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	Be aware that stones from the field are triggers: some of these few and large like lion or aspen, elongated and round with ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you understand how many spices are in it for what purpose, which indicates what they represent here.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see fluid discharge (likely referring to bleeding or other bodily fluids), adjust the location where it has settled and place yourself there for an hour until the blood is stopped, then return to your operation within that time frame when the bleeding stops.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Prepare you must with tools that are used in the extraction of bone from humans, so your assistance will be useful for them during their operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from hemorrhage caused by sharp artery, then apply powder over the location and press gently with these pills to reduce swelling without furthering; do not pry open or extract it. And thus the illness will cease.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Return care for the flock/cattle (implying returning injured animals back into health
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of pain becomes acute on certain days, it returns to your workplace after resting until the stone is gone (implying that one should return to their duties only once an anal flare or kidney stones have subsided).
Capitol lxii.	Capitol xvii. (Assuming "lxii" refers
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	It appears that you are referring to an abdominal hernia, which is when internal tissues or
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	The text you've provided seems to be in a constructed or stylized form of Spanish that resembles the structure and vocabuls more closely related to medieval medical terminology than contemporary usage. It appears incomplete but I will attempt an interpretation:
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The generation of this hernia is through debility which affects the kidne gods, causing them to expel this substance; and some even have it poured upon the kidney stones by way of impactful beating.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And for the joints where this addition of water occurs: if it is in the white sign as we have mentioned before, then demotion appears decreasing during a long bath with its figure and manifesting genitalia, when the moisture accounts for all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the patient'se viscera (body cavity), then an abscess appears and it must be removed, thus increasing their overall esteem.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If moisture is between the neck of the urethra and the white line (probably referring to a part of anatomy relevant in medieval medical practice), then apply pressure gently with fingers on that area.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to learn about the color of humidity, look at the swelling in which this form precedes; and as soon as it appears on the surface where the accumulation occurs, observe its moisture therein.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to treat the patient with iron in need of bloodletting if it is within your possibility, then perform cupping on their body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When it rests on top of its two above any cause for few reasons and stops immediately using cloth padding.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Here the text translates into English as follows:
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	When applying pressure with stone and cutting through the neck of the thyroid located within this limited space, do so carefully for proper management of the situation inside herein provided space.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And if it is the second painful section that has been stretched away from the line where one'thy jaws should be located and reaches the white chest area understandable by him who knows well of physicians, then he/she must address this issue accordingly.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and watch it carefully so you don'thy insert anything into the wound; your incision should only penetrate as deep as necessary, subtly observing through your cut according to what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Through proper application, pierce the bladder of water at once, and extract all the water completely.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Here comes the line for translation:
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that the discharge from that part of the belly below the tailbone in your operation hour occurs when you have completed the section of the cyst, then return what has come out and adjust the lips of the anus belonging to the genitalia which are stitched together, being careful with this like other creatures do until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have corrupted the humors due to another illness, then open those vessels through which they are discharged and extract the humor, taking care of that which we mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May it be that if water is added in body parts as examples, then those are hernias; therefore, incise that part where you have already cut on the other side of the abdomen; and if this appears to be an operation for you, perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And lay two pressing cloths and wool pads following this manner; they are for the extremities which must be covered or moistened with wet wool, arranged along the waistband of the trousers, one foot plugs into the crotch, another at the hip joint, two more on each thigh leg, and two others over both arm-holes; all together is adjusted in the trouser belt.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And when this hernia is treated artificially with a delicate hook needle inserted into the place of excision by iron pin; and it's that you grasp these thin pincers tightly where the intestine bends, which has been hidden within (possibly referring to an internal sling or bandage),
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When puncturing through that cyst, it is set on fire so that all the moisture can be evaporated.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Return the flesh that has been cut with knives, and scrape it out using fine cautery wires; examine each part as soon as you can do so within safety limits, aiming to eradzyme all of them, while keeping a safe distance from the flame.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Be aware that this operation is put in safety and lengthened from blood flow blockage, better than an incision wound.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May you cause contrainddict if applying poultice or performing drainage at the time of separation or during draining procedures, whenever it causes discomfort for which care is due to me as mentioned earlier on in this text.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	May the groin be painful and not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision as I recommend; when you are certain, based on what we have said about their significance, that this hernia is pervious.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you open the space in the spleen above any raised area of your patient'thy chest bone and make an incision for the abscess down to their lower part where lies the spine, stop making the incision according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	When I have broadly opened where the water flows through it all together.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return your pace over the location where it covers and place that there which controls him along with this to make his body moisture flow from within himself as if he sweats internally.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return that which is inside so it may be healed (the patient).
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	May it be that the opposition of water in that hour when you pierce through this: and herein no pain is caused by water but rather due to white panniculus within the worm's dwelling, preventing its treatment; provided that which goes into said cavity for suffering or with a tool meant for extraction—such as shape precedes it. Adjust in place of such environment something small (likely referring herein to an instrument used for medical intervention).
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Be aware that water returns and is gathered for up to several months or until those days arrive; when it comes together, according to the manner of this medicine, then the humidity passes through them in those times.
Capitol .lxiii.	The text provided seems to be from an old medical document discussing methods for treating certain
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	This line appears to refer to a section about the treatment of cushion (hernial) masses, possibly relating to inguinal or other types of hernias
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	In this section about the treatment of such cushion masses (hernias), there is fear that they may lead to death in major cases; therefore, I propose examining and removing it herein so you can be saved by a better method than previously considered or applied for treating hernias.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	You are now remembering the operation performed in that manner and with these specific instruments (appliqué). The text implies a recollection of an established procedure or treatment for hernias, likely involving some form of surg
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Thus you're saying that the instruments (appliqué) are used in these bones where they have been applied and inserted for various reasons: either due to acute overabundance aggravation which is then expelled into the genitals, or because of impact. Here it seems doctors might be explaining why certain treatments involving instruments (appliqué) were necessary based on these potential causes – excessive internal pressure leading to an outward flow toward sensitive areas like the genitals and perhaps injuries from external forces such as a blow ("per percuscio").
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The instrument (appliqué) retains the same hue of bone and does not induce pain in place; it is serious or grave when considering its application – possibly referring to a more invasive procedure that respects natural anatomy, causing minimal discomfort without being considered severe. Herein lies emphasis
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When it is loose (probably referring to an untreated or insecure condition), its color is dark and there's nothing centered within it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some pains are due to the entanglement of vessels, and it is remembered where they have occurred already, or by congestion of those veins which has just been noticed.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May it be known that when gout is caused by kidney stones, they are dispersed with the application of a poultice applied thereon; and do not touch them.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is painful due to inflammation of the vein not be dispersed by any cause, and should compression occur thereupon.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if it is that flesh has solidified in those meats, then you must remove the fat and insert what was extracted into them.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an attachment within a cause of the chest or between the vessels, then remove all that which has attached itself and cleanse it with round scrapings.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the nativity of flesh in the location behind is what you have inscribed herein, and extract from this entire volume with which we are speaking together.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Thus when your operation is complete, fill it with rosemary oil and wine; carefully place that in the other remedy to ensure its healing.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.: This appears to be simply indicating chapter number 
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Chapter XLVI (assuming a Roman numeral system where '.' represents decimals): From the treatment of inguinal protr
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	About the application of an embrace-like wrapping to resemble a shell for soothing the testicles; it is difficult in terms of exercise and ambulation on top of them. (Here, "apostema" refers to treatment or remedy applied by medical means—likely bandaging with gentle pressure), suggesting that such therapy was used historically possibly due to inflammation or discomfort associated with testicular conditions which would impede physical activity above the hernia site(s).
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In treating this illness there is concern due to what has already been remembered or experienced before.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However much we praise what was done in that second attempt after performing the initial one.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	When you cover the hernia over an elevated cushion; and fix the suspenders of the testicles at their respective parts, as shown by these signs on your thighs; hold those other servants that are yours, and extend them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	When you insert arrows of lead along the joint, through which way they pass inside where have been discovered the vessels within that place and direction.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	When you have extracted all parts where we previously did, using an iron dagger (arcarius), from the body'dictions:
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And place a double-ended needle in that spot where the pain is felt most intensely, and insert one end into these locations of intense discomfort; then guide the other end as directed by their positioning herein below them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And insert them into the heat location by sections of seven times according to their length, and remove what has accumulated from fresh and decayed feces.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Ensure care for this little one in order that other illnesses may not arise from where fluids do not drain properly by two kidnezymes (which is bad).
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May you inflict pain on all the vessels, provided that it causes the testicles to protrude or for them to be thrust into the vessels, resulting in a lack of nourishment within the vessels and making them brittle, so they do not function well anymore.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol .lxv.: This line appears incomplete as it lacks contextual
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	From "the care of an intestinal hernia." Here is a possible translation, assuming the text follows similar
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia happens because the cords (possibly referring to intestinal tissue or 'strings' in Latin) extend beyond what is normally contained within, due to weaknesses as if they were untethered by heavenly angels from their usual place inside one’s abdomen. Here we see a poetic and metaphorical approach typical of medieval medical texts: hernias are depicted not just physically but with celestial imagery suggesting the out-of-place elements as if they were being influenced by otherworldly forces, causing them to protrude
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is of either the cords or excretion from within it; these are driven out by causes such as: through concussion (percussio), suffocating pressure like a vice grip (suzug - possibly meaning to compress and impede flow, though suzur could also mean sexual act in some texts referring ambiguously to the male genitalia with medical terms); loud noises causing distress or agitation; elevation of any significant cause might lead to – through external pressure. Here we delve into potential etiological factors described by medieval physicians, combining somatic symptoms (like those caused by concussion) and environmental influences—both physical like suff
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The term 'aquo' when stretched due to exertion (possibly relating back to the pressure and strain mentioned earlier), it weakens slightly over time, but never completely fails; yet inside there is no fracture as long as one keeps their mouth shut within this place for a lengthy period. In translation: When water – possibly symbolizing internal fluids or humors in medieval medicine - expands because of exertion (strain), it does not break entirely, but becomes weakened progressively; meanwhile inside there's no fracture as long you keep silent within this space for a prolonged time. This sentence could refer to the concept
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it occurs during digestion (as happens in choking), various symptoms appear suddenly; and this is due to intestinal imbalance, and what concerns us here are issues with parts of the abdomen related to indigestion.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some pauses are taken with the intestine in it (the bag), and this is called an enteric hernia here.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness' spices we fear lest it be missed here in this place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The translation of the source sentence line by line into English is:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is possible that from that portion more may flow out,
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	When you scald that which has been previously examined where the sinews of the testicles are located, it is discovered that there exists a white hardened substance in some division.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the tube into this that contains semen (testicles), within white circumcision areas—the portion between which is located at the base of the penis, and another in between these two parts, absolving any adhesion present behind it.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When it concerns the joints that do not have any cause for being wrapped in white cloth,
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause within yourself, then immediately bring it forth into your abdomen now.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E envolveys les extremitatz del campo i l'aquel am liament vehement entró encara que alquil dels vasos que ni si per causas de poder evitar apostemat caudal.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And after waiting another period of three days beyond the forum (which may refer to a specific time frame in treatment), make these two lashings from the clypeus that immediately encircles the cord and matches the size of his testicles, inspecting all over his torso following roundness. Then place him back on one's care hereafter.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Return the incision in the groin area of the scrotum'thy section, where blood and disease flow as we have described here.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the application of water is delayed, then it must be poured into him and a pause allowed until we have said what needs to be said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And apply care for this sickness with the other treatment of diseases within it that have been healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	The given text appears to be instructions or observations related to medical conditions in medieval times using a
De hernia ventosa.	Based on your provided fragment, it seems the line might pertain to handling
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this case of a belt-like or "ventose" hernia (likely referring to an incarcerated inguinal hernia where the protruding intestine cannot be pushed back), it has not been attempted that you've managed its c
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first day's treatment for the hernia was as we have directed in dealing with it; this involves placing ligatures above where fluid accumulates within that part of you—when performing so ensures tightness at the site, preventing further leakage or protrusion. Here’s a line-by extrábel translation:
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when it is time for healing as we have discussed, then take care of the patient accordingly.
Capitol .lxvii.	The provided text is not in any known medieval medical language but rather appears as a mix of several languages
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Based on the elements present and considering your familiarity with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French—which all have roots in Romance linguistic traditions stemming from V
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	From the discomfort experienced within our joints when we have them and seek relief by moving to where it hurts: herein lies your body's signal for intervention or care. This translation suggests a time-honored understanding of bodily sensations associated with conditions like arthritis, pointing out
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Not from the joints themselves do we find any cause within their own structure—if there is one at all (a nod to possible anatomical issues), it's rare or scarce, and they can return throughout every hour of time; this implies that internal factors are not typically foundational in causing conditions affecting the joints. This statement reflects a perspective from medieval medical theory wherein structural anomalies within body parts were often considered minimal contributors to
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	May it be prolonged time that allows for the necessary breach within our bodies' confines—when we decide to apply force herein; through this extension and application of pressure upon what already exists, which is painful in joints where discomfort was previously felt: such actions may soothe or alleviate not only the site targeted by intervention but also provide relief. This translation reflects a medieval medical practice that often viewed treatment as restorative manipulation and massage to ease bodily pains, suggesting an early form of physical therapy focused on manual adjustment within one's own body structure—this was seen not merely as external application (like medicines or poultices) but also internal correction through self-administered techniques.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of him is with points applied when it has been previously described in his account.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in some cases it is healed by iron placed on its two between your thighs, and drying up of hernias at their site according to three days' duration.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Return strength to the white cloth that is placed under where it has been discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	When you lift up and place that above the prominent part of the coccyx, pressing it onto the abdomen below,
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	When you have brought the two locations up onto the end of the finger joint and adjusted one among those with your hands,
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Here you apply pressure to the limb extremity and do not insert into or extend beyond the cecum of all at once; nor any other cause should trouble you in knowing how to treat an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And in this place, it is better for health that they apply points with cautery.
Capitol .lxviii.	The provided text is not in an actual combination of Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French but rather
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Based on the context and recognizable words within this line from a medieval medical treatise, it appears to discuss treatment related to male reproductive
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Moving the scrotum in men often helps to soften between those bones which are situated therein and it is kept under surveillance by watchful eyes (or doctors).
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Now it is necessary for that person who cares about the patient'thy condition when he has formed an abscess in their groin according to his two hips, and whereby you smooth out her natural cushion; also adjust your lips on the stitching.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, in the meal there is excess of softened bowel (perhaps referring to feces), which has been cooked three or four times and bound with a suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return the incision between the sutures, and apply care for healing other afflictions within to ensure fields (body areas) become healthy again.
Capitol .lxix.	The text provided seems like an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English but la
De castracio.	It appears that there was a misunderstanding or typographical error
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Indeed, it seems the text is discussing castration within legal and medical contexts of that era:
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that gonorrhea occurs in two ways: by drawing out (atrissio), or through the splitting of segments (fissura a seccio).
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When it is caused by atraction, the way of operation we must make the beast drown in its tail while their livers are softened and made thin (and hanging down).
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return those in your hand so that they are solutions and do not appear suddenly during handling.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May pain occur in the scrotum due to a crack or tearing, which you hold and press on the neck of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Return the harness or traction device, and inspect over each part within which two limbs pass through.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those purulent substances that you have already washed out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Ne does not apply pressure on these of the sciatic nerve but rather over those where it lies upon the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This inflammation of the scrotum is better than what it suffers from, for effusion can cause issues with the testicles, which the beast wishes to expel.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Return care for what is inside that needs healing.
Capitol .lxx.	Capital .lxx. (Note: The phrase "Capitol
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	From curing hernia disease.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermafrodozia in men is known by two manners: one appears when there is an accumulation of fluid (water) between the scrotum and where a thread-like structure forms, which resembles a woman'se hairs on her skin.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some of that urine from within it (the body) enters into the coda (urethra), in which is located among the testicles,
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	May there be something special about the female body: for it is as if two testicles of man and only a few millet grains at birth are present in her womb, which corresponds to four puppies (testicles) from men.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure consists of three kinds: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And when you insert those joints back into where they escaped from to avoid the occupation of that place by them again, and treat those other diseases as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of men where semen is expelled from the scrotum and neither cure nor opposition occurs in it,
Capitol .xxi.	Based on the linguistic features present in the text—which include vocab
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	From sloughing and flesh due to causes related to women's health or conditions affect them specifically, medical practitioners advise caution when applying treatment methods like cauterization on
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	From sloughing and flesh due to natural causes within which treatment must be adjusted, with certain guideldictions being amplified in some women until they resemble menfolk's state of health and experience during sexual intercourse. Here the text indicates that treatments should consider a woman’s unique physiology – particularly relating to her hormonal cycles or reproductive system (as suggested by references to natural causes, femininity, "men folk", and sex). The specific medical advice given might pertain to monitoring body responses during treatment phases influenced by these internal processes.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Now cover what you find excessive in washing, either on your back or between your thighs and insides.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	In absence of understanding (no ultimes in inscizio), mostly at the head of reason (le preon de la razit), to prevent any flow of blood (flux de sanc).
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Return care for that which is affected by diseases within it until healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Maybirth is flesh that has not yet entered the womb of the mother and thus suffers within it (and for this reason we refer to 'malady descending'), so let us examine these parts carefully as if they were cockles, now our first call "illness crawling downward". Henceforthy may we also diagnose with slow observation, treating what is sickened inside that becomes healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Given that "Capitol" does not directly correspond with recognizable medical terminology
De curacio de alratica.	Based on your provided context, it seems you are attempting to translate a line from an
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The translation of the sentence into English would be: "It is that woman's chest should not be pierced or only a small opening." This suggests guidance in medical practice related to procedures such as making an incision for surgery or other interventions,
E es o natural o accidental.	The translation of "Es o natural o accidental" into English would be: "It
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The translation of the sentence into English is: "It is accidental due to illness that has come before it; these pains are caused by improperly managed flesh or hardened fatty tissue, perhaps from excess consumption (of food), and/dictum subtle stones." This indicates an understanding in medieval medicine where certain types of pain may be attributed to recent sicknesses. The mention
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	The translation of the line into English is: "These are painful in her belly or limbs (bodies), from what comes out inside it ('inside' could refer to internal organs rather than a specific part like 'belly'), and these pains can be caused by coughing up phlegm, bloating with gas within the body cavity, menstruation is prohibited." Here we see medieval medical advice that certain bodily processes or states (like what comes out of one's mouth—phlegm), as well as natural occurrences such as childbirth and menstrual cycles are linked to discomfort. The line reflects the intertwining of physical health with observable symptoms,
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The translation of this sentence into English is: "Her knowledge about that pain comes from the physician's observation if it appears clearly before them ('if clear'), then they must advise her; however, if not apparent, seek out those who are learned or reach for light (knowledge)." This passage underscs a medieval perspective where diagnostic and treatment decisions rely heavily on both direct clinical examination by the physician as well as consultation with educated individuals. In situations when symptoms aren't immediately evident to the observer, further inquiry into these matters is recommended—possibly
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	May it be through subtlety for this individual's benefit and directed towards the mouth'dictions, then with your toothpick you break that which separates them from their desire of food intake.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When pressure is applied to the gums and teeth are held with intermittent stops as indicated by their most sensitive points, it means:
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Here the woman is over her two (or herself), with extended thighs and lips forced out so that whatever subtle instrument undernethy can be removed, and lubrication occurs within those parts.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Return wool and linen into the oil and place it over that location to keep it from drying out at home for as long as possible.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the scab is thick and woody, then you must insert that small splinter of bone or blackthorn into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If it is for meat (nutrition), then suspend that one on their bone and incise that one as well.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And apply a wide iron tool for that dirt (implying impurities or foreign matter) does not harden into pus within the body.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And thus for a few days use oil in his treatment.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	When it is cured with the other method of convalescence while being healed,
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some pains in the breast during other patients' births occur following this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for apoplexy (stroke), the one in which brain function has not yet been affected, there should be no iron used on any part of their body as a remedy/treatthy.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Since there is no text provided for translation beside the example line by line interpretation given above (
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of course, here's an attempt to translate based on the example provided:  
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Through those openings of veins, from which blood flows constantly, inflamed are the humors that form pus (abscesses).
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And in the division of those things and their sinews, I have directed these that receive care towards me and those that do not receive any care from me.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So say that hemorrhoids and thighs appear when in the womb of the mother, they are not considered a disease to be treated with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those which are on the surface wherein she feels her sensations be those that when healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in moist and wet clothes or heavy linen garments, and fasten those around her waist, examine these areas where they are tightened.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Return the powder onto those that flow from one of the inscribed wounds' bites, with ashes and appearance similar to them for these individuals.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into pillows and rest them there for an hour; then place them in cold water quickly.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of bile persists, then apply that which has been ground from honey and grains and gold dust and gemstones in a warm bath or poultice.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Return bread and honey, mixing them with water, and apply it externally to both of his limbs.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction is detached (likely referring to an organ or structure that has come loose), then bleed it out (presumably through lancing); otherwise, bind with two swathes and perform incision on its breasts/chest areas; this refers to a treatment involving restraints applied at specific points along with surgical intervention.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request what requires strict attention, for that which appears hereafter in their tongue according to my explanation earlier on this page (or section).
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In English line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise text provided would be as follows:
Capitol .lxxiv.	The text provided seems like an attempt at translating medieval medical terminology into English. Here
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	When the navel piercing occurs in a pregnant woman, it means that she has experienced an unintentional belly button (navel) piercing while carrying a
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	When there are various species of worms, alongside ringworm and open sores with pus-filled ulcers and abscesses as well as other types of infestations in the abdomen (belly), it indicates a complex parasitic condition where multiple kinds of internal parasites have taken residence.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already spoken about these illnesses and their properties, as well as the remedies for them in this division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When you dig out in this tract of apomption which is found when physicians examine those who are sick with it, and if you want to know how they perform its operation using iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Now consider if the pain from inflammation in your womb is stabbing and pulsating with heat and fever; when touched, it does not cause cracks but rather indicates a need for aid that helps within until the agitation subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you make the bed for a woman on a couch that she provides with bolsters; recline her back and adjust their weights gently to align just behind the abdomen region, expanding their hips slightly while also bending their legs at knees soothly as needed. Here each limb is held together by gentle means (likely some form of binding or support).
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here the maid follows directly and administerthythe tool with which she has opened up (or prepared), according to what will occur as reasons for doing so.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you intend to administer this tool on the woman'thy forehead (assuming "preon" refers herein as a type of instrument or treatment), and only what is in that tool enters her uterus, should be its own pearl and lead.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the mother'supreme,'s texture, then you must pause on its surface so that no part of this entire apparatus falls into it (the maternal principle).
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and it is touched on the body (ma) and becomes hot and moist, then cover that part with your hand under a pillow or folded cloth to cool down its heat, applying pressure as needed where there'supreme bone/skull meets the spine.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the illness is cured, then you pause in the mud or oil submerged with some stickiness contained therein; and place your hand over the section before puberty of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause away from the mother and over the woollen blanket cleanly submerged in water where they have been boiled:
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it is cured within two days with wax that should enter where it has healed, which brings the patient to health once again.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the patient'dict has gone into labor in a prepared state, then when you are not permitted to attend them for treatment, they have water that will take care of it here within our division (section).
Capitol .lxxv.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical manuscript or treatise discussing a condition
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	In the process of training nurses, we must teach them how to administer medicine when boys exhibit hives as their second manifestation naturally.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the matron exhales her breath in the childbirth figure by means of it (the labor), and when you next see/observe a woman expressing at parts, she desires to smell the air on top of this part; hereby removed for which vapor above them caused due its origin from that place. Moreover, knowing well that this part is second natural figure in childbirth order (after or following), and it's sanitation performed over her head, along with another servant suspended around/hanging on their belly button; holding the woman’thy hands together hereby supporting labor process through physical presence and aid.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you lift those limbs, ensure that the patient's belly is compressed for so that their unborn child can safely descend into the womb as they lie on their back, and give them a second one, which will be cleansed from excess matter during proper purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May that which is not natural and untreatable occur when he becomes ill on his feet and the body'dict shows before one’s head—when both legs are affected or at least one leg plus/minus chest, whereby their abdomen turns over onto its own column, resembling forms of him they cannot cure.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary, it is for the midwife who must be wise and subtle in all these matters, so as to avoid errors and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When showing them in their entirety therein and within which they represent for the eye whatsodictates over that very same thing;
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain enters the patient'se head naturally, it is violent on women and difficult at their part; thereupon they use that servant who holds those hands of hers, which allows them to evaporate the discharge with fenugreek seeds and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return (or insert) the metal instrument between your fingers and in that place another inserted into which allows moisture, whereupon it enters as a second vessel containing fluid secretion within itself.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Precede pushing the woman'dict belly until she delivers the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not done already, then cover the woman with a cloth made of pulp and seed from plantain and fenugreek; this is what she should be covered in.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the command to give it, securely fasten the bandages and apply that poultice where healing is desired; put your mouth and nose on his body until such time as he enters the forum of treatment (perhaps referring to a town meeting or gathering for medical discussion).
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the more painful parts of the body have been brought forth to common digestion (i.dict "fet so foro-getadas al comensament"), then gradually reduce that which has become easily handled ("petit").
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the patient does not obey internally, then lift the woman onto a couch and remove her feet from it, and place the couch on the ground; ensure that the woman remains upright to avoid falling during contractions (conception).
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the masses are not turned down and die within the flesh or between their thighs as it lies upon you with your cloth (drap), then extract those from there and remove them along with that which is of equal size, afterward they will be expelled through the mouth.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From birth over these feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly is on their feet, and you push them downwards, making it small, and heat that body up, holding one hand undernezymindful of those in pain and pressing gently with two hands to expand this little bit progressively:
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he is inside the thighs, then you command him to express himself and make that outflow happen if God wills it so.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no water to wash away the fluid we have applied, return your child gradually within until you reach that second figure of nature'dictated by their fever; at this point, apply tepid (or lukewarm) water for cleansing and medication.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited to have all the fluid that we recommend for treatment, then take muscle from high altitude and soaked rubber dissolved in water, crush them thoroughly in the mortar with good percussion, apply lines of this fluid on a woman's body (the abdomen being below), containing pus coming out of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Return that limb in water bathing, until you achieve relief for the epicondyles.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts of it are softened and become moist from myrtle (and then apply pressure there), thus treating that area with the steam produced by myrtle and applying pressure to alleviate it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you place it under fumigation for an hour, then have the patient lay on a couch, and make that movement with their tongue (probably indicating some sort of oral treatment), removing from there and pressing down below the lower abdomen tightly compressing in this way.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Evaluation of the flesh over these bones and limbs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you gradually insert your fingers inside; and have the woman stand with her back bent over her spine, holding her feet up off the ground, while those same ones rest on the pathway, continuing to complete the task.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the flesh is not removed (presumably referring to treatment of what might be an ingrown toenail or similar condition), then lift those feet and apply pressure on them with movements that are strong, step by step placing weight over the small areas undernethy (hips).
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert their hands and gently place the small part into its hole, commanding the woman to express herself through it where it is inserted.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eye salve duly hanging from one of its most (the limb/body part being referred to).
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When it is in reduction of its state (of the body), if you cannot reduce that yourself, then lift up the woman and carry her to where she can be reduced.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it is not possible to do so, lay the jaw on the bed and forcefully massage their thighs until they hit with violence, then administer the ligaments that you have previously mixed with mucilage as recommended.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has occurred, then apply that poultice on the navel area, and study how to reduce swelling of the belly, shape the fetus into its second natural figure, and urge it back inside so that it enters through the same opening (presumably where labor began).
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Eye examination reveals that her feet and facies are two inches from her maire'supraception (likely referring to the bellybutton or navel).
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the matron holds her hand over the belly and gently turns that little one gradually, it becomes easier for them.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is necessary for him to sit down, and when he rests on the cushion that we have prepared with oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command the patient to drink little by little, and when you have given it, direct them to take that measure on top of another cushion and order them so inclined towards their right side, and instruct them how much they should consume; this is taken for medication.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the patient vomits violently as per this malady, consider it and if you inspect inside their tongue with your own tongue to ensure that any moisture is expelled from within.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is suspended on the face and chest of him/her, then you should incise that part which resembles an umbilical cord (the belly button), to ensure it does not remain stuck or delay in movement.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here you place the fetus within those parts until breaks occur where pauses happen; and command the woman to take some measures on herself if God wills it, that he may assist in childbirth laboriously.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twins groan often and sometimes three or four times per day, it may be strange and unbearable; perhaps due to natural causes, but they are alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Given the text is in a language that borrows from Latin, Italian, Spanish and French vocabulies, here's an attempt to translate line by line:
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult for them to endure their childbearing and they come upon us with complaints about the non-natural figures we have discussed, then attend to these pains as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is subtle and gentle in her touch that makes things easier and more refined, and if she acts slowly with all skill according to how prepared they are for healing.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember what formed within the womb and was aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some become pregnant in the month of May one or two times (and sometimes three to four), and I must verify whether a woman has had five abortions, another has formed seven times, which causes pain measured by the distinguished learned ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxxvi.	The text provided appears to be attempting an interpretation of medieval medical terminology into modern English while
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When the fetus is removed upon death, it means that in cases where a pregnant woman passes away
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus that we've discussed in obstetrics and it is not decomposed, and today you must use a wax seal to cover it up; this should only be done if the woman was healthy before misfortile incidents occurred which made one believe she might have lost something.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back with her head inclined downwards and thighs upwards,
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister holds that hand of those who are in pain or tied up at the waist, so that their body does not extend beyond and extraction from the fetus is necessary:
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And apply moisture to the mother of life' extrinsic damp and thickened vapor (mucus) and seed from that, holding her hands.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Here the midwife places her hand on their abdomen where the umbilical cord is located to keep it in place during childbirth:
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If there is discharge over the feet of your patient, it may occur in the abdomen or between the ribs and backbone (loin).
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And keep it in the position of the patient an additional unit or three (if necessary), to ensure its attachment by means of a catheter and not be extended beyond what is needed for their abdomen only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	When gout affects the entire body, it is for that reason that its removal must be done carefully as if in a toothache sensation by you (the doctor).
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the patient'thy body part has been extracted forcefully, then they should be allowed to enter back into the place where it was removed, and at that moment their entire body will have come out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the leg is inflamed on the other side and it'thy not possible to reduce that limb by carrying; then wrap your cloth around it so as all of its parts come out, and trace along that limb whereever there are swellings or in the groin/thigh junction.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And where you make it in the other part of the body and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	May it be that the head of the fetus is large, or compressed in labor pains, or adjusted at the top of the womb where tendrils enter between the dull spines and fissure on the crown to extract water with an instrument called "alundat," from which forms other instruments will be taken for this purpose.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is sick and compressed by the sternum (the breastbone), then it has been opened within wherein the moisture that exists in the chest is evaporated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	May it not become complicated, nor should you eat, then immediately examine the head as much as is within your power.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there are openings in the stomach or they protrude outwardly within it, then you must pierce that part where fluid is circulating inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If it is about your feet, then the attraction of you to that place (presumably for treatment) will be gentle and directed towards the mouth of the midwife (likely indicating where one should expect some sort of remedy or relief).
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the belly is being compressed and pressed on your chest, then remove that dress which covers you so tightly, tear it apart while letting out the air inside these places where the compression occurs.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May it happen that the other members are pressed and turned back to their heads; when the physician enters from the right side of the bed, he/she will insert into her mouth (the patient's), secure therein with a clasp or two, tighten around the head, and draw out those tongues within it towards its entrance.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted by apatema that causes pain in her chest, do not allow it to worsen there; from then on, administer treatment for moist fatty effusion.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply liniments; follow up with the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on the patient'se chest, let it be stitched if possible; and administer to it what we have said for the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then insert into pillows and remove them.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When there is no cause found within the secondary (referring here possibly to deeper or systemic issues).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all of your examination, then administer what we have discussed for the treatment in these punctures caused by the mother'donkey (presumably a metaphorical or ancient term referring to inflammation).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have an excess of phlegm flowing into clear streams and administer another treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And there was seen in her stomach a woman who had died, and placed upon that focus another gone on, which itself is also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Occasionally an abscess appears on the patient's limb for a long time; and as it swells up with pus, begins to ooze fluid (or "gut").
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	When they call for healing and have treated him for a long time, his children are not yet well established or firmly rooted in health.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And when you apply pressure over it for some intense constriction bands and squeeze the bone one day, another on other days; you will have gone too far, as there is not a bone left in her belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are of the bones of the dead body.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So then put on the leather gown, and extract from it stones or bones located in their saddle pouches, which have been collected for a long time; correct this small bracelet of yours with care.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From these instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of movement in which she is lifted up:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how one should strain their free limbs where there are two spear-like tools in the extremities of both feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	May this virtue be subtle as chains and either pain or cramps of the joints caused by cold humors entering undernethy pressure points beneath them (below).
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	When the length of each rod is two feet and a half from both ends to their midpoint (palms), which measures three hands wide by four palms long; here are already made adjustments on these rods that have been fixed in place (which lengths measure three hands wide by four palms, with an end-to extra length of two handfuls or a half foot each).
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions are inserted into the mother'thy mouth so that she can swallow them when you turn over these given remedies.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another subtle form of that which is secretly present herein; place it undernethy, and also on their legs. Here "autra" refers to something else or another thing, similar in context to the previous
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is a form made of bone or wood according to the shape of forceps; place it underneath, and also on their legs. In this sentence, "sia" refers back to some treatment device mentioned previously (likely similar in function to forceps), which
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	May it be at the very end of your body with two additional lengths like this: its length is a handbreadth and its height (or depth) are two fingers' span tall; here "quays" means to measure or equal in size, so they indicate that when using these devices for treatment as mentioned earlier ("additament"), the appropriate dimensions should be one palm long by two finger spans high. This guidance suggests specific physical attributes required from an instrument used within their medical practice – possibly something like splints or
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish to use those devices for treatment (the ones previously discussed), make the woman stand on tiptoe over her feet; there's already that which is between your thighs – lift it up now, here "aquos" refers back to something concealed or secret within them. The instruction seems to be directing a healthcare practitioner (or possibly themselves) in an early form of manual therapy: the patient should stand on tiptoe while treating issues likely related
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Place your hand above the device with force applied according to how much respect you have for (or value) the mouth of the patient within which bounds set by when the mirror is held up that allows visualization as desired – here "aprecio" refers back again, indicating personal consideration or esteem towards a part of their body. This line indicates they may use tactile feedback from holding tools over parts of themselves to modulate treatment with respect for how much it affects them personally and visually monitored using an object that serves as both mirror ("metrona") in this instance, suggesting self-
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The method by which they were previously directed is as follows:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressure that makes it push down upon the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	When it concerns the form of medication taken by him that contains his great head (likely referring to a specific remedy or treatment involving some kind of "great head" substance), he takes
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 He is assembled with tweezers to the extremity that he attaches and turns on it several times (and perhaps takes additional measures where needed), twisting as if using forceps repeatedly, until attached at which point they turn together like a pair of clasped forceps.  
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of sitting few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an ointment has one needle:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a needle has pinpoints:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps in which your teeth are inserted into where the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a splint has two ends at which the head detaches itself:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two entities in Latin:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are being used and whenever the spices of that thing become multiplied and prepared by the craftsman according to their quantity is when I place it on its base, and also put some people there for each amount.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And when it is necessary for those instruments not to work together, that need cannot be waived.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the removal of the second element (this interpretation assumes that "segunda" refers to a specific object or substance
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second element is retained by you and causes pain to your patient, command that retainer (likely referring to an obstruction or source of discomfort) held by the caretaker/patient themselves, apply a corrective touch with authority, placing your hand firmly over their mouth and nipples as necessary. If through such action relief is provided, rest assured they are cured.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a hot wave and pierce through the covert at that spot where burning herb exposes the mouth of the mare (the patient), apply chamomile oil with calamus and anise seeds along with cinnamaldehyde bark and juniper berries.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave, and pause over the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place one end of the clyster (cannula) in the mouth of the woman, and insert that into where her emissions go down to the cavity of the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	When that part is applied as directed beforehand (as we have described), and the second servant moves swiftly,
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if you want to continue this treatment and avoid surgery, then command the matrona to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or millet paste, and insert that into your intestine where we have marked it; likewise introduce another one there as recommended by us. If she inserts furthermore within the belly button (belly), place inside also on their stomachs if desired. As soon as they find this second point inserted, take out little by little each insertion until such time that mother does not clutch tightly; at which moment remove them carefully one after another to prevent accidental injury or misplacement during the procedure.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	From above where it has been smoothed out both right and left are easiness of movement.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust its contact quantity; if it complies and avoids attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the queen'thy mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the cauterization and medical treatment of her water with metal and plants.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	May if not all causes recommended are avoided, keep you that do not touch upon it in iteration of abstraction; may but what enters from the mouth to the hip joint also be enclosed and treated with ointment and tetrafourmacon; this thing will purify those areas for healthy days ahead and dissolve any remaining issues.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When one is fainting (feeling faint), the illness has risthyteously ascended to the head and stomach, and it leads to indisposition; hence when such are administered under a smoky atmosphere in an appropriate manner.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May the ashes of ancient ones be brought up under fumigation with nut and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of this tool by which a woman is subjected must retain her menstrual flow and the second girl (servant):
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Such pain is of bone or flesh.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the subtle part is below in the chest and the extensive part above the focus, and the underflowing humors are also restrained beneath the breastbone.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And when that tongue which has been ingested enters again under humidification and repeats itself, do so as well with another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of caring for an infant' extruded bowel not reinserted (the phrase seems incomplete and a bit unclear as it stands, but I will
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Of caring for an infant's bowel that is not ruptured (the phrase seems incomplete and somewhat unclear as it stands), the delicate handling ensures its safety or preservation of integrity ("ciphac" could be interpreted loosely here, possibly meaning gentle care). Please note: this translation attempts to capture general ideas but due to
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Therefore the mother takes care of it (presumably referring back to caring for an infant's bowel); if not already done so delicately ("ciphac"), she shall pierce gently with a sharp object, and ensure that her hands do not touch wounds or injuries. This translation attempts to convey the original meaning while providing some context where it was unclear; "perfore" here refers to making an incision carefully which is necessary for medical intervention if gentle handling
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 Then place it over the burning and oil (possibly referring to treating burns); similarly, provide care for that which is contained within—ensuring proper wrapping or bandaging with wax inside. This translation tries its best to interpret an ancient practice of caring for a patient's injuries where specific materials like lana (wool
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 If there's concern it might be tender or sore, pause for a day in the treatment room (this suggests taking rest days during medical care), and wait until the infant can endure more activity again. Here we have an interpretation of ancient healing practices where breaks are taken to allow patient recovery before continuing with treatments—a concept still relevant today when considering therapeutic procedures that must be balanced against periods for recuperation.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 And heals the patient's belly to solidify offspring or applyments (the context here seems to involve medical treatment for an abdominal issue); therefore, ensure that this consolidation is done as instructed ("inscidida"), and provide care with water which we have discussed in our treatments. This translation reflects the medieval approach where home remedies were often part of a larger therapeutic regime; herein lies an indication to follow specific medical advice while using simple resources like water for healing, aligning with historical practices that valued both adherence to
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of caring for those ulcers that come about by chance.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The leaking sores that occur in the lower segment of connectivity or within one joint, from behind or in its space:
E es una fistula o motas.	It is an ulcer or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that ancient constriction is related to moist and sticky humors rising subtly within these ulcers, some measures are taken from them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those penetrating things make them fearful because they are suffering from those (the humors) exiting and breathlessness; some of these patients suffer due to the humor'dictorium exits, others suffocate as a result of it.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	From those fistulas occasionally appearing in the hollow space within the bladder, and entering into the meat of the uterus; these enter through the junction of the thigh and the pubis.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When it is in which there is a penetrating and non-penetrating (abscess) within the belly, you insert your thread here into the abdomen, and introduce delicate rods or iron into the abscess when not turbid.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that narrowing you feel pressure undernethy or the tail of a horse within where you sense the tightness, it means:
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that one of them for any cause of obstruction or worms and windiness, as we have said before, then understand they are non-permeable, and take care of yourself accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or urethra, it means that its purpose is to expel the fluid from that place so that the location becomes medicine and gets healed properly.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May if something penetrates the joint of the thigh or enters into the bone and causes pain throughout the circuit, then this person is said here as one who attempts to enter without being blocked by obstruction in the bone itself; they will undergo a swift treatment immediately. In no way does it have value in medicine nor can it be solidified with wax (as some preparations might suggest).
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those perforating ulcers it is not healing completely, and the treatment of these by doctors works hard on which becomes firm again.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May heal as expected if it is not impenetrable and old-aged; such recovery hoped for when you follow my advice, which has already been applied.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that person feels cholera entering their colon, then immediately insert your finger into the area of discomfort in the colon.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a thrust in the belly and perceive that it is attempting to pierce through there as well, then surely you know that this thing penetrates; therefore do not attempt anything on or around where that which perforates occurs, for indeed we have already said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Mayhap there have come rightethy men who heal in hospitals of saltmen's houses.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	From the medical practice in which you hope well, as before it was done, and whereby that flame inserted into the fistula shall ascend until it escapes through the cloak; and after inserting such fire repeatedly (as many times—up to three—you know have become exhausted all those bones padded with this fistula resembling a feather from quill),
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attack is within and does not penetrate inside where it enters therein (the anus), between that which one hopes for flesh or chest organs, then you form a fistula on its surface above the navel; once formed, dry out the umbilicus of the part containing the fistula, so as to enter into and through this within the region whereby ends said limb's extremity. Hereafter dries that which is in contact with the wound (the treated area), achieving liberation from it via the intervention itself (through drying out).
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Return cleanlinzymes those constricted veins which have been assembled with the penis catheter and do not break due to any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May the fluid from sanctity sometimes flow between you and your covering when those stones are inside it; then take up with lymph or pus-filled instruments for cauterization at the focus, so that adjusted stones' inflammation will be alleviated, and the discharge of bad humors removed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	In those remedies in which stoppage and extraction take place, when the healing has been restored and recovery is complete without fear of further iteration.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has entered into the belly of this person and is lengthened along its surface on top, then join your hands therein at the belly so as to investigate further.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	So if hundreds of trials and between you (the healer) and her are the flesh or meat, it is for permeation now not to be operated upon in her but by a second route of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The given text is a medieval medical treatise discussing various methods for treating certain conditions:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 And in some cases the fistula is closed according to this methodology: when you insert an instrument into the fistula, and it reaches the skin of the abdomen and at the edge of the navel, a needle inserted by the surgeon' extricates the intestines accordingly:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that faithful wrapping of fields or around those areas, and attempt to insert the foot in the forked part wherein lies the continuation of its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Might if it penetrates into the margin of the anus intentionally, then extract the nail from that traumatic intromission you have made in your anus; and remove its tip, adjust both ends to their respective examples, first-time cleaning each with water for one day or two days at most. Whenever possible, once again insert the nail into those flesh pieces wherein the extremities of the nail intersects between the legs' limbs.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Return care where it has been made firm and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	May it be that the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, but rather there'thy pain originates within you and cannot be cured by me alone. Therefore, I must enter where needed according to my preparation so as not to introduce any additional injury; meanwhile holding your hands which are supposedly healing inside.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of spigastle is what causes the fistula: its curvature makes it sharp and the other division does not—so that without necessity, take measures sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From the seam of hemorrhoids where blood flows in that part of it.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "Inflammation of the joints appears as twofold in origin; either it is due to carbohdictum (indicating that these are like grains of rice), or those things herein appear between the patient's buttocks, similar to fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From those small and large, which the sanctus cor verifies through these timespans, and thus it is within the abdomen area, in the limbs of him/her.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Even if there is a lack of moisture in the small intestine'se cavity according to its limited water content and by its skin tone, it must be addressed accordingly:
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which they have inserted into her colon is to command the malady (disease) to settle and express itself within where it inserts, so that you can see its humors appear therein with your hand.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you sit and hold your nails down or up against the skin where they touch it with your own nail, applying pressure on those areas of their flesh which are yours to heal.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May if the points are not held in those places due to their moisture and softness, then take a rough cloth or woolen material for them, fix it with threads at that spot where they should be attached, scatter some ash dust onto these areas as part of cauterization; apply cautery according to the procedure established beforehand.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Return that care for those things which have been healed within it so far is applied there again.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the belly does not expire (evacuate), then crush it with pestle in which small biting is done, and wash it with that water present in the colon where obstruction occurs to facilitate evacuation when the intestine squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hernias are deficient at the belly button (navel), then their cause is leprosy (leprous condition), and you must grasp those areas with your finger or tongue, insert them back inside where they were before so that they can be healed as we have discussed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	Here is the translation line by line:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When it is necessary for all of them (the humors), and only one remains unused from that which has been taken away, then the surplus of this humor will flow out of that particular part.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand over the belly, roasted or in a chestnut case; and put that there on the colon (large intestine) to command the humors back inside.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within the cavity; and when it has discharged itself, care for those inside of it who are ill or other forms of cure contained within (that they may heal).
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treating fistulas (emphasis added for clarity). Here is a possible translation line
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Treatment involves prolonged sitting or rest due to cracking of the joints or because they are naturally formed, respectively (translation with added clarity). Here is a potential interpretation based on historical medical practices: The text suggests that treatment for certain conditions may involve
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 When such conditions are considered outdated or ineffective according to the prevailing medicine of that time, they advocate cutting off those bony prominency points with either a spatula (bone point) tool or their own blunt instrument which is moistened and held over where pus discharges from beneath it. This action prevents further spread; thus proper care for these conditions should be sought within them once they have solidified. Here, the treatise implies that removing certain hard bony structures at joints could help in managing purulent (pus-filled) effusion by cutting off its source and stopping progression before consolidation or setting of pus occurs—a technique possibly reflective of medieval practices aimed to address such conditions. This approach underscores the holistic view often found within these ancient texts, where physical interventions are considered alongside an understanding (or misconception) of bodily fluids and humoral theory that dominated medical thinking
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When you have initially cut off the violent discharge of purulent matter that was first within and are red, indicating inflammation or infection—and care for those once healed: Herein lies an emphasis on immediate attention to acute conditions presenting with signs like pus exudate following incision. The treatise seems advocating prompt post-operative (or surgical) intervention and monitoring of wounds, aimed at prevention or early treatment before any serious complication such as infection ens
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of treatment of limbs, it is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Understand that this is not standard Latin and blends elements of multiple Romance languages as well as some older medical terminology; however, here's a rough translation attempt:
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when the fluid that has entered is located in the joint of the knee and between its bones or ligaments, and it has been removed from their body; take care of it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then cauterize the second that came before in his chest.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers appear rough and round on the surface of the body, and they often come into motion in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	In caring for him/her, extend and insert that which is faithful or within the box inserted by you; perhaps it's a needle of faith (or material) used in treatment inside this container.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it as we have mentioned before, at the focus or in urgent medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And there are now forwards and backwards along this same tool with which you directed them.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May a small and thickened flea be upon the surface of the body inside you (the patient), when it is crushed, it causes pain all over your body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Care for him involves inserting a catheter made of either goat or tortoise bone into the body cavity he contains within which the loop is positioned; and with your hand inside that through which it has been inserted, rotate while stopping its movement so as not to harm his flesh. And when this material (the substance being a part of the catheter) reaches where currents flow in the formulated body cavity, pause there on top of the meat covering it; and continue rotating until you remove all residues from inside him entirely.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, use a lead or iron tube according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here is the line by line translation:
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to cauterize the flea as it emerges during the causticization of the anus in the capital chamber for treatments, then:
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of course with the instruments that are administered for dysentery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times pain is caused by silver or tin ingots poured out and melted down, and at other times it's due to small and large instruments that are used for their administration; the one administered in children’se treatment is considered smaller, and those whose thighs bulge or swell belong to these (children).
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of scab or smallness is:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube below where it is tied with an expandable bag according to this method; and that place down there, when attached, holds the bag as many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The translated text line by line is as follows:
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is a bag in which the medicines of the bladder from beast or sheep'se wool are paused, then its handle is like one's hand.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if it is pierced due to gross disorders when turned, and the space where this occurs in him:
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If medicine forces it out, then take as much as possible; and if sleep lasts for a whole day, perhaps tomorrow there will be improvement.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you tighten that in the diseases of the abdomen and eye inflammation (the "coitus"), then repeat the use of caustics until healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is bleeding or wounds in the belly, then let the sponges be delicate and soft under which the children can rest (be seated).
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of healing diseases or illnesses.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And you have it divided into the part of healing for these ills that were suitable to free them accordingly, and hereby declare how this curative action should be performed with those remedies in accordance with their complementary nature.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it is said that sores are diverse according to where they were formed and how the pus was collected (inoculated).
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	When the causes of motion are arises due to humors accumulated in conjunction with a heavy stone or rolling on thresholds and floors, hitting furniture, fistulas, or being close to these sources causing such movements.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the humors that are present in the body' extrinsic parts such as head, neck (col), chest (pietz), abdomen (ventre), belly button (fitge), and resemble those of the limbs be alleviated with a poultice.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And when recommending a cure for some diseases, it allows thinking and rules to be applied concerning the other diseases as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When you consume foods of simple diseases, the recall of complex ailments will arrive at the feasting table of the third capital (which could imply an internal understanding or recognition during treatment).
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say when you have simple boils that are not fractured, consider: if it is a stone or resemblance causing them, then press and rub the head region immediately, without delay; extract from there according to the quantity of fluid present if no cause prohibits cauterization, mainly if what has come out so far belongs to the simple boil itself.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	When there is a procedure on the contrary side of the affected party, and one must keep watch over their abdomen for retching and vomiting, especially after consuming heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If from careful observation you find no cause at all, then reduce intake of food and do not approach meat or drinks again.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When pressure is applied over mud or water where the patient has been caustically treated with hot oil or vinegar and seizes it tightly (seized firmly), likely an infection may be addressed:
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of an abscess and it has been recently formed by the patient' extrinsic (external) factors, pause over the soil where such intervention is needed, provided that this dust/soil hasn't changed due to external weather conditions which may have affected its purity.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed its quality, place your hand inside where you put onlinen until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May it be that the child is large or because of insufficient space and appearance, and their lips are not adjusted properly for sewing as recommended by them; in such a case, adjust those ones with stitches accordingly.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May you find the child inside bone and flesh, not restrained by it but held with a small suspensor; inspect that which is found therein carefully using medicine to restore their body'se tissue back into place where tendons reside, instructing the humors (fluids) within them to digest foods containing seeds or grains and fruits/vegetables similar in form.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If you find decay in the spine and it does not stick to the bone, then cut off all this putrefied flesh with water, and apply careful attention (to remove or cleanse).
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases an artery or vein from which blood may flow is not severed by medicine, then look at the artery, and if you have cut that one too much, cut it with a sponge or ligature (tube), as long as what we are saying does not worsen your condition. If so, perform cauterization within which blood has flown out once severance is done.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pains are simple and small, then the cause of them is humidity; therefore sprinkle this dust over those places until the air dries them out.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The purpose of the powder is: a recipe with one part oil pressed from seeds, two parts dragon'dictum not yet extinguished, three parts combined; all mixed and crushed together, this mixture constitutes its ground form, concocted for good binding within which to drink.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one performs surgery alone, it is not advisable when you do not have an assistant and dragon'searthen steel at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation takes place on the great swellings when they are stopped over them and have not been recently moistened by rain, which has not changed their airiness.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has become altered, especially in summer, you may not understand where to position this powder for relief, therefore take care of those places we have mentioned earlier; thus rest upon these drying agents or place therein that which is made from flour mixed with water and honey inside (to form a poultice), and attend carefully to them until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you break a bone in the body, and it is small like an injury caused by movement (gestures), then extract water from that place with tools.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When directing the treatment for skull fractures in this manner that is poisonous,
De las plaguas del col.	From the humors of the colon (or possibly referring to 'fluids' or elements within it
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the waste (or feces) becomes acidic in the colon, there is no difference in medicine for it, and between this and what occurs when constipation affects the head; both are simple issues to address within medical practice. Here "plagua" likely refers to stool or bowel contents which have become too hardened (constipation), causing difficulty during defecation (
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerve of the colon or artery is involved (suggesting some form of neuropathy, possibly pain), it remains as much in medicine that this issue should be avoided rather than directly treated with immediate action; instead take care to soften stools using water alongside remedies like dietary changes and herbs. Here the text advises a gentle approach focusing on prevention through hydratsation ("cu aquo")—and possibly other interventions, such as modifying one' extrinsic factors (diet) or taking specific supplements ('ziniar,' which could refer to zinc known for its role in digestion and nerve function).
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No joint or any part stops because of total weakness; for the substance of nerves is also weakened and its continuous flow to the brain, which applies it throughout all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If it is that he needs treatment with folk remedies, apply some warm water poultice or cold oil-rubbed stone (or plain clean stones), and heat during the bathing process along with other mineral waters according to this methodology, and dress warts.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the child is large, then apply stitches or clamp their lips together, and take care that these are treated until healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth or pain in the lower parts of the body due to suppuration (pus formation), then make an incision at that location for drainage removal.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the soil there is an inserted artery and blood flow occurs, then separate or dry out that which needs to be dried if necessary; otherwise, perform cautery on it as needed.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May you have already secured the vertebrae of the back or all, and thus saved the veins in the neck, do not touch that; even as equal to it adjust the lips of your tongue with suture on its spine so as not to touch it; restore it to its natural shape, strengthen this part through structure alignment, leave it for days at a time while healing takes place. Also take care in these places where fixation and excitement occur when being restored healthy.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May it happen if the child already has pain in their bones beforehand, then you will strike that place; and also when there are fragments of bone present, remove all those pieces which you can from them; but if you yourself cannot enter inside (to treat), let goats come into where the sickness is located so it may heal itself.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the child is freshly born today, then grind over that which has been recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	May it be that if there is an opening (fistula) in the patient'se ground/soil body and recollection of water comes to this, then cure that which contains said water herein within its head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	When it concerns coughs or phantom pains that occur between the shoulders and are felt in space, on a shelf, at the chest or among phantoms,
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of lance or cottle and at times you reach the depth, then also take into account that if the patient' extruded bowels when they lose their vitality (when constipation occurs due to weakness), consider them dead. You understand that pusible excrement indicates a mortal condition in patients with compromised health.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is no depth and the soil (referring to body fluids) within him has just been purified, then pause in his chest for the first hour after morning cleansing time, without tightening it so that the sanctum (body) remains deep inside its cavity and returns to the heart, possibly pausing there with wax applied on top, while gently moving afterwards as directed by signs of diet throughout the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the unguent is not at your disposal, then rest in the bath containing cold water for that which draws out moisture; and let the gout lie on the bed of foul mud so that runs the fluid already adjusted to it within you.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May if already three days have passed or may not yet be the case of malady spasm, trembling heart, and chest tightness from bad humors; at times use other good means provided by you, so that when patient is saved, then take care for them with a pillow (for comfort) and provide their necessary treatment until recovery.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	May the cure of him be considered sufficient if healed at any time, even while still bound, so that it is known already a leak or fistula has formed; then take care of such with your own knowledge and judgment as his physician.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the patient has a wound from an incision or perforation and it is simple on the surface of the skin or buttocks, then treat that with water previously applied after stitching if large, or powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May there be pain in the bone already and open wounds present as well; if these sores are separated from each other, then use a hook to remove those sores.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, let them be led out where the pestilence will remove them from there (the removal of waste or infected material).
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other sudden illnesses in the other body parts, health is restored by the fluid we have mentioned before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From intestinal disorders.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomgy that you experience in your belly is great or small or wandering.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great experience they may insert the nerve or tendon of it into its cavity, so that there is a forceful and subtle union among them.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When a small disruption is caused by another'diction of them into your place so that their internal matter becomes difficult to reduce, then their breath and body become swollen making reduction hard for you.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Thus the better disruption will move there, for in that place it is difficult to reduce the hernia, just as with these special organs discussed hereinabove.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Even knowing that the surgery on the abdomen consists of four methods, if you provide stitches they can be common and suitable for wounds from other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other stitches communicate with each other or themselves in the abdominal stitch, perhaps even more directly within it itself.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And recommend each of you an examination and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So when the child is small and suffers from some cause of the hernia, it becomes difficult to reduce that; either because of its diminutive size or when the hernia swells due to cold air:
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	So when water is poured in, now that you have cut and submerged the enema cloth alone or squirming it into place with hands dipped in water along with ginger, pepper, spices, and ointments applied to ensure the inflammation inside resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some measures have been taken in which water has entered for the resolution of inflammation; and it is better than pure water alone.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	So when the inflammation is resolved, then moisten the intestine in the water where it has been placed with lavender and marshmallow (the cause being slight), for that helps to soothe the interior of the body.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If you manage to release the inside of it for this treatment, then divide the rupture into small parts with a tool on which incisions have been made.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial sentence translates as follows in English line by line:
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of that tool, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One sharp bone fragment, and the other not acute, and a subtlety that is not of tendon, whereby one has become blunt or dull at this joint.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the child is increased and comes out of the intestine, it'thy reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if possible above water, for better healing that way.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	May when the disruption is wide open and occurs in the lower abdomen area, where you make the hernia protrude on their thighs, and place cushions under them so that your head rests above it; if it's located below the stomach, then put a pillow under his/her chest and armrests.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Here comes the first sentence for translation: If disruption is in one of the parts of the abdomen, then stop your thinking and consider it momentarily so that what'dicted can either come out or stay put within its place.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	When it is necessary that water be applied in large pains and bleeding, do so accordingly with the conditions of these great pains and this flowing blood.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In minor illnesses, stop what you have prepared for treatment and position the minister between your most painful parts; this tongue holds everything together in its mouth and adjusts the lips of the patient, as well as addresses any cause that may require suturing from here to there.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here is the line-bymediate translation of each sentence from medieval medical treatise:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And where the needle is not fixed in any of the patient' extrinsic limbs as far down their body to prevent flesh from separating and for dirt (impurity) not to attach itself before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Not for extended period of stitching so that the patient is not hindered in healing (consolidation).
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These surgical needles are placed carefully in the small wounds, and it suffices for their stitching either an individual pin or a group of them to secure those areas.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	May the second stitch be common: and it is that you gently insert a needle into which thread from both ends of the thighs and upper arms, using delicate skill with thinness and thickness on the hook where the string is fastened.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has entered these four extremities (hands and feet), reduce the sharpness of that portion from which you are taking it out, in order for the wound to be sewn with a piece of cloth as strong linen below this half-cut area, so that the suture will also serve as additional reinforcement.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When there is a gap between any of the stitches in this part (the body), it measures the thickness of its bulk.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitching knows how to heal men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And has already sutured the child who was afflicted in their abdomen, which contained a large worm within an egg (possibly referring to tapeworm), and whose intestine had protruded two palms from the lodgment site of the thread/needle; hence you have reduced that hernia.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And in the spaces of fifteen days or thereabouts, it has been consolidated and healed, with care taken for movement to prevent stiffness over time; such treatment ensures that they regain their natural disposition as best as possible within these five weeks.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E the other doctors had not healed it; and by miracle fire, neither did they relieve that wound in its place where oil was not applied nor any medicine used for treatment, but sometimes touched overnight twice a day with honey dipped into water within which the fire cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two types of stitches according to Paracelsus's account.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with needlework of the vertebrae, and insert the spit-fired thorn from one section to another.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters into the navel and in that portion where you have inserted the thread according to length, as far as all of it is consumed by the body whole; place the point of the needle also at the other end part of this portion directed towards the opposite extremity of my flesh.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have felt that entrance, then make another passage in the extreme parts of this body segment from here to there; and let the entry point for the needle be on the other side of this area.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When a point enters into your entry, which allows that same entrance to enter the cavity at the tip of the limb where it is already inside what belongs there for this entire thing to go in together.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Here begins the treatment from this side of the body and places it at that end, piercing through which needle is then inserted into that same place in another area where you previously made an incision; take out that very one now lying there.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And apply some medication and another kind of it within what you have used so far according to that which has been shown, for example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suture technique is that you sew the skin with which hairs grow on it, so as to stitch up a wound in the extremity part of the tailbone area, and let that other bandage stay inside until the dressing is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second specialty of self-stitching that Gualia daily speaks about and recommends is what you should sew yourself with natural materials as recommended by healers; they apply one other' extrême, and another on their corresponding extremity, doing so according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Where you keep the needle at your designated part of departure, and make it pierce through that portion in that spot, and rotate the needle so that while doing this, it penetrates from two points on each side of the navel; thus:
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Here they direct the swolthy joints to rotate and allow fourteen humors from within their body compartment into the opposite parts of the limbs through these openings in two terminal segments of the vessels:
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This stitching is better than ordinary sewing and it's from which we remember the healing process.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Galla
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	May the needle be straightened with two pins on it so that you can insert these into several stitches of those whose bellies are sewn together, and start at an inserted needle in which case: then make this pierce inside another suture following them who have their entrails woven together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the belly'dict location (belly), it is understood that herein to sew becomes difficult compared with other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the application of medicine for infirmity be judgment on other illnesses.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is when you continue to treat the recent swelling present since that changes it, and return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; afterward pause over that skin tissue covering.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the seed, then pause over that area with this cloth where you are currently inside to make hard and leather fields; they will be consolidated as wards for other diseases within which it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	May you not have medicines present at this very moment; then place them where they are just now, allowing the body to start healing itself for today and night as long as you teach it how while using these remedies whenever ailments become simple when no other medicine is readily available.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin may spread to the main limbs, then immediately submerge wool in warm or scented oil and apply it between the joint spaces where legs meet hips, keeping pressure there for as long as possible within these areas of movement.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, they slowly worsen each day, and if the obstruction has reached its cavity, that part becomes blackened hard as a knot, especially when it occurs inside the condition of you.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what is gross from within (the intestines) heals faster than what lies in the small bowels, indicating a belief possibly related to digestion and absorption of medicines or food for different conditions located within these body parts.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to cure the one about which it has been called "gout," for in that vessel there lies much fluid and because of its large size within; as well due to the subtlety of its veins, and proximity to the nature of nerves – all these factors make healing challenging.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what proceeds from the soil is cloth (referring to medical treatment using natural materials), you will obtain that which is fresh and use it as directed in your pure, refined manner when reducing swellings manually.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	May it be that space has passed and blood or black bile was created therein; if so, press firmly upon the place where darkness appears to exist, in order for the fluid (bodily humors) to flow out through veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when you inflamed it within the hernia (budel).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When you injure the intestine and it is sought to restore in healthy homes (the abdomen), because that which was causing pain in their belly due to percussion of a lance, being an old scab/worm infestation with fistula formation inside, suffering from handling and movement.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Now you apply the treatment to him and it may cease if not yet confirmed in his healing process; otherwise continue until that area is strengthened where health returns and recovery site solidifies.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when a skilled practitioner inserts large pads into the balloon (the bulge), they are asked that you grip tightly with these; and adjust your lips around those inserted in the mouth of the patient, so that when you clamp down on them, their head remains attached but does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Return rest for one shape at a time and do not cease until another is formed as per the quantity of all humours within.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Return that to the soil and crush those attached caps within it, so that the intestine becomes healed inside the cavity; and do not cause harm or injury to anyone by means of malady.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced by something from within these animal parts of him; you grasp its extremity with a needle and make it detached, then cover its extremity with fine thread, wrapping this around what'dict beast part inside his body. You insert this thread into the lanced area along with other pins attached to that same piece of linen or wool used for piercing, thereby reducing the disruption caused by such an injury.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This incision for sewing is not our primary means of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the child is large and wide, mainly if it's in one of the small intestines, then it will not be eliminated easily, nor can its healing occur completely here (in this location).
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You understand that when all young and apostematic become weakened (envenomed) as old or aged people do, an ulcer forms; it is not consolidated nor does the arm detach entirely from anywhere in any body part – everywhere thereafter a fistula develops. Here comes the source sentence to translate:
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	E fistula according to truth is a tightly woven, hard, white fabric that does not cause pain and where the curegility occurs as in the healing of penance; hence they call it 'the coarse grating,' i. e., pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	When it is in moist conditions and gets wet easily, and when such dampness disappears within some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved here, it's scant and heavy, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here's the line by line translation:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes, and their symptoms are the subject of medical treatment in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Once you have made an effort to understand this treatment for fistula, which occurs through surgery on the abdomen.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore this one of these ulcers that is according to the current illness belongs to diseases hard to cure and not receiving treatment, engages in work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth of the ulcer that does not reach these places which are mentioned herein, and you wait and hope for its healing, and wish to gain knowledge about it, then take linen or iron as a trial, and if the ulcer after rectification proceeds further downward, inquire with this person.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then seek that subtle lead (which lifts up and corrects the curvature of your body).
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an abscess with frightening symptoms on it, you cannot attempt to heal over it yourself.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then apply the poultice over them with their own ointments and through these others draw moisture away from those areas using your hands, which hold onto it tightly (emphasis on grasping).
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood over all these causes and seen them plainly stated, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: for you consider whether it is an apparent fistula close by or distant joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of those places where blood flows.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And when it is dried out as directed by the physician of your body, and what remains therein that has come from corrupt flesh or decayed tissue within its channel, either formed in the organism itself or in a fragment/particle (and appearance), heals whatever can be restored.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May the fistula be deep-rooted and secondarily ruptured; then cover that which is inserted into it as far as possible with your instrument, purify all of its corrupt flesh with medicated poultices wrapped in cloths, and administer those inside these wrappings within the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped firmly.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	When some humors that have entered for several days into the cavity of the fistula due to decay, medicine acts quickly and removes all such humors from there.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Return that which is inside it with ointment because those produce healthy flesh within while being cured.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	May it not heal with this remedy, then you will need to cauterize that second one we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the cause of fistula is bone and sinew (body structure), then you must certify this, investigate further as recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any potential causes related to veins or nerves or main limbs when we have discussed.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	May it be that your bones are discovered and there is any decay or blackness, then treat the area where the decay resides entirely; take care of what inside carries life within so that its essence can heal fully.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If the patient is not healthy and full of humidity in their bowels as they used to do, then you will understand that you have not yet reached the total cure of corruption; accordingly, carefully and meticulously perform the action on them again for purification at this time, and restore what remains.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed (the patient), eat; but if not, understand that the corruption exists in the deep recesses of the body and has not been addressed yet, so you must now seek to remedy that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bones are decayed or damaged (les os corromput), it is within your power to extract them (es petit), then use delicate forceps for extraction (lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils).
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If there is a bone obstruction, then very carefully extract all of them without causing any damage to your strength or health.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May if there is any cause of dampness involved in these humors, and within their understanding they have no fear or mistake; then you should inspect those ligaments or bones here present, breaking them up (possibly referring to the treatment involving fragmentation).
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	May you not be prepared with stones for your bones of the hour (bone setting or adjustment), then rest upon the bed where grass is soaked and sprinkled, place that thereon which moistens into whose cavity those very bones made from flesh and sinew are contained; keep this wetness to prevent it from hardening, and ensure the section you have inscribed in your treatment remains intact.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having (have), if there is fear, pause over it covered in oil for three days above the wound or submerged container of Egyptian linseed, or within any other type of fat from fats solidified by heat; when those bands are tightened around them, and their bones become separated from each other due to these constrictions.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	May it be that your bones are also hanging like those of the cambac or coyssa, and if from there you have spoiled your face as much as possible, then let this remedy run for only so long until such time when that blackness (impairment) and corruption can no longer retreat inside it, at which point restore its youth.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	May it be that if harm from within is a great part of the matter, and decay has already reached the bone marrow, then it becomes necessary to close that and all back into the place where corruption arrived, so as healing can occur inside where such damage took place.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And you recommend that they go into their coccyx so as to ease and assist in your work.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Foc un home jove for any state beyond thirty years old, to which you inflict pain in his groin, and the putrefied matter is within the body where it has reached the groin, and this substance forms severe abscesses without external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And now the fever spreads within it due to the errors of doctors inside which infection occurs, and its cure takes place with pauses while the focused fistula is opened; there are burnings devices used on this wound where all patients were previously soaked with poultices and applied moisturizing substances.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many years of treatment by doctors and not in the body fluids but within the arts (crafts or skills), he was called a master.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then insert the attempt into one of those organs, so that it reaches the bone (or possibly referring to a surgical procedure where an instrument is placed within).
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Return and examine quickly those instruments, bringing them for all parts of the limb.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And now you have jawed and dissected within those parts wherein the bone has been broken, and that corrupt joint was disarticulated; it had already become rotten and decayed inside one of its cavities where something entered.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And when I discover water that was previously found and prepared for me in bone,
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And if it was not in the bone but that very decay which had been cut off and sealed up, then there already has been a fracture broken down.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And place your hand over for long-term restoration of health through conservative medical measures; this is not achieved yet.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Return and investigate on top of the second bone above the initial discovery, and continue to abrade decay in the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	When I have applied the necessary remedy for this patient'dict illness and healing has not yet been restored, continue treatment until recovery is achieved.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And now you discover another measure and carefully restore the rest of it piece by piece until fully restored within an inch of its bone marrow, extracting what is needed from medicine, thereby strengthening ligaments and healing fractures.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	It is not necessary repetition in the operation of Lu and his section unless for the disposition of Lu'se fluid balance and their tolerance to it, as they will proceed throughout all hours due to excessive involuntary defecation caused by malady.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so heals the whole body, and nothing remains of hardened flesh; for it is good that his disposition in his own body returns to normality, and restores its vital force back into itself—and converses within himself without causing him discomgy or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May if the bone protrudes in the joint already pried up by it: then take hold of that tendon and stretch it out at the extremity of that bone, commanding a servant to extend it further; pull apart those woolen threads one from another (i.e., thick ones), keeping them separate while you place your hand over the flesh wherein you intend to cut so as not for this reason to lead the flesh astray outside its proper parts and boundaries.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When a blow or tablet is applied for decency, it's allowed when the sword does not cut into corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	When the saw is used on the damaged area little by little, and if it appears within the cavity of bone decay but not in its emergence to feeling, then take care with the saw again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are rotten and not prominent, it is one continued division into the other; whereupon decay occurs throughout all parts of the body or in a specific location, apply bandages quickly, and appoint someone to cut away the corrupted flesh from that which has been continuously divided. And if there's damage at this spot due to continuous cutting (the process described as "serratura"), it is their responsibility to address it immediately with care and assign tasks accordingly for its removal or treatment.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And when the screw is in place at the location of the decay a small one, just as we have said before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If there is a deformation in the joint, cut out that defective joint and saw at it with your own hands from another part of the body where it continues to be damaged or affected.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If decay is in the continuous flow of joints, it is not due to logic but rather disease or dysfunction.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or breastbone, it's difficult; but if you seek where that corruption appears to you and remove that which can be done by your hands according to any suitable arrangement for doing so, then correct whatsodictates this within yourself when no external force of vein or nerve causes harm.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Here is the translation line by line:
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Be aware that this operation concerns the specificity of the tool from which you are operating; when you have great knowledge and long experience in these arts, as well as witnesses for diseases herein mentioned, then you already possess what is necessary for healing according to your skills at all times.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And when forming the body in this chapter, you shall pause with simple instruments for those that are needed for your procedure which will be experienced by others as well.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw (The form or shape of the surgical tool referred to here
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of other scalpel/saw: Here, it refers to another type or model of a
Forma de autra serra:	Form (shape) of the other surgical tool (scalpel or saw): This line indicates that
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of the other scalpel/saw is large: Here, it describes a specific model or size of
Forma de ray:	Form (shape) of light beam: This line likely refers to an
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head (tip) of this light beam follows the shape of a star's crown/crown-like form, and its points are shaped like staple or tack heads: Here, it appears to describe how practitioners might mimic certain shapes when using an instrument for therapy. The "ray" may refer metapthyically to light used in some traditional healing practices that involve
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It does not convene but rather they are frictioned over the joints when corrupted or where there is a large gap: Here it explains an alternative treatment method that might involve applying pressure ("frictioning") to areas of discomfort, possibly for healing purposes in this medieval context. The "boca gran ampla" (wide mouth) could refer to opening up the affected area wider
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of other saws/blades mentioned earlier: This line likely asks or refers back to previously discussed forms
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of smaller saws/blades possibly compared with others in the context: Here,
Forma de razori lat:	The shape (or form) of a raptorial blade or tool likely mentioned previously
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape of other saws/blades (decentent) is a curved piece made from this metal and the hand's fingers are also shaped for holding: Here it explains how another tool, possibly used by medical practitioners in that era ("fayta"), has been crafted to facilitate handling. The "curved" blade or implement (arc de lu pus sobira) would have a specific shape designed for its intended use and the shaping of fingers into a g
Forma de lu:	Shape of Luke (assuming "Lu" refers to an
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of a razor with concave curvature typically implies that it has been designed for closer shaving or specific styling, perhaps aim
Forma de razori autra subtil:	An alternative subtle form of a razor could refer to an elegantly crafted blade used not just for gro
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another curved-tip razor might indicate the use of such design elements in specific areas or contexts where precision is key. This
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	A small, tentacle-like appearance suggests that this form could be associated with delicate shaving techniques for sensitive skin, implying an ergonom
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of the cutting teeth by which bones are embedded implies a specialized function or material that interacts with skeletal structures. This could be relevant to medical instruments, dentistry tools for
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Other shapes of smaller cutters might refer to fine surgical implements used in delicate procedures requiring precision and care when handling
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of another cutting instrument appears like a spike where its tip is employed to slice through bone structures. These are displayed in specific locations within the skeletal framework—perhaps referring to orthopedic surgical tools or other medical devices used for precise interventions involving bones, such as: "Another type of sharp cutting tool resembles a spike and its tip is utilized herein during osteotomies; these implements are show
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the cutting tool resembling a spoke that conducts through bone, may imply certain types of drills or sawing instruments used in surgical procedures to cut into and remove sections from skeletal structures. Such tools are specialized for orthop
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The tip of the tool is thusly angled with a sharp point, which indicates that it may be used to make precise cuts or incisions—possibly during procedures requiring fine detail such
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and somewhat like all the causes that have been mentioned of wounds and cuts and sawdust use.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the joints of limbs and bone fractures.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are swolthy or because of an intrinsic cause or due to external causes; when you treat that corruption with these medicines and the cure does not relieve, then at times the corruption wanders in a limb where no injury is caused by it, which requires you to insert said limb into this potion so that the humors escape from there, preventing them from leading death or greater damage.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the name of that person, it is because their limb has been blackened where they have been beaten and rubbed with soot until this darkness penetrates into the body part being examined; hence you find them in your knowledge.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or percussion is in the affected limb, then you will incise the limb and not leave spaces for decay to enter into it furthermore.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you have access to the cavity, then cut that part of it from where heat rises in the fireplace and do not leave space for decay inside there.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that occurs within your arm inside the crotch at the joint, then insert it into the crook of your arm there.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another decay occurs and I send the cough to it, then in that case it is the death of phlegm; administering an additional cause for healing depends on virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When a part of the body resembles its own and deterioration occurs within it, then you must incise that area into one of its nodes (nuts).
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you climb up the leg, then cut through it entirely in that area.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May you enter into the region of flesh, then incisions are made on the cushion within the joint junction of the flesh.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If decay has already reached the navel, it is not healing in this place but rather expulsion of morbus (disease/infection), and you must remove the morbus to death (or elimination).
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	E the act of inserting or sawing your limb is that you tighten one ligament at once in the part where you wish to insert/saw, and another above it on the spot; extend the minister'se two legged device over the parts immediately around it. Then separate the flesh between these two bands until all of the flesh has been exposed; afterwards apply or saw accordingly.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is placed over all parts such that it does not touch the affected area and drains away any established leakage or adhesion infection, here comes:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If you encounter bleeding due to sanction when performing work, then cauterize the wound immediately, or place some grains of restraining powder on the blood; and return it within your medical care until complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that affected limb to its ligament and tendon joints, and take care of it so that it heals properly.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And advise them to enter their home on their foot, this matter that you have recommended and which has occurred in your patient' extrinsically due to excessive heating assembled around the fireplace.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When decay occurs initially within the patient'dictum where you must attend entirely to the foot,
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And so that home prepares for its patients to go towards the limb where they suffer from pain and heat, insert this cure into the joint, apply pressure therein, thus healing occurs.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago that same doctor had made a mistake in this matter of mine concern.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now it has come to me, and so I am compelled to reflect upon that excess water which rests above the surface of my medicines; purify the body' extraneous matter; for this superfluous is not repercussed within its place but goes elsewhere.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When he returns and comes back into his land and informs me that this person has prepared their entire body completely and is cured,
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This sentence does not have been applied as a healing aid for what has affected this illness, but it serves as its symbol and corresponding action:
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of care for the belly and quality of enema with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscess forms within the cartilage of joints and its space is prolonged inside until a collection of disease occurs, then it gets cut off and perforated; an infection ensues (infectious arthritis), whereupon the affected area is dressed with linen as swab if available, using thin cloth undernez your hand to avoid reaching down into any potential corruption. It has not touched bone or nerves nor caused a fistula; one applies pressure gently and does not suffer from these complications.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Even if there is a protrusion within the decay inside any body part, it's called an abscess and cannot be cured immediately.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is that you must immerse that catheter entirely in water wherein it has been turned and mainly when made thin like a cloth, so that it does not stick to its site due to decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	May you hope that the bowels will stick and that this decay has not occurred due to any previous action, in which case care for it with a clyster (enema).
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Return that which has come out, and apply it there for so many days until the curve is straightened and modesty regained.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the ulcer does not tolerate Egyptian medication or ashes of charcoal, then you will administer that with water and honey mixed three times over, and similarly for its venereal part: mix it with wine and honey also, because of the property of honey to cleanse and wash away, making urine adhere more.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have taken some waters and find that the belly has become softened, then use this to cleanse any meat in it which causes discomfort.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And when hot wax drips and dissolves that oil, or you administer some medicines and ointments which already have their properties in the intestinal tracts; what happens is that these substances are cleansed from there.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the fluid from the rectum is not received by the catheter where it should be introduced, then gradually increase that small amount thereof and pause in a wrapped (or covered) Egyptian or basic wax envelope until increased enough for proper introduction.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	When the suppository is large, then you should insert your lips into it and place as much of its quantity inside the rectum where it will be used for cleansing purposes (usually referring to a medicinal enema).
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifices through which his bowels pass are elevated above their place in him so that they run downward quickly upon being constricted by the curvature of the body'thy flesh, when these organs tighten within this curve-shaped space created inside them.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to dry the moisture within the body as you wish, then pierce that which prepares your limb for wrapping with care so that nothing remains in its way inside.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And apply consolidating medicines that are suitable for the space around the patient, to extend those already in contact with their clothing.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When someone is above the belly button, it relaxes them throughout the hour as long as moisture that has been adjusted in their abdomen does not come out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	In order that you may know whether what flows from the bowels is good or bad, hot or cold, properly digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	When you have thus considered the location of that swelling, and whether or not it hurts in there, and if so, is it an abscess?
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medicine is prolonged in this manner, and the material that adheres to the orifice of the sinus sticks on it, if you apply lubrication at any time during the day when said substance has stuck, after removing the dirt (or soiling), change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that from the sinus one can expand spaces where viruses reside quietly, do not despair of him/her because healing will occur in those places inhabited by spirits conducithy to his health and upon which discomforts arise for you today; these are precisely where cures shall take place.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If bile from the ventricle accumulately for days is brought forth by belching, then you know that it does not adhere; and if delayed adherence of bile causes prolonged illness, adjust in purgation using medicines, and when they are moist both within their substance and essence, dry them with linseed oil applied during over-administration for excess dietary indulgence.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here is the line-by extran in English:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when it seems in that manner while the patient is braced and anointed with wax (or honey), using lime as needed to prevent sticking or burning; apply powder over the melt, placing cloths soaked in wine above where they were inserted after being engorged.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations for each line:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling persists and is not healed by this treatment, you will understand that the corruption lies in its foundation, and already have made inquiry into the bones or hard body parts (like limbs), where it has spread; then apply cauterization as per instruction from above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment for paring of skin and nails cracked or cut with finger addition and cutting off sections.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have applied the moisture that we discussed in division and do not hinder your care, then return what has been washed away by water to the skin surface entirely, and apply treatment with this fluid therewith; for such cauterization promotes healing swiftly.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the wound heals, then external additions to the ulcer will be absorbed into the parts damaged by itching/pain from undernethy (the cautery), where you press upon that subtle angle of the point which pierces the flesh; thus compelling said pain outward and through your hand. Then, taking care over what has been consumed within so far due to corrosive medicines injections while it was healing, ensure proper bandaging (ointment) for its complete recovery.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If decay is present in the bone beforehand, then you must insert it and extract it therein, for no time will heal such a broken bone within him.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the hernia and protrusion go down into it (the cavity), then cut that part where its memory is presumed to be located, and ensure that which goes inside becomes healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May it be that with percussion or incision on the tongue's edge, and in such painful moments when you decide to lance the groin, dry out the wound area around the sharp pubic bone below (across from the navel), ensuring not for the cutaneous layer of flesh beneath the tongue piercing to enter into the body tissue already inflamed by gout; and take care that this place yields fluid when squeezed, which may indicate excess superfluous skin-like membrane above it (the site where pain originates), causing further discomfort in cases related to natural adjustment of such extra layer.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May adjust it herein among the most robust men of our time, for both in flesh and bone as well as in skin, there is none like him/her.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When it is cold in them (referring to a body part), or when they are born from the stones of their own flesh, these things occur at joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not one born in acorns of this thing become sickly; and he who is born at the joints becomes ill-tempered.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	From those who are overly fatty (individuals with excessive body weight), their section is tender, and it is that you must insert the one belonging to them into a stone for relief in the hips.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May those born at the joint' extrémity find healing difficult; therefore keep watch over their abdomen.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May happen to those born in this place; who have inserted themselves into the body of him/her, and placed one of those available saws on them appropriately, taking care that what is inside becomes healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May consolidation that occurs between their movements or due to birth defects of the home (body), or from childbed treatment/combustion of focus, and thus keep closing that solidification until they return to their body' extrinsic form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here's the translation for each line:
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	When the suppuration seems solid on your hand'supreme, then wipe that putrefaction as it is prepared and conform to the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From indecentness, they become swolthy (varicose).
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	When varicose veins are present, and the swolthy (thickened/enlarged) yellow humors flow into the limbs' cavities, primarily in the legs of travelers and workers, they become more noticeable therein.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now when you administer the purge of cholera blackness for some intervals with an aim to forcefully remove it from the body, bring blood back into the patient'thy inferior vein (basilic).
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Might the cure for them be done in two ways: one is that it should be made clear and drawn out that sick black bone, and the other method is raising the vein and extracting it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the patient according to this method: Insert a cushion under them so that their thigh is resolved (healed), which comes from within the bedsheet, and secure the water-cake bedcloth at the upper part of the thigh where it joins with the knee area using one bandage; also dry up veins in various locations depending on how much you want to drain, holding their hands.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return that one (possibly referring to an ingredient or remedy), and command it/them not to consume foods causing black bile production.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cauterization when veins are filled and blood flows upwards into the malady area.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation according to this method: you who raise the cushion of the thighs (if they are raised by muscle contraction), place it in water and securely wrap the cushion with wet cloth around until swelling subsides, or if exercised without bathing at present, causing injury to the limb.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	When the cushion is placed at the back of the vein either long or near its end in the patient's leg (or heel), you must draw it downward along the vessel to drain, or when located on the sole of the foot, there too pull it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Here comes the first source sentence: Return your hand over the area and cleanse all along where that pain appears, as it happens when that disease progressively worsens into blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	When you remove it from under the neck (the throat), take that white thread back which is tied around its string (presumably a medical procedure related to sutures or ligatures).
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Return your tool so that it is raised and supported by the cushion you have placed undernethyour head (assuming "codena" refers to neck), and hold this instrument one inch from the top of a lion's horn, if necessary for treatment purposes.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Return another section of that same section by three fingers and rub the crotch area where blood enters from below up to above until it appears reddened.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey and lift, then insert a double-ended needle firmly and draw it out, or alternatively insert the lance quickly into its path and rotate your hand throughout the entire area where it has entered.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If it is not fixed (set), but if broken, it must be lifted with difficulty and has come upon the waist due to that harm, causing suffering.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the entire atmosphere outside has become saturated with vapor and oil soaked in water and not covered by oil, then take care of what is inside to heal it.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vit has contracted and caused twisting at these parts, which we have already mentioned, then cut into that part where there is contraction throughout its entire area of twist and envelopment, and place your hand inside so it can be elevated upwards to lift it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient that has fallen ill with it:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an egg:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Not allowed to be filled with air as the unguent nor is it sharp pain for which blood vessels could not handle, and because of its large hardness even if subtle, they will insert the vein due to its subtleness; there are excessive amounts present in us.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein in the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the hollows of those lands where Al-Ateg (presumably a reference to Avicenna, an influential medieval physician) lived on Arabian and Indian arid lands with little fertility, where neither grass nor herb grows.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When it occurs in other parts of the body than where cushions are placed.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The translation of the source sentence is as follows: The putrefaction in him (the patient) comes quickly with arsenic that enters his intestines, worms and other creatures born between the intestine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And here is the sign of the patient'se reception, which acutely inflames in the area where you have applied it; return this location back into place (i.e., restabilize), and begin the infusion from that vein apparent for its rooted nature like a plant stem.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, cover it with one of those iron balls that form part of two dragons', and do not smell or touch that metal hanging from the cushion.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	When as many treatments are given for any cause beyond the parts of the body, you enclose them in lead and spices that thing over it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the pain extends further, cut a portion of it and wrap it up; do not enclose that which has come out within wherein there is pus—if you indeed remove what' extruded, once done so will contract into flesh again and cause abscess formation and ulceration in the wound.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that treatment which is increased and extracted gradually, enter it out of the body to prevent causing pain in any part of the limb.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein in some men who are of its length in the forearm and fingers, it has already reached me that one has touched twenty finger spans.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is inserted into the hour of his medical care, then insert the needle into the abdomen and penetrate that long tract in the body cavity until all the fluid present within has been drained out; administer putrefaction from this place for several days as part of medicine treatments. Carefully attend to worms at such times.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes has been blocked, mostly when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and comes from these blockages, here they are:
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore take care of that ailment as we have discussed in division and about the fluid mentioned earlier.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the worms generated under the skin it is called disease of cattle (bovine).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in no land foreign to us malady borne by cattle due to long wandering and having few rests; it affects the whole body, ascending upwards along with movement, showing its signs on each limb within which breaks through the belly button (navel) and exits out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And it is through the generation of them that various humors, worms and snakes along with lice and roundworms are produced in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	When there is fear due to the patient'thy malice, when they walk and rise on their feet and reach the belly, their liver becomes inflamed within them, and causes discomfort that worsens over time.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	So when you intend to heal and extract it (the patient), only then do so with your walking apparatus and the feeling of touch upon them; after that, where necessary apply what is on top of them and tighten firmly above them, and dry out over there while removing it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If struck upon the flesh and not bandaged, then halt your burning instrument above where it resides within that place; for the greater cause of fear is decay in which it deteriorates its dwelling, as you have mentioned hereinbefore.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May if that being reaches the upper part of the belly tightness over it becomes severe and on top of this you apply pressure to him/her; remove whatever harmful substance has entered into his body through medicine evacuation, while avoiding certain foods causing decay.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From above suffering worsens.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is well-known in our land and it causes pain that appears in the upper parts of the body; this condition can be transferred from one limb to another (member).
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And if you already see that second one who recommends it to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called upon a sick woman to a village, and found her arm with a small inflammation in the vein of the arm; you pressed it for an hour, seeing that it was moving along as if driven by a worm from here to there, possibly because she is pregnant when walking around.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And now it enters that pain into this place and contracts within the muscle here, holding for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Return correction in the other limb until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Recommend that I rotate my body as much as possible, and it is too remarkable in terms of exchange within oneself and movement from one part of the body to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E you already had seen moisture in our hems according to that mannerism, but you have seen pins which cause pain when they are moved between body parts.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not there be water in the veins when it is with a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Even you do not think it'sin watermelon alone but because the woman was of a weary body and with exposed legs and veins, in this appearance her windiness becomes apparent.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have a cold body with congested veins following this treatment.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to heal the patient and they feel that pain, at this point it may seem like your help is not apparent when we have been discussing with them; however, now stand firm over him/her gently and dry out inside where there might be effusion of inflammatory fluid, then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Mayhaps if you do not time the sweats (indicating when they occur), then at once attend to that part of the body and apply what comes out, those which expel winds in their secretions, as well as pills foul-smelling or medicinal/herbal ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of pus (or abscess).
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Say they are varied according to the species and their positions in which we strike them, for that is why those with large points, small points, concave, hollow, hard ones are solid; and of those with three angles, as well as where tongues reside, and on which stands.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here is the translation line by line:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the serpent bite enters into him/her and penetrates the bone above the brain, it becomes intensely acidic through vigorous action, causing blindness, dizziness, groaning in the mouths, inflammation of the tongue along with questions about language comprehension and disintegration of thought, accompanied by vomiting resembling that caused by water entering his/her body. Here comes a sentence describing symptoms following a snakebite:
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if it appears in your legs, do not attempt healing or extraction of the stone unless absolutely necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the senses of the body are present in the chest so that they belong to the left breast and have been fixed therein for a long time without cause; this is not due to cold air, but their movement resembles that of the limbs, crawling like black bugs or locusts. This trembling makes one'se hands shiver (shake), chest heat (feverishness), sudden fearfulness and fainting—hence understand that death is upon you wholeheartedly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lungs have been struck by dust from insects and the parts of the chest where air enters are stimulated, the lung turns a different color, exhales great breath outwardly, and requires an influx of fresh air for respiration.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the swelling is in the belly where it resides in the waist and the pain comes from the small back bones, then there will be a great intense pain with breathing pains that do not affect all of the body' extrinsic musculature.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is a swelling in the stomach, then strong vomiting occurs from eating some spoiled food by the worms inside it.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If there is a swelling in the belly and it remains fixed in place, then some form of opening or separation may occur from mud, linen, or bagpipe (the material that has been disrupted), without hope for its extraction through this method.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the stone is in the bladder and urine has flowed out without cause, some processes may occur within the body parts where urine was expelled, causing pain in the abdomen; hence it'dicts that such condition can be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members also be with it as face, chest, and hip joints; shoulders and arms, spinal discs of both sides, shoulder blade, collarbone, thigh bone, kneecap (knee), wrist, elbow, ankle, and likeness to the limbs—are saved according to major dispositions when the lance does not damage veins or arteries nor is it venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend that I have seen of these teachings, so as by them to indicate the cure we seek.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is here in the patient's tear duct within their eye socket and nose bridge; extract it from another part of the body using other parts after purification with gold leaf from the auricle (earlobe), thus healing without harm to the location where extracted.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extract another spear from a healer that is in his eye socket here below (in the cheek area), gently touches it with slow blinking of the eyes, and this spear was hidden; only by holding onto its small part attached to the sword handle can one retrieve it. This represents sharp daggers taken by Turks who lack swords as weapons.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Senate is present, it does not occur in its own hall for an unfortunate incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extracted another poultice from a home Cresto that had been caught in the gallows, and it was an Arabic-made poultice; this is where I grasp them. And now they have pierced through there between two legs (likely referring to inserting needles for acupuncture), which has already sunk into the gallows of him/her; hence you gently insert your fingers, and extract that same poultice from there, thus healing the Cresto individual.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extraction from within another home that had been ensnared in their belly; and having considered that they would die because of it, I kept the hole open for XXX days without any change or cause arising concerning their arrangements, attended to what was extracted therefrom, and thus healed them, not falling ill at this place.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And you may find in this place where they catch flies between the two of them (the patient), and consolidate them there, placing fire above for some time until the fly is trapped at the opening of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man comes who has been bitten on his face and whose wounds have become infected but are not causing pain here, seeming to them as if they were coming from these places.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted from the body of their king who was seized in the heat at nose and had already descended into the seventh stage with everything hidden inside:
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And it is called in his care for healing with the use of the bandage within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And insert the location of action and digestion into where I have placed it securely so that above appears the site for cessation over which.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And not an accident significant occurred whereby the sickness reached that place; and you continued upon it with the cautery, for days on end without occurring any such event; strength was gained through this process while removing phlegm from within over intervals of several days until a day arrived when I felt my nose.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Now you rest your cautery above medicinal acute corrosive substance for a few days until it bursts out, and then apply that same thing onto the tip of the needle, which attaches itself firmly to the handle.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Here are the translations line by line:
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you recommend that I understand the quality of extraction from some herbs, in order for pauses here and now do not rule or indicate what has not yet been mentioned, which parts of this art and its definitions are beyond comprehension by me who am narrating.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The skilled physician compares little over movement, and about water where it is present; heavy operation new and unfamiliar tools must descend from external causes when sickness occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so it is said that legumes are not taken out of the limbs where they are inserted, but rather by one of two methods: either through the place in which they have been introduced, or contrary to the other divided section.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When someone is born into this place or enters it crudely through the flesh and becomes expelled from here,
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not obey the medicine during the time it is to be taken, then continue taking it for several days until the meat (the remedy) has been absorbed by your body and its exit from your system occurs.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	When something like this is stuck in the mouth and cannot be swallowed without help from you, then let her take that slowly over a few days or more frequently according to necessity, it has already been taken out by now.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey the treatment for more than three days, then continue piercing within the course of the ligament in that bone part until its cavity is further expanded under which place it can be extracted smoothly.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the thread has been fixed in the patient' extricated of their skull and is already progressing into one of these accidents they present, refrain from extracting it lest its stay within be appropriate to those days; if however the thread proceeds downwards towards the cerebrum (brain), death will not prolong.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the stone is not fixed on the bone there and does not enter into the joint cavity, but rises upwards through it for a few days without being caused by these accidents, then your engineering in both the junction of the stone and at that place must be.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is not motion and you do not extract (the patient), then administer balm in the circulation area of the sac with which we have applied as remedy, taking care that the place where they are healing remains so.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the stone has been affected within the body'dict and of feeling; then inquire about this pain which you feel nowadays, if such is felt by thee, thrust it away with an acute instrument to where convenience allows for its extraction from your being.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot lift him due to the constriction of the patient' extruded matter and his long tendons, for there are neither nerves nor veins here, then place on top where it can be enlarged so that extraction may occur.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you are holding the auricular (likely referring to blood vessels or perhaps limbs in this context), then tear apart the flesh where it is fixed throughout all parts of what remains after amputation, and use your artifice if you cannot remove the flesh from the detachment of these appendages and within their narrow entrails.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any location on it, then use your hand and forceps to remove all parts where there is inflammation; subtly maintaining that the extracted pus should not be broken apart and must remain within your difficult grasp for further treatment.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot cover that of your hour, then lie down for days until the parts in his circulation are purged out, and repeat this action as long as directed by him.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If your body has contrary flow of blood as we have mentioned in this chapter for healing, then you should provide that which we've discussed herein.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise into English:
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	So that you contract the belly to make it according to the shape in which the flame must be for the burning of the belly, as this may also benefit health.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If it is not within your power, then apply what you can manage through figures (i.dictions or methods).
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the stones that are taken out of place by others or those already begun to move within any division outside your body cause an aggravatio (protrusion), and as they often press against the cushion placed above, pull them; thus you grasp it again with varying force depending on how much strength is needed. After this action:
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then turn your blade according to opposition as if entering into the bone itself, and expand upon you yourself, removing that which has entered therein.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave that for several days until in ashes (implying allowing time for something or someone). Here is the line-by-line translation:
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is from the seed of arsenic that this comes about here, then you must take out what belongs there with force.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the sword has been struck and you wish to administer injections, then insert it therein if dull-tempered, with careful handling so that inside its cavity within the groin area of the sacrum, push this needle into place on command (of oneself/physician).
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	May it be that if the seat is concave, then you will push in there with such strength as to drive that into it; for when the seat is thus elevated by your forceful insertion, everything flows properly according to natural law and health returns to normality.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the patient'thy humors are inflamed, then you must contract their entire body where it is real (the affected area), if possible with water; and apply that which agrees best to them therewith when conveniently arranged for such treatment.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the chest, or abdomen, or bladder and it's pressing down so that you touch where there may be pain when touched (and possibly bleeding), then:
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of these forceps is as follows (with which you are pulling out the thighs):
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs, like saw blades when they take hold of the bed to prevent them from falling.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those arise special pains, large, small, and migratory ones according to the size of the humour excess (suggesting either blood or phlegm) in its quantity, as well as considering their extent within the body'se fluidity (perhaps referring to synovial fluid), and also taking into account bodily contraction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of thrust from this limb with pain as if caused by cold wind affecting the body inside it, and pressure applied to that dullness herein described:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The form of stimulation for dull body part:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	aychui cum rii pa sìalleja l'intramment di lui in la zigetta contena, et è trascossa addietro da accuia.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De surgery of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of which it is customary to cauterize, these are the ones that supply arteries for cutting (likely referring to blood vessels), said in hushed tones among scholthy men; herbs found on both sides at temple heights; and veins within two tear duct plexuses from twin flames called aspiring lightnings; cauterized vessel located where the forehead meets the chest, as well as vessels present in extremities of nose; guidewires are near the neck (likely referring to esophageal or gastric veins); and additional arteries found within both upper lips.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that have been punctured in the chest be dry; of those it is a cephalic one, and must be treated with wild garlic or other rams' tails: this people call "the vein of the whole body," and domestic clover for its treatment. This clover is called “chickweed,” which locals also refer to as “vena del ventre.” The arm veins, punctured over the fireplace, belong here; it's where injections are made – visible through appearance: chickweed venous matter, between these two arcs of blood.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh are three veins; one of those is where the curvature of the bone lies, following the wild branch; another is saphenous, located in the cushion' extrication site within the leg, which follows the wild branch as well. Here there are other like venous structures related to these ones.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of the veins that you have placed in the arteries is ancient and migratory, causing ulcers on the old wounds.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take up the cautery lance, and that is whoever it concerns themselves with; take them gently into the groin where the bladder empties into the pelvis (the urethra enters here).
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	When you raise your hand above and lift up the vein and artery in their respective parts, cutting through where they enter:
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	When the length of the intestine is equivalent to two fingers adjusted or enclosed, and it expands as much as you wish - this describes an appropriate measure for a segment of the intestine being assessed by feel alone in terms of size during examination:
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength at the base of the lungs and place therein what has been healed,
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the examination of his body parts, there was also an understanding and a process of cauterization for them.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	From the veins and arteries of our temple-like bodies, this ancient and harmful excess fluid extravasation comes up to us through overly abundant exudations from these vessels.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Accordingly, you perform that operation on their thigh as they contract it inside so that veins appear in accordance with sensation and indicate pulse rhythm through touch; at this point, your duty begins.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E prop tu eleva la coda desobser sobre la vena a les partides dessus, i intromet el fleübotomi inscident joas, e él va levantar la vena en seus; i esquadja aquella asse com els fets que he fet en las doass venades d'altra banda.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return the thigh bone to its position and pause there over the vein for an hour, pausing also on that spot where pressure is applied firmly until it heals inside.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And when they remember them (the patients), and of those the insight, and attach themselves to the common table.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	So, the practice of phlebotomy from the jugular vein is applied to the cerebral venous infections and migradictions old wounds on the face that exude pus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the protruding point where it stands on that vein and strikes upon you as either lean or another cause in its madness, and let your strength move according to how much you wish; also direct the rupture of the hernia until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the strength of both veins in the eyes be weakened by humors coming from their own bowels and bladders into the eyes, and facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the cautery is that it tightens the sinew on one bandage, and apply such to those very same ones; you stand upon its head (on top).
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it is time for a blepharoplasty (eyelid surgery), do so transversely along its length with small incisions made by the surgeon, and if done delicately, then the extremity of the patient' extrusion will not be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	When necessary for the flow of blood to increase from that place, rest on those spots and strengthen them by one night, then restore those places as well.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bleeder of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent sweat, as well as facial illnesses and migradictions that cause pain in the face, mainly when old age comes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the bleeding that he does is to tighten his chest and place it under your left hand so (as if placing) below the second vertebra in the neck where the vein will not be felt here, and blood flow begins immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you finally have your fingers on the small vial and make it run through the second chamber according to your need, and place that one there for healing purposes; thusly is restored balance of humors within the patient' extricated (from their system).
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of cauterization for wounds guide contraction and treatment of leprosy, as well as combating diseases and poisonous sores with accompanying hemorrhaging.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	When the quality of that patient' extrication is such that rheumatism tightens every joint in their spine, and it happens while standing on his head; here lies the physician above the malady’s neck, there stands a partition underneath him.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Return the vein to its long main branch gradually, and remove it as needed when directed for water infusion based on necessity; similarly treat other such veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Return the ligaments and strengthen the vessels to prevent arterial constriction from becoming focused on, allowing them entry into the womb where they can heal together with their offspring (the fetus).
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The action of cauterizing the veins with forceps alleviates small blisters and sores in the mouth and corrupt gums and bad ulcers present in the nose and throat area, which are considered harmful to health:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And as for that surgery of theirs, it tears open the malady'setup before you and straps tightly around your neck with a bandage; another demonstration by either one of them through darkness about each vein from which blood flows—one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. It is in these small venous vessels that it may be found, hence why I proceed to investigate internally at once.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	May you doubt it at any time and do not know which one of them is the greater or more visible among those signs; then understand that you are referring to the most significant sign out of these indications, and pay attention to its manifestation on their body.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears as if veins are in the upper lip area (possibly indicating a varicose condition or similar issue), here comes the line translated into English:
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May it be customary for some to insert into the lips' spaces where veins are located.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the veins from behind your tongue that help with opening the parietal (skull) incision to forehead incisions and those related to throat inflammation (uvula), as well as mouth diseases, be properly placed during craniotomy procedures.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And as for the quality of intubating those areas where the malady is between your thighs down to the sole of the foot, lift the tongue of the patient and observe it occasionally from one vein's entry point and the other' extrinsic venous entrance; noting that in each case when declivity occurs towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then apply pressure on your hand where you do not exceed its limits over those veins that are about to burst forth from the swelling; soon after these will arise and be visible vessels of blood flowing outwards.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that have been cauterized in the groin are located where circulation occurs throughout all men, and their cauterization is performed according to two methods: either insert a cherry or an olive into subtlety declining motion for adjustment; alternatively use small cutters, applying pressure with fingers if necessary. This represents our method.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is why they come together and mix these subtle and refined substances according to the extent of the veins, as well as their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of foot surgery using mirror:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs an olive operation:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This surgical instrument is of lesser length and subtle touch, appropriate for the delicate operation on small veins that contain clear fluids within them.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of the basilic vein extraction be one of three veins: when it is drawn out from behind the back and shoulder bones, as well as where your hand touches your stomach and chest, holding their hands tightly in place.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When convened with the bloodsucker extractor, when extraction is done and maintained above fear in that person, even now their artery has been opened, if an error occurs during puncture of the vessel by the bloodsucker extractor, it will be inserted into that artery, causing flow backs of bile, so that one does not bleed out while being sucked on by such a device.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear for obvious manifestation, then you should keep what was placed and change to another, or secure some kind of barrier at this place; where that is evident on the end of the arm, treat it with cautery here today as we discussed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the surgery on your patient, then bend down at the narrowed part of the arm where you come into contact with the location of the pulse; place a bandage over their wrist (where they have hands); secure both arms and patent the veins that are concave in shape during the operation as we discussed. Also keep an eye on palpation through the spaces around the artery' extraneous space,
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you tighten the sinew that you have previously stretched at this spot, it expands there and thus becomes inflamed; therefore, address that (it is likely referring to treatment or management of an issue caused by such inflammation).
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see blood flowing during the incision with a lancet used for children's arteries, then be careful that it is of an artery; and if your fingers touch upon this spot while they are long gone over there (the distant area), place them firmly on top. And should the bleeding stop momentarily, move your hands vigorously to ensure continued cessation of blood flow—do so with strength in both arms when it has detached.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard your patient's chest from moisture and let it not worsen for the coming days while healing occurs.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May it not be separated; and if you do not have medicine for it now, then incis the artery when needed, as its part becomes contracted and detaches - grasp tightly this piece with forceps and apply firm pressure to that location on the site of vein narrowing or ligament weakening within the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction is detached, so be it; and if not, take care of that which proceeded before from where the dust particles have flown off the sanction for its memory recollection.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the flexion of his joint is difficult in movements at small children and for the possibility of ligaments on their arms.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the puncture of the black vein is conveniently to extract blood from the upper thigh and lower leg parts; for this purpose it consists of branches of both basilic and femoral arteries as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then bring the vein back into its lengthy state.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The instrumentation of cranial vein puncture is that it extracts the humors from the head and relieves the illnesses of the bile (humors).
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this particular area, if you wish to lance the bleb (fluid-filled blister), use either a lancet made of olive or myrtle; here it is safe from all veins and will not damage any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Indeed, you must perform the operation of cauterization that protects it so as to prevent its razor from piercing only the scalp therein limitedly, and secure the place with your pulse located above it, ensuring not even a touch if no initial percussion upon this area at times reveals anything.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Even if you press deeply into the patient's body without performing an incision in the first touch, there may be no sign of that implanted object (implant).
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May be the quality of that operation and these accidents in which you should think about correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le first of them is whom you know that bleeding not performed but for the preservation of health and hope for recovery, with caution against diseases; where bloodletting should be done in one of the veins located in the groin (cephalica, femoral, basilic), during breakfast on Sunday or Monday mornings, and dietary adjustment is made when significant signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When surgery is performed either on the third day or at the very first push since morning, after three hours have passed in the course of that day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May cauterization be administered when necessary and convenient either in the morning or at nighttime; it can happen any time of day without exception.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to perform a fingerbloodletting for any malady they desire, provided there are fissures retained due to the use of leeches during enemas with castor oil as treatment, in order that blood does not flow into the vessels drained from these holes while being performed on bloody bladders (which indicates purification), so that it is not directed towards the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	1. Return consideration in the subtlety of humors since the sanction is large due to meats and drinks, or if it's possible for fluids to ascend there.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if there is any cause that does not forbid it or due exercise for such purpose to make the sanction more subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And when you stop bleeding in the patient' extramammary (outside of the breast), at that time is it third hour as we have discussed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And so that you may take care of the patient's chest today with all their misfortunes, anxiety, anger, and various bodily accidents experienced throughout the day, accompanied by excessive pain, heaviness, hernias, and swollen limbs.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in his bedroom, there are present causes by which men commonly use perfumes and scents, as well as balms and similars according to their quantity of possibilities.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the lancet maker over a thigh that has been pricked or where it was meant to be pricked.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	Either the early constriction that does not involve swelling or the excessive tightness is to be restrained by blood flow stoppage; otherwise, it must undergo softening and restriction of movement in the limbs should be prevented.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the sentence to translate:
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	So that, for which reason it is necessary for the surgeon to be firm and ready in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is broken or the thigh swells up, leave it for a day or two without tightening the bandage, but firmly apply an apotemic (treatment) dressing; do not immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	When circumcision is performed as desired (which could imply that it'dictorially or medically necessary), then proceed with cauterization using a silver
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If you perceive it as small and cautiously sanction (perform) circumcision in that distressing second part of the text (suggesting a specific step or phase within a procedure), fearing not to cause excess, then proceed with performing the circumcision therein. Adjust accordingly for any perception perceived by you, as this will be done where small openings are made in homes and bodies requiring minimal intervention ("pauca apercio"). Here we understand that if an initial gentle approach is taken due to a concern about causing too much harm or alteration, the practitioner proceeds with circumcision at another specific point which likely corresponds to minor access points typically associated with delicate procedures.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	May you see that cautery has been applied already not to be touched upon here further and not as an excuse for any cause; pause over some division of the orifice of oil, which eases the pain in the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better here than where they are elsewhere.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a great inflammation arises at the site of incision, it continues bleeding gently day and night, mostly in the area that is not actively circulating blood but rather from recent hemorrhage (possibly at the femoral vein), then:
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up moisture from that vein of said person or another vein, for its complement/completion;
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is any blackness or greenish tinge in the location for a few days, do not touch it; and if you wish to pause on that some cause of inflammation or dissolution due to mirra (a resin used as medicine), or from honey made from thyme or calamus plant or something similar, identify its source.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically apply pressure points and elevate spots for incision of bladder puncture procedures.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And rest your hand on that one, and if you need to apply a compress using damp cloths, be mindful as this prominency is wicked and bad; hence keep watch over any cause mentioned earlier which makes the blood flow strongly from the artery of life.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an emetic is added in the water for stoppage, so that place becomes hardened and care of it will ensure healing within itself.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And when you remove from the sanction as much or as needed according to the patient'se capacity and appearance, that is how far you should extract it from the sanction.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black (i.dict that it indicates a severe or deep condition), then observe carefully when you insert it so as to ensure proper placement; and if it seems thick (possibly indicating inflammation or excessive fluid), be cautious of its sharpness, ensuring careful handling within sight.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	When someone is weak and needs tooth extraction during a fever day (a period associated with an illness), the bleeding of the vein should be increased, which means both local incisions on the gum must also occur.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In that who is feverish, their opposite forces are present, and whatever extracts it should do so in guided movements.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best that is administered through a venectomy of veins is not an incision.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This surgical intervention is saved from the flow of blood and nerve inflammation, and a good one has been applied according to tradition and duration.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is inflammation of the complexion, then bleed through it by inserting into its cavity an infusion of myrrh or spiced wine with cinnamUBon (cinnamon), ginger, cardamom, and cloves; aromatic perfumed oil that also has fragrance.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you experience syncope (fainting) due to the evil breath of motion sickness, then induce sweating by applying warm water from meat and fragrant substances; use aromatics on some herb, and apply it to your body parts accordingly.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use those other causes mentioned in the division concerning constipation for elimination.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wants to remove their arm and dissolve the old wound following treatment should apply pressure from where the lancet was used for catheterization; its discharge is frothy, which will expel the small amount of fluid daily according to the quantity of discharge over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May whoever wants to heal their arm and shoulder should apply pressure for seven hours or nine from the first day of surgery on these body parts, as they become strong afterward.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May those who wish to pull the thigh of their body away from where it turns downward will find that this happens on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that part of the body where he has cut and scraped now becomes feverish due to its blood flow in a state (likely referring to an illness) being abundant and intensified, leading into syncopes; thus you must maintain all conditions for bleeding cauterization. Place your hand over his pulse on that part of the body where he was cut so as not to die from syncope when the lancet user is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you intend to unlace the arm and evacuate the sanctum according to habitual cleaning time, as your fingers are already oiled with blood from the vessel vein and difficult pus of the sac, press down on that spot immediately because it is too much evil.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the patient lying down at all times; or extract this thickened blood that is coagulated in the vein of sanitation within its fomentation, either on a warm tarry lard (or butcher's grease), or sage leaves, and apply pressure to draw out what has already escaped.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is swolthy (thickened or inflamed), do not touch it so that the thrombosis does not worsen.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to induce the bowels according to their natural order, there is no reason not to do so; therefore, proceed with emptying them over that place or in another vein as needed.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	When the referred "arm funnel" is punctured in the place of black or basilisk (when not anesthetized or fractured), it consists of these humors.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bloodletting for them is that the bubo infiltrates its own body, and when it gets roasted inside where the bellows are until a vein becomes apparent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And make it strong over that limb affected by constriction, and apply the poultice along the transverse small intestine, neither longitudinally nor laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	When you perform an extensive opening and your cautery is the one used on that particular joint, where it enters narrowly at the intersection of the limb, do so carefully.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of bile is prohibited, then apply heat to its tail and make the liver run in the backward part of the colon until you fulfill your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would be excused from bathing in the tail of the water and your legs are paused therein during times when young emerges (possibly referring to childbirth).
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And here is the translation line by line into English:
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	E the suction of the pus from the cavity of the womb is given for the diseases of the belly.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	E the quality of the bloodletting for him is that you squeeze his limbs or your own, placing it in an iron dart while venous swelling occurs and bleeding becomes apparent; perform transverse bloodletting on this area so no drop will escape.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	With caution not allowing your hand on the fleshomacho (possibly referring to a part of the body for treatment or examination), soon after they touch the exposed nerves of their bare skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Ensure that your hand is in contact with the base of the tail and let the blood flow smoothly in there; otherwise, if you do not maintain this contact at the base of the tail, the blood will clot in the vessel within the vein, and it must be prevented from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When extracting the humour according to necessity, pause over the veins and salt so that it is not condensed together; seemingly as if you are performing throughout the entire body.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the strength of that operation on her right thigh be assigned to those illnesses caused by melancholy in accordance with medical practice.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	When it appears in surgery like you have with your other things,
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The strength of the vein from the phlebotomy is present in those illnesses that occur at any part of the body, similar to menstrual diseases and retained menstruation, as well as for ulcers and old hernia-like conditions, and their appearance.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the bloodletting for him is that his malady thrusts its phlegm into his tailbone and sets it upon that spot where veins appear; this applies to the joint between the foot and the leg, and you must mark those veins with a finger touch.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply a large poultice or cushion under the thigh supports and heel of your patient, for it is better and more beneficial (salubrious).
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If a mouth ulcer appears on the face of the body, you must guard your nerves that are near it from touching the area where the ulcer is present and pause your treatment for this condition as long as you wish to inscribe or not.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Whenever it is necessary for you (the physician) to perform this action/procedure with forceps or similar
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Whenever the sanction is forbidden, you should take the patient's leg and immerse it in the tail end of the water vessel (likely referring to a basin or bathtub), allowing the poison (sanction) to run off within that space as long as it has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the lancet user makes a mistake in their first attempt at lancing, repeat on your next few attempts until you find where it should be (the location becomes safe), and do not fear harmful spirits, but rather protect yourself from potential nerve damage as mentioned before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	When there is pain from the soul of the other foot upwards.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	From the vein of sciatica, it is located downwards towards the ankle joint on the left side of the body.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The strength of Lu's bladder is considered proof when it becomes full during surgery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of this patient'thy footbath is that it cleanses and strengthens his thigh muscles from within, using a long bandage placed underneath subtly below the ankle bone – therein lies its purpose; otherwise not visible.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	When it appears, then you apply the poultice to each part as needed and across its axis, better so; if inserted inside through a slit or cut out along its side, that is where they are placed.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	When it comes to your nerves, make them run as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return and tighten on the location of the incision cut and strengthened it here so that healing will occur.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventosity and those properties of dressing from them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Venous swellings from corn, or wounds, or leather.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This scrape that is being caused by either of these two ways (hands or instruments), hereby it shall be addressed as follows:
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary due to illness or prolonged exposure, immediately provoke a breeze for the entire month at this place and time of day here in these circumstances;
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When the cause is among men who are in their bodies due to excessive consumption of alcohol and indulgence, causing these people:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore when it occurs at any cause of them, especially if during the third or fourth day after their passing away in the morning hours, they command that fever be taken as a passage through which to heal.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the youth of wind from the back is that which, when it carries gravity to the head and sinks into the humors within the body; may this also expel all the passions throughout the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This discomfort is in the location of trepanation for the skull (cranial). Here "this" refers to a specific type or aspect related to cranial surgery, likely addressing an area where
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not hidden that he uses the one in which there has been full friction or where pus (infection material) accumulates; this gives great harm to him. Here, a physician emphasizes the importance of avoiding areas with extensive rubbing and existing infections when performing medical procedures like trepanation on the skull because these can cause significant damage
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore I will not use that for her joints and in those heads where diseases are loose (fluid accumulation or sinuses). In this line of the medieval medical treatise, a practitioner explains their choice to avoid using certain tools on areas prone to fluid build-ups due to
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And thus I will not use that which is continuously causing harm to him; and so also do I command the fan (ventozador) to hold back its mae slightly at parts of joints, fearing generation of forgetfulness/negligence in treatment or healing. Here a physician expresses their concern about using instruments too roughly on areas sensitive due to existing conditions which might worsen these and induce the patient's negligence towards self-care as they may overlook further complications from such actions, possibly leading them back into painful situations for lack of proper care.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The fan (ventozador) is in the location of trepanation for veins and basilica: therefore I will confer these breathing issues, constriction of arteries and hernia rupture, cough, which are linked to this area; hereby addressing them. In this context from a medieval medical treatise written in the early modern period where contemporary understanding may not be reflected accurately, but we can interpret that by using specific tools or techniques aimed at these structures (veins and basilica/diaphragm), the physician seeks to alleviate related breathing difficulties such as asthma-like symptoms. It implies a direct approach wherein physical intervention is seen as potentially
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When a small wound is inflamed and if it relaxes for some time, weakness develops in the limbs and abdomen.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the breeching of the bladder provides for joint pains in the head and backbone, moving away from it, preferring to cause pain in the teeth' extruditions; this is where one performs a craniotomy (brain surgery).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the suction device not to press on my hand so that it does not injure an artery and cause blood flow disruption, here is the translation line by line:
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	When the suffocation of breath occurs in the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as appearances related to illnesses present in the mouth, they are located at sites for extraction of dental implants that exist within the lips' orifices.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the humoral imbalance that occurs on the sinews be relieved with this application, which is achieved through its warming quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	E the ventosa applied to the divided areas of the focuses contributes effectively to lithotomy (fracture removal) surgery, especially from the basilica vein, umbilical and cephalic, whereby those fingers placed along all these veins inserted into their carnal counterparts, and also thinner vessels were positioned within them for proper attachment during dilation.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanded, do not proceed with cauterization, for the location has been stripped of flesh and now its nerves and arteries are exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is through this air wherein they blow over the abdomen and confer on the sores in the anus, made of putrid excrement lately produced by flatulence or bowel movements.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the windlass to make a strong gust of air from earth (heat), and that it reaches areas where there is great depth, use fine-tuned mallets for incisions or scratchings as required by craftsmthy action.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May the slight breaths of the cushions show themselves gradually throughout the body, causing pain in old arthritis and menstrual cramps, vaginal discharge, and bladder issues; leading to periods (menstruation) and abdominal distension, remaining stationary at sites suitable for dilation procedures by doctors or barbers.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Even though they treat all parts of the body, it may lead to fainting in this manner.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From the coughing due to overfills, it is necessary for health that there be as much air in the lungs as in those of breath from their chest and leg pillows.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	When the position of the winds (presumably referring to breath or respiration) is such that it pauses the flow of air during inhalation and sucks out early morning moisture, do not extend this position; rather pause those leaking spaces temporarily, and bring back those hernias again.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this process, continue until you see the place turning red and swolthy, at which point the patient's agitation will become apparent.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you scrape and repeatedly suck small amounts at once, take consideration of the body'se disposition.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that body is of tender flesh and you scald it gently without applying pressure, so the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When ordered by the bellowsman, enhance the incision and press a small amount of suction for easy removal.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is thickened, then you must scrape it downwards frequently; in the first washing, open up and purify both the area of impurity (the affected region) and its moisture (likely referring to bodily fluids or humors).
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May occur in the second stage of obtaining knowledge about removing the thickened sancus.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is due to dirt or filth, then cut away the clean surface so that it can continue its flow (presumably referring to a bodily process such as urine).
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And at last, when we extract small stones from joints or knees enough for us one incision is sufficient.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a sick limb, cut it with the scalpel; and if our patient has a large body part, let us first make an incision with a sharp instrument.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	When it is time for cauterization in which only the depth of the chest cavity is concerned,
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the bowel is thick, hard, black, and its parts are strained, so that the places of the clysters become softened, lubricated, dissolved; if it's summer time, then take honeydew oil or wine vinegar, mint leaves juice, chamomile oil, sage – apply these to such likenesses.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is great and sudden, then apply honey, or balm of St. John'dicta (possibly referring to willow bark), oil of Aloe, juniper, or myrrh; according to their appearances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be that the bellows is made of large pieces of tendon, and such are forbidden to oil, and which for these places should provide airflow with warm water from heated stones or hot springs, or boiling water, similar in appearance.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And it is from where the moisture comes that washes their breaths with water taken from juniper and sumac, or similar substances brought to them:
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that which has excessive quantities, wash their breaths with vinegar from ancient apples or water of ashwauta (ash wort), either pomegranate juice, elderflower tea, or chamomile tea, and in this way they resemble themselves.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that the wandering vein is treated before wanderblowing (a procedure likely referring to cauterization or some form of intervention).
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the patient'dict: if the wind-blown or one that has to be cauterized with cold and steam on them sickened by cholera and inflammation, caused by frosty causes, such as vinegary acids, indigestion, flatulence, and diarrhea, then these are their symptoms.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When their foods are taken with wine and roasted meats, and vegetables prepared according to taste, they appear pleasant (or seem well-presented).
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that which is cold and prone to flow in the mouth or nose with a vinegary taste of honeydew, or apple cider vinegar, and strong-smelling foods entering between Christmas and Epiphany; it is recommended for him to use little bites of bread and cheese, pausing meals containing apples, cabbage, beans, peas, ducks, geese, and chickens.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	Whenever during bloodletting and cupping therapy today'thy urine is more than food,  
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	When given in beer within several hours to Alcuin'thy or muscle medicine, whether nowhere before the windfall season or after phlebotomy, so that primary body parts are comforted and such inflammation is avoided; indeed when this treatment occurs:
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May these pains that are being scratched be ceased under the leg bone and in gout and on the umbilicus at the joint locations, where these limbs do not endure scraping upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E it is not for these reasons that the pain occurs in sanctums of members, but rather due to a blockage within their veins and lymph nodes; they use this method with puffed pauses on thighs when illness affecting blood flow from arteries to venous systems, as well as above umbilicus (belly button); it is rare that the member gets dissolved wind agitation or inflammation in these regions and resolves pain caused by such conditions.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is stopped over their drains or pus when acidity increases in them due to the act of suction on the accumulated purulent fluid, removing this pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When it seems that pressure is applied over the foot and belly, within those chambdictions (or cavities).
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These breezes are administered with suction alone, and some treatments are given at the fire's flame.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When water purification measures are fully administered in cases of jaundice, it means that the treatment or remedy has been completely provided using clean and freshwater to address the condition related to bile (often associated with liver issues). Here's a line-by-
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The reason is that the bladder must be filled and large stones removed; therefore, water alone or with medicinal plants in it will suffice for this purpose of cleansing (or possibly expelling) the stone(s). Here's a translation: The need arises because the bladder needs to be full-sized, which is why only pure water may be used—alternatively, with herbs included within that water—to perform cleanse or remove stones.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of the bladder administered at our focus: two drops formed by us here; and the quantity is one palmful—it’s what we have in hand now, within this locale which lies along its circuit or pathway through the body fluid systems. The volume should be as small as a needle's length when inserted into it (likely referring to administering medicine by injection). Here are more details:
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Its pain is due to excessive bone marrow or heavy borders of fatty flesh such as thighs, large breasts, and tight skin that do not allow the limb to maintain its position on oneself.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever it'supreme heat of day crosses over bone or iron (perhaps indicating a feverish condition when the sun is at its peak), there is lighting in front of the fireplace.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the greater wind that we have treated already, and its small remedy for those conditions second to these illnesses in which he uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When liver and spleen swellings are larger than those of young men and thick limbs,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of keeping this fire above the limb is to gently ignite a wick in a small candle made of wax, and place it over the middle line of smoke within the space where the smell arises, so that the flame can be introduced gradually, preventing combustion of the patient's thigh.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Place it stopped on the member of the abdomen and tell them about what we have said, so that when they breatthy take in air but do not digest as a result, their breeze then becomes thinning out quickly.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And with fire according to its nature, and repeat that action if intestinal obstruction occurs therefrom.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May an air clystre be administered in the fever of pleurisy, which contains neither crosswise nor twisted water and is only filled with water up to the extent necessary, resting solely on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it should be done: And this is the form: The more inflammation there is, the better it is, so that a large amount of water can be absorbed.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii. (The original text does not provide further context for
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	This line translates as follows: These are not administers in the small members but where possible placement of drops is impossible due to their diminutiveness—such as teeth and gums, or when limbs are bare bone without flesh; these would be used with what said above (likely referring back to previous instructions), nose, and times like those.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And regarding those worms found in the body fluids of well-prepared porridge,  
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Here applies the application of liniments during day and night, allowing them to be digested internally within that which are famished, and ensuring their excretion from the body through bowel movements or vomiting; apply bands on those parts where swelling has occurred in the groin area, as well as relief with bandages for pressure treatment.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are filled up, in case (of)…
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to suction out the location with air, they may ease in joy or relief.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash out and apply warm water there, which will be moistened and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leg of a sick person is elongated by blood clots and their residue remains inside, then wrap it in moist cloth, and rest your hand above where the residue lies to prevent its reflux.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the sanction multiplies, then sulphur ground three times or small balls and stones from their causes sharply rub over it; so that the sanction falls away; or they are padded with cooked fava beans placed therein until they adhere to the place, and the sanction abides.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeated injections of blood-letting (suuguis), when possible change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If blood discharges are prohibited from suspension, they must be stopped at the most recent or keep an awl inserted in those places where it occurs; and have them pausing therein until I feel any new one approaching.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want to apply powder over those areas, a little of ash or salt is used, and then it's stirred together in the pot.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Ayssi begins what concerns restoration (or recovery).
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the practice of medicine, and it concerns the restoration of a fracture and displacement in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, understand that the wise doctors and barbers here in this court, along with those who at times neglect to respect free men or read from ancient texts, are presenting their knowledge on these matters today.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Because of this reason, we are deprived from the knowledge among our learned men; and it has never been overlooked in any time since I have had it, nor after that period for which free literature on ancient subjects and studies into their understanding were available—until now when extracting science (knowledge) from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	In preparation for experiments or study throughout one'se lifetime.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol primier.	First point/chapter (assuming "Capitol" refers to
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections from the essence of bone fractures are required before we begin to recall details about the broken bones themselves, whether one or several.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Now that we speak in this introduction of these subjects, and within which comprehension for our craft occurs; here you and they are quickened who know or learn this noble work from us.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And when you experience a fracture or dislocation or twisting (sprain), then coil yourself for the treatment of this injury with cauterization of that place, if there is no specific cause preventing it, take care to relieve vertigo, and such pain may be due either from weakness in general health, crushing fractures causing swelling or severe heat accompanied by intense fever.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Ensure it is filled with fresh herbs and meats from birds and pigs; forbid large grains and fill up with all kinds of food that swell the veins within, provided you serve a poultice to prevent absorption into the body part if there's no fear of leakage.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Whenever it returns to its original place in the patient'se primary area, which is how they are used to being found at present.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone breaks begins to be repaified, at that time it is necessary for us to feed it with nutritious foods rich in heavy and large substances; just as we do with wheat-based dishes cooked in water, rice, legumes, milk from cows, cheese curds (and sourcing), fresh vegetables, grains of various kinds, similar items for them.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Be aware that bones break and become weak when they are in the bodies of those who are young or decrepit; it is impossible for them to continue being connected together according to their natural state due to drying out (loss of moisture).
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	When they are solidified and continue according to their nature for as long as possible in the heat of life, just like bones from small animals do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Mightily nature adjusts and contracts upon the broken bones of any part taken by reason similar to gluts wherein excessively thickened flesh adheres within that which binds together those ensnared individuals, inside therefrom venom from fortitude and firmness emerges akin to flame at supper time—and no cause forbids one'thy execution of these works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary to take breaks from the foods of humors that have gravity and consistency and thickness, as we have mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motivated by different types of bone break according to the type of body part.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Be aware that the instruments for breaking bones are various according to the different parts of the body, and a break in the thigh bone is different from a break in the skull'supremacy; and a fracture of the chest bone differs from a fracture of the armbone. Similarly, all other members vary among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When all types of bone breakage occur, they are remembered separately in their designated part of the skull.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion of various types in him/herself (possibly referring to different movements or symptoms) indicating a possible injury or condition related to bone fract
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various kinds of bone breaks in them (referring to different individuals), including an arched type break when they fall on their elb0r or knee; and some fractures depend on the length of the bone: these include wrist/arm fractures, pelvic fractures from falls or impacts both direct and indirectly (as in slipping), head injury resulting in a concussion when struck against something hard enough to cause pain like during an accident; as well as small linear skull fractures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The whole specialty is in dealing with pain as it arises after the restoration of the patient, at their specific locations:
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Moving title of bone breakage.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For this translation I will first break down the sentence into smaller parts and then translate them:
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is neither twisted appearance nor pain upon touching the bone and groin without causing great suffering, then it'dict not be a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Here come possibilities are that it is twisting or small fissure, not where you apply your touch and compression to the entire body; there rest upon them at this time those medicines by which they recall what moment convenes here for treatment; place also slightly on top of these remedies stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Here you understand that where it bends and does not divide into two or another which do not meet at the site of inflammation, when those who are meant to correct your hourly appointments encounter an apendicitis flare-up upon their arrival.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If there is an incision made for cautery, let that be done within as many days as possible until the incision heals; and apply heat to each wound you can elevate or compress.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Given that you understand restoration and cleaning of it is easier than dealing with the bones in which I've been sick,
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Return that strong member which will come with recollection of him/her.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is satagated (inflamed or rigid), then it becomes necessary to extend this broken part of the body, whether it's leg or arm/hand; if your own hand is small, use yours; otherwise, one must use either both arms and hands, or a single cord.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: If your position is where it pauses the lower part of the body according to its natural shape, as the parts of the limb are extended, you must perform what returns those additional elements back into their corresponding places in each region they were before.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When you touch it here at this time beneficially with your hand, and if you see any other cause present there, correct that issue according to the amount of your intention.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive extension and compression, as physicians who have used their methods for a long time say will cause an open wound through one'se own operation or may result in contraction of the limb while they perform it.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Apply bandages and perform proper operation and restriction of that limb, rest and calmness; warn the swelling not to worsen during your vigilance or sleep time, observe his rotation and agitation, attend all his movements throughout the day until he finds a position where pain subsides when lying down in this spot—or due to injury/injury. If you need to change positions for him so that there is no longer any pain (the cause of discomfort), ensure that your body alignment at these spots prevents further twisting or turning; guard against water accumulation where the limb rests, ensuring it remains dry and straightened outwards/outwardly.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of a relaxed member' extrinsic features are those that you recommend, from which you understand how members vary in their smallness and largeness as well as shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	From those who are small of arms and face as if they were the hands and flame, it is necessary that their covering be a thin veil made from fine cloth undernethy.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who have a heavy limb with the coccyx or cushion be covered so that their burden is wrapped and tough, which links the large and strong member of all parts to strictum gulnus where they cannot enter.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here begins the treatment, take care of your patient'se bowel movement conveniently so as not to aggravate that fracture on their thigh or leg which is enclosed by three layers or four; and tighten a little with the bandage around it.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And place it in the upper portion of the location where there is a breakage, and keep your hands tightly so that you do not loosen the area where the break occurred.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Here the text is further translated into English:
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	E assign appropriate pause between the femurs of stoop or cloth wherein is fixed the twistiness of the fracture, if in it there's twistiness; otherwise, none found here has a cause for pause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And place a pause over this other bandage, and apply hot poultices to these wrappings so that the pain subsides immediately if there is no inflammation or suppuration present at the location where pressure has been applied; do this for several days, and keep yourself firmly on top of it with those very same strips.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Here come the splinters from hemp wool rage, and they are formed carefully; or made of wood, or fronds of palm leaf - their shape according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, if the splint placed on that fracture is thick and a small one has been applied to other splints, then its length according to how it fits onto the limb both in height and size; also apply firm pressure over those splints as per your first bandage direction; place this force under the foot accordingly (to where you have discussed about fracture), so that when extension from the fracture occurs with elongation, then the tightness of your bandage corresponds to the location of the break.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And when small movements are not conveniently suitable for binding those waters which you wish to retain and the space between stones has a day of movement within it, do not attempt to bind them with tight constraints; rather, wait until that time is over.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient' extraneous humors are led by their limbs into your locations (the body parts where you applied pressure), then promptly cease that flow, preventing harm or injury from occurring within them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some injuries are from the ground upwards and there is a disturbance in the spine; they come to mind at that place in the second particular characteristic.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	E understand that when all limbs are broken on the first day; this causes them to become worse if not properly rested for days seven or more, according to your knowledge of the coming of a putrefactive attack (cautery).
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how these devices were used by the ancients to treat injuries such as fractures and dislocations, which are restrained over breaks in bone structure (translation with some contextual interpretation):
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of immobilization post-fracture repair is convenient for complex cases and mainly concerning women' extraneous parts: where no heat nor effusion arises, use talcum powder on the casts, and it is the bone marrow from flour that facilitates movement in these extremities.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When comforting him as you are doing so, but if that same book has humor too dense or heavy (indicating the presence of excessive "humors"), do not make his ease neither light nor subtle—use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Autotherapy remedy for fracture and dislocation: recipe of asphodel, mandragore, acacia, myrrh, and magnesia (ground into powder), which is mixed with the juice or wine from all ten thistle heads. With this mixture applied to a place where bone damage has occurred; use it for good healing composition in order to restore broken bones naturally:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other forms of impalement that cause fracture and twist: mixture of white dragon'thyng, myrrh from the same dragon’s fruit, aloe from another dragon’s fruit, frankincense (or possibly Arabian) dragon. xx;
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground in mortar and crushed into powder or pulverized with water or alum, and they take their medicine as directed.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of the splinter and bones apart, there arises pain in those places, with a tightly wound thread tied around them, immersed in oil and vinegar, and fixed upon that location: such is its binding.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this bandage nothing has been done for restoration or healing by poultice and purgation as they should be handled properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other means of cautery that restore the cuts: olive pits and poppy seeds together make an effective dressing; all are used for treatment.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of the plaster applied for bone fracture restoration and when you want to resolve ossification: a mixture of alumina, pillowcase, violin flowers, wheat flour, all parts divided into three portions; these are crushed and mixed with water in which (if) the limb is not cut.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut (injured), then apply that same water from the colon and urine to soothe or cleanse the wound.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering for restoring the limb when you have a hard abscess that must be drained at once: recipe with raspberry and wheat germ, honey, myrtle berries, mint leaves, violet flowers, chamomile blossoms; all are crushed and mixed in water from rose petals or double-infused water according to the quality of the limb and rest period needed.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras does not prescribe a free that is resting on the limb injured, but rather pains treated with wax and oil, nor any other cause; he recommends moving between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia have seen that there are pauses on the broken part of them and their causes for exsiccation due to warmth taken in with myrrh, grains, and spirits recommended by these things we use herefor.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Manipulation of plaster that comforts injury and pain: recipe for bruises from teeth or home insides, and honeycomb (spelled as "altea"), chopped parts; crumbly pieces and powder are they, this is their compress.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	When the quantity according to which you tear down and separate it is considered, if there's not pain or bleeding nor bone fracture at its place, then do not delay your work for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you experience severe or sharp pain at the location, then bend or dislocate that part in time, and apply a plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that subtle restriction and apply the plaster small and not tightly by your initial compression, and delicate handling is necessary for healing within this space.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If times come when the abscess and swelling and pain and inflammation have all gathered together from there, and indigestion requiring enema and strictures as well, then repeat that action which you performed for the patient'thy entire body at once.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of the causes we have mentioned before, then wait three days or four at most (or seven), and some treatments may be applied over the course of twenty days as long as they appear following the detachment of the limb, until fracture consolidates, just like what we've described.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	When it adjusts within the tightness you may have nowhere in your initial restriction at all, and fasten to the belly'dictum of humors (the stomach), as soon as memory returns for that matter.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May if you open the fracture site it may dry out and weaken even further, so be wise that nourishment is forbidden to prevent this; therefore bring water for your thirst every day of feverishness until three days have passed, alleviate swelling with a small pill, through which nutrition will enter the limb, healing the body.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May those who heal the fracture of another limb when not yet restored at meals observe their timing and follow its curvature, according to which they perform it; this is error in their work, great fear – if rightly timed and executed correctly with care, large Antics will expand freely without water being imposed upon them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	When they have not seen any doctor for them (their fluid), it is reasonable that their humors do not balance well.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capital Second: When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The spices of fractures are motions, and their forms are various, with distinct causes: for any given type of bone break is caused by the impact from a space (likely referring to air or fluid), which enters into the cranial cavity where it can cause pain in the skull. Consequently, this spice/type of fracture gets named; when the gap penetrates through part of the body'thy bone and cuts through flesh without passing beyond its exterior side (this phrase is a bit unclear), then this type of fracture comes to be known as complete displacement.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This break or perforation that has already penetrated the periosteum (the outer layer of bone), is either in the face of the bone itself, and/thy pus from these breaks or punctures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is a bone fracture in the subtlety of the hairline, that' extrinsic name for this particular type of fine crack has not been given yet.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it hurts in the bones of the joints when they are covered with phlegm (or effluvium).
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So as all these severe breaks are bandaged with separate strips of cloth like pillows.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this fluid returns to its place in the body, that is where it should be accordingly.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	With all these tools for detection and inquiry into their attempts at healing corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special vessel is found when it has been discovered in the bone and withheld, laid upon it for a little while until the fracture appears blackened.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the healing of fractures consider the accidents of humors, and if through those accidents signs are manifested as vomiting from cholera, distension, loss of understanding, abscesses, syncope, acute fever, symptoms of these patients, and their likeness to such accidents in major dispositions, they do not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you witness an accident due to incorrect movement, then you begin its treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause is that pus comes into your stomach with food during fever days in the twelfth day of entire arrangement, as you study on the bone's exterior at noon today (the Roman numeral "XII" represents the number twelve).
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days, then when you press on your bones from morning until evening, they are said to be rotten due to sweat (the humoral excess), and thus prone to having accidents as recommended.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has reached the skull covering bone and is made of small pieces and hardness, it's time to remove those broken parts carefully as advised by you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	When you raise the head of the patient affected by humidity (plague), and observe over their bones second in use and manner according to your experience with children, so that they lie down on the sickbed.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you suspect bone fracture or osteomyelitis (infection of the bone), apply cold water poultice, and then press on it with what is dripping from there; this will help rest the swollen flesh within so that infection stops spreading. Begin at the site of injury to the bone and start incision work here as well.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it is one of two methods for operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One of the maneuvers is to insert one instrument into another such that it lies inside as follows: And this is how you do so: Insert a smaller tool within this one, just enough for it not to fall out. This describes the technique whereby a medical practitioner carefully inserts and positions instruments during an examination or procedure without them becoming dislodged.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And thus it is that we apply medicinal herbs placed below for the second time.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Using their ease in touch upon the joints, that they may not strike the head and guide it along here.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is hard and sharp, then when you administer injections into its channel immediately before applying pressure with pillows (which are not deep), do so accordingly.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	Even though there is no name given for the condition, it occurs when these points stop at the end of the bone inside where fluids accumulate that have been previously brought to this area by movement or other means; because they are located on either side of what appears as a rounded extremity or small circle near the head of the limb (which resembles an edge), it prohibits being submerged and passing through the bone'dict:
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these many trays, each corresponding to the degree of sharpness in any part of your body where this present apex resides within all parts of the brain, and its quantity shall be according to the amount of spicitude therein.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And where you must exercise utmost caution that the scissors do not touch any cause of apoplexy (commotio cerebri).
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone perforates and if it continues along its path within you (the patient), extract that outwardly soaked with water from where fluids have entered, which in the hardness of this fluid appears similar to nails; but also consider whether there is blood or subtle matter extracted as well, like other splinters.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If there is any misalignment or displacement of the small bones, take that which will make it easier for you to handle them from their joints; and use water and ointments made with honey and liniment where these hands have been used.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other aspect of the operation is painful and far-refaltening, which Gualia and Laze pursue for great praise; this is their discourse: it's necessary for you in your attendance to discover where the bone fracture was forcefully and clearly placed, as soon as you have discovered that location and paused briefly with a slow and cheerful movement of which this forms its shape.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If there is any additional cause related to the patient'thy hip joint in its location (likely referring to a hernia or prolapse of the bladder), then insert that specific one at the extremity of the instrument used for exploration, and release it from within such means. Once released, this will alleviate harm and fear as it leaves his body/self.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what is broken off or remains of the bone are its surface roughness and small fragments, you must take care that this roughness and these tiny pieces are removed using tools prepared for such purposes from various quantities so as to be able at all points conveniently administered where they should belong (to the bone) according to when your operation is complete.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any of the other small vessels or fragile breaks in your body that you have lost and need to heal through proper care according to what has been lost.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because they have not been taught about all these things in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	When we write about great breaks that have been shown us,
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you are removing the bone, then take hold of two or three layers of cloth as much as the pus present and immerse that in olive oil; submerge it over the wound dressing until such time while which fluid (pus) can be drained from above. Then wrap another layer of doubled or triple-folded cloth, soaked in vinegar and oil, immersing this also underneilement as before but with intervals for drainage; administer internally to that wound sinew using the amount by which blood flows at a time from above. And do not tighten it until such quantity of flow has been reached where no more can be drained (i.dict, meaning: apply without overdoing).
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	When you make powder from these medicines and they are dry, apply them everywhere on the ground (or in general), universally applying all this medicine that possesses its property to prevent being swallowed or bitten upon.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Guard your second nature so that the child in its care is clean; and it shall not be doused with oil or other substances nor add virulence therein; when adjusted on the brain'supreme membrane, corrupts that place, and brings upon misery to the liver.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When the patient complains of chest pain upon being struck on their bone and it is felt more intensely when nearing recovery from treatment, consider if there are accidents that have occurred to them in total; be aware that all may need attention accordingly.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not alleviate the blackness through medicine that is withheld from below, then make such remedies of honey and olive oil in three parts each, drape them over these lines herein mentioned; furthermore apply it to where this ailment has occurred. Also provide care using curative spices as you find appropriate for healing should occur.
Capitol .iii.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual line of
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When you crack your nose, it can cause discomfort and sometimes pain due to the stretching or potential injury to the cart
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Though it's not the nose that is broken but two bone parts separated by nasal bones which have been pushed apart—perhaps due to some missteps, as there are now two or more fragments in your face; these pieces do not break into larger shards nor get fractured further. They simply suffer from displacement and twisting movements without causing additional injury internally within the skull cavity where they belong.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the bones breaks in its place, then insert a small object into your nose to compress that fracture down towards their chest and backward as indicated by this body part; until you can return it naturally upwards according to the shape of the person's body.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	If it is needed for your ease (to have pain relief), and ensure that you do not harm yourself during this operation on the patient'thy thighs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the break is in the upper jawbone and does not go to that place, then have it measured on the part of the beak where it has become large or swolthy.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the bone is broken into parts, then you make it seem as if there are two (or more).
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if the hernia remains after restoring it on the first day of rupture, then provide relief for seven or eight days off from exerthyctic application (cold therapy).
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do so with arrows and spears (caligae).
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you apply heat treatment externally as a poultice using honey or oil mixed with water and rosemary (or possibly vinegar), do so carefully on the affected area for relief of pain due to other forms of apoplexy cauterization, which may be necessary.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not curse the abscess with caution (using cautery), then put that same warm poultice made of barley flour and pomegranate seeds mixed in almond milk over their leg bone, and place it above where a snake might lie without any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are slightly broken or displaced, then you must separate those fragments and extract them with instruments suitable for these purposes; also fix that fracture using fluid (blood) necessary to nourish and consolidate it, as well as apply bandages appropriate for this purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you crush worms in the nose, then treat it with this medicine and insert iron rods inside so that healing occurs throughout the body.
Capitol .iiii.	In order to provide an accurate translation for "Capitol .iiii.,
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of jaw joint restoration when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone has become loose and the fracture is not yet fully healed (and it' extruded into two pieces and curves towards the divisions of teeth), pay close attention to this as well; if you notice that your knowledge in such matters grows, be more careful.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is broken into pieces, then cover it with extension of bone segments inside so that healing can occur.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you have decided on dental intervention for separation, then tighten those of which you hope will come out (the teeth) through the root of gold or silver or by yielding; and place your pause over the broken jawbone, and above doubled cloth wrap, and heavy wax decoration placed along the length of the jawbone; apply that second one as long as it is part of your attire. Ensure this does not get destroyed during application/use.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the humors that they take rest and calmness, and pause their consumption of solid foods with a stomach' extrusion (or diarrhea).
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If your figure has become distorted due to any malady, then you should sit down and stretch that which is altered today until the third day; afterward rectify what already exists from clay or white lead paint (alabaster), place these remedies undernethy where they are bound with woolen lining.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is placed and positioned on it, so as not to alter the bone'setup, let him who has been healed and strengthened from his broken limb stay outside for three days; these movements are repeated regularly with this fracture.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another inflammation occurs due to applied poultice, apply what we have mentioned for these pains within the patient'thy body until it heals and alleviates that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is young (implying fresh), consider if it'thy bone has been separated or shattered, then you should apply pressure on those fragments that are located near water in the body region of those joints/bones.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the poultice applied by you is drying out, then increase it as much as your need requires.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished those satagias (treatments or compresses), and there is no more discharge remaining from them, if it'se broad, then anoint with mud of the garden; otherwise apply one of these preparations as needed to this place until healed.
Capitol .v.	Given that "Capitol" lacks context within this ex
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When it is bent, the sternum (or breastbone) should be repaloaded or fixed in place as part of a chest injury treatment. This phrase suggests
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Continuously moved is the broken sternum of the player due to their movements and that fracture falls into one of three classifications: simple (or closed), comminuted (with bone fragments spread apart but not displaced, suggesting a clean break with multiple small pieces remaining in place relative to each other without shifting) or compound/open where the broken ends may have pierced through the skin.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken or separated into two parts that do not touch each other, and restoration to its state therein occurs—and when crushed in such places, healing becomes difficult, and the bone may become crooked: this requires special attention for repair; one must be patient at these fractured sites.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the operation on that bone is complete, it means you make two servants present: one to aid and hold the broken jawbone in place, and another to extend the chest where the fracture occurred.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Return and set the fracture in the bones within which it is broken according to its shape as determined by observation, ensuring that there are neither small elevations nor deep hollows present.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion lasts for days, then you must press gently the spot on the malady patient' extramundane part (belly) with a cloth or woolen piece according to your need; and expand and lift the chest, contracting it through your hand where you apply pressure as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot lift the extremity of the shoulder blade to the parts outside, it will come down to the sternum, and the humid becomes over the chest area, causing a limb swelling movement.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The minister presses on the muscle of him at intervals until the bone of the shoulder blade is elevated above his shoulders, and then he corrects the fracture with those tools therein.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel tightness in the shoulder and chest areas, then cut into that area to remove those hardened masses easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then you will ingeniously insert one of those tools that have been prepared for this purpose into its joint wherein they rest, and these are either made of iron or wood; thus, here too we see what form this tool takes:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It appears that the text is from an old medical treatise with a mix of archaic language structures and vocabulзу which makes it reminiscent to Latin as well as modern languages like Italian, Spanish, and French due to their common historical roots in Latin-based Romance linguistic tradition. Here are my translations line by line:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the patient'thy length be as it is possibly for surgery; let there be times when you have hands and limbs available, one large and stretched out, another prepared.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the intestine you have caused when extracting the gallbladthy is wide open and at risk for peritonitis (apostema), then adjust the patient's lips to sew them shut.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the rupture is slight or you fear an abscess formation after incision, then apply pus and bandages according to the quantity of the wound opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you apply a poultice of vinegar and oil on it, then rest over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the bone harden and set when it is rubbed with flour mixed with egg white over a wooden board (stop), placing pressure on that spot until firmness sets in; also apply double layers of padding over the stop and paste, holding hands to maintain warmth for healing. Place another cushion under their legs, hold them around chest area if indigestion is present from whatever they consumed previously related therapy (flour mixture), ensuring a three-inch wide band with an elongated appearance on the palm or within that space; enshroud all in cloth and secure beneath the stone pillar atop where fracture has occurred. Keep hands close to body, rotate them gently around patient's chest and back (where pain is felt), ensuring contact with these areas continuously until healing sets roots deep into bone cracks; if further hardening of break occurs within the site, it will not remain hidden on you anymore as treatment progresses.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here is the line-bymediate translation:
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Return the position of the malady'dictly to his chest bone (vertebra), and gently tap him on it, so that he can sleep there at night within a small hernia cushion; thus ensuring that this servant lifts up its help from underneath, raising either broken collarbone or arm above the vertebral column due to muscle elevation.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And if you do not tighten the bandage immediately in the infected or gangrenous area, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And if you have seen the patient'thy face turned towards water, adjust on the constriction and restore what has been broken in the shoulder blade such that it is healed and coagulated again.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Strict and strained according to the measure of days in twenty-eight, some discomfort is experienced by these people at that time.
Capitol .vi.	Given that "Capitol" is not part of an understand
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	La traducción al inglés del texto dado, que parece ser una referencia a un procedimiento médico para reparar
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 La traducción al inglés del texto dado, que parece ser una referencia a un procedimiento o concepto médico relacionado con la reparación cervical (spatula es incorrecta en este contexto), podría interpretarse de la siguiente manera:
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 Así entonces cuando se rompe el lugar del hueso — y sucede dentro de él mismo, no por una lesión externa — y según lo preparado previamente para este fin (siendo esto parte integral o intervención médica), es reducible nuev trocar a la forma natural en toda medida posible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place pressure over the spot where moisture and albumen humors accumulate, as well as pressure under doubled cloth padding; also apply pressure on the stone slab stand below according to the entire length or amount of the spatula, maybe a small portion only.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the chisel is concave in some of its locations on the scalpel, then carve out that concavity with a hammer and adjust the chisel so that it' extrudes evenly across all areas.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from above, away from contraction and the firmness of the sternum within so that it is not weakened by its location there.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, let another application be made to strengthen and straighten out the leg bone if it has swelled from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When you apply heat over your belly, it is said so here (referring back to a previous statement). Here's my translation line by line for
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The tool or utensil has been restored in xx days or approximately .xxv days. (Note: "xx" and ".xxv" indicate placeholders where specific time values
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Then once this number is completed (presumably a countdown or specific step in the procedure), you will melt away/dissolve the ligature, and ensure that it's secure around those bones from which fear initially arose nor were to be undone anymore. Here's an English translation for each part:
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed to the area of the shoulder and neck bones, then cut over it gently, hold firmly (and make incisions as needed), for we have discussed this procedure related to the fracture healing of a patient with apostomatous cautery if necessary here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The seventh chapter of this document)
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Restoration of the bone'sfracture: This line suggests a focus on medical treatment aimed at repairing or healing a broken b
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The bone in question has been broken by the cold and exposed to moisture there, making it possibly cracked or fractured at its ends which may have become chafed due to movement (or perhaps more accurately "commotion"). This line implies a diagnosis of some sort after observing symptoms that suggest damage consistent with bone injury. It highlights the importance of proper care and potential intervention, possibly for healing or preventing further complications from such an
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	From the accidents that occur when they break their skin due to falling and resulting in deep wounds causing pain all over, difficulties breathing, coughs, chills, fever; it is declared within the cavity of a broken bone which remains concealed from one's consciousness. This line discusses potential complications following an injury where not only does there seem to be immediate physical trauma and associated symptoms like pain everywhere in body ("lo hale"), breathing difficulties, coughing up blood or "tos," fever-like chills (referred to as a “fomento”), but also hints at the potential for serious internal injuries not immediately apparent without medical assessment. The phrase points out that these severe consequences may remain hidden within ("occulta") until they become sympt
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	For the restoration of them (the patient), it is positioned with their abdomen upwards and a pillow between their shoulders; we then address the muscles around him, adjusting his back to two places accordingly—this follows all mannerisms that are possible at present time which suit our methods. This indicates an approach taken by medieval physicians focusing on proper body positioning for restoration or treatment of injuries and illnesses consistent with their understandings ("ad equacio segon manieyra") while accommodating the current state's capabilities (“entro que retorne la figura del os”). Here, "equatio" might mean alignment as part of a healing process or simply positioning for comfort and effective treatment. The mention of muscles suggests that they are concerned with maintaining physical support structures around affected areas ("subtilia te en la operacio"), possibly to aid recovery post-injury—emphasizing caretaking strategies within the limitations (or "maniera") imposed by their medical understanding and available resources. The phrase also touches upon an aspect of patient interaction, suggesting gentle handling or manipulation ("subtilia te en la operacio
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the translated sentence by line:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke the dismemberment of that which corrupts or pricks therein, causing pain or abscess (which I call decay), then you must remove and rectify what causes this through your healing art; if such removal affects the face, also reduce swelling. Adjust so as for it to be cured within its confines.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The text following this reference is not provided
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When the coastline when broken." - This sentence appears to be incomplete or fragmented and lacks context for a precise translation into English. However
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	When the fracture of the coastline does not occur in large rocks but rather where there are thinner, more brittle stones; and from their extremities they do not fall directly into those areas with dense bedrock but through porous or less solid ground." - This translation aims to convey that when it comes to injuries related to the coastline being broken (which likely refers to accidents at sea involving rocks), fractures are more associated with smaller, weaker stones rather than large boulders. The injured individuals' limbs would not directly fall into dense rock areas but might instead land in softer ground
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	I understand that you are afraid of the questions I have for you here." - This line suggests empathy towards someone's fear regarding an inquiry or set of interrogations they might be anticipating, with a possible context related to medical exam
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration should be such that the fracture is enclosed according to possibility within there where it happened; and afterward you apply an ointment or splints tightly for strengthening of broken bones if necessary." - Here, the guidance appears to focus on a practical approach to healing fractures. The text suggests placing any debris around the break (possibly crushed earth) back in place within as per local tradition and then applies an ointment or splints for additional support of broken bones if required by individual need. It reflects medieval practices possibly combining folklore remedies with some degree of medical understanding, albeit rudimentary compared to modern standards.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the backbone is declining towards the parts involved, it causes severe pain and piercing sensation, similar when you experience a puncture while crying (in other words, emotional distress can worsen physical symptoms), and thus one must apply pressure to the area with clothing; this condition also makes breathing difficult, induces coughs and vomiting of phlegm; all these indicate it is hard to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ants are working diligently in that heavy matter.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	From them they say: cover the foods of humidity that produce inflammation and expansion, so that the belly swells up and is extended, leading to broken parts being pushed forward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we consume water to prevent it from causing the hardening disease that leads to stone formation if not already suffering: and if you do suffer, help with drinking water.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the groin (belly) is strongly contracted and does not suffer from it, pinch the belly with a puncture wound while fearing for the area of concern; then they will tear over that place where the bone has been broken down by age or injury. Then pause above this instrument used to maintain strength (possibly referring to an amulet), recall its memory, which precedes it, and ease their limbs with these tools in order to extract what is there.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	When we adjust the lips of the patient if they are large, using compression, and treat that which is placed inside until it heals up.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an abscess opening (appendicitis), then insert your finger and press the point into oil rubbed olive or similar substance, place it over the location so that it heals with the fluid applied to treat the appendicitis wound.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When it rests upon the bed where he sleeps, so that it is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol IX" does not provide context or
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The phrase you've provided appears to be in Latin and relates to a medical procedure concerning the vertebrae of L5 (Little Five) and C1 (First One),
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Translation: "Sometimes the vertebrae of L5 and C1 are broken in falls or accidents, which is then similar to fractures of the neck." The text you've provided discusses injuries that can occur when a person suffers a fall or accident. Specifically, it describes damage to two critical regions within the spine:
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When you have caused fluid to rise in the neck and veins know if it will heal or not, then consider that if your own fluids are already softened and stupefied (essentially dead) and cannot be purged nor extended from those places, when they constrict there, hands on theirs become needles where pain is felt; you understand thusly it will not heal. In the times of preparation for dispositions [death], one knows that this condition does not improve.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If there are pains in those places and they become tightened or require a piercing, then you will understand that the bone of the body is saved, and humors circulate for healing.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see how his backbone looks towards water and wish to know if it heals or not, then pay attention to the state of his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you find that it is already soothed, apply to those waters where the issue occurred and when on your two shoulders lies wind motion and desire for evacuation, causing reclining over their backs and urination with no ability or control, understand then that they are near death, hence do not attempt treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If there is no cure for that cause of them all, then it'dict be worse and more painful.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you perform ablations on the scab covered with dry earth or stones, and pause over where there are such growths for some hours until they are calmed by those astringents; stop at these places for several hours so as to calm down the lesions.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And when one of the cushions for comfort and existing, rests upon that which forms a ligament; commanding the humors to take repose and calmness, so they do not sleep on the part where pain resides until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you injure the bone' extrusion or any cause that has already separated from it, then apply pressure on the spine and put strain on the affected bone; and if there is a large wound, suture accordingly; also provide care for those encased in bandages until they are healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the bone of the hip is broken and it' extruded thigh marrow (the femoral head), which you insert into the left side groin area until it reaches the other knee joint; then stop applying pressure on top, but if necessary apply force with these tools or your hands. If they are digging their fingers in among those things, take a pause and strengthen that arm/hand (the one being used to stabilize).
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel shattered fragments in the womb (body), then touch that area and apply pressure on it until healed as prescribed within treatment for recovery.
Capitol .x.	Capital Section (Assuming "Capitol" refers to an
De restauracio de la ancha.	The phrase "restauracio de la ancha" suggests a restoration or renovation,
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad ones are broken, and if they break further, their breaks cannot be hidden in those extremities; rather, they descend to where these parts begin (indicating perhaps a structural weakness or injury site), causing pain at that location as well as puncture wounds. The splint is stunned when fractures occur.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of him is that you spread your hand over there where he lies, suffering from a broken figure (referring to his body).
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the bone is broken in only one limb of you, then take that second part which has been strapped with leather and assemble it back to its original shape according to your body'dictions/structure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May if the fracture is long or already descending into its parts, then speak of the humors within your abdomen while you prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	So when you have applied the plaster to that area, pause over it; and also halt briefly on either a beam of wood or bone piece, tightening firmly where there is no risk of cracking under pressure nor injury to the spine.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you harden the ulcer with caution (cautery), then cease its extension and begin healing within that point until such time as it is sedated by this treatment; thereafter return to restoring your body, strengthening at that moment what has come before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If your bones are broken or fractured, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (The provided text does not contain enough
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	La restauració de la fractura del auxiliar." translates to "The healing of the assistant's fracture." in
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	In this line, "Adjutori" (assistant) is described as being between the shoulders ("entre les coydes"), which likely means that they are in pain or have a shoulder issue due to their positioning during an activity such
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken (the assistant), then the restoration of him/her is through two methods that you grasp with your hand as follows:" here, "la restauracio es en una de doas manieyras" translates to "restoration involves one or another manual method." The continuation would specify what these manual techniques are. Since no further detail on the specific forms of restoration is given in this line alone, we can't provide a direct translation but understand that it suggests two different hand-held methods
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	They are held in the hands as two types of leathers straps and they should be hung from an elevated position." This line describes how to manage or treat something (likely equipment for fracture healing) by using hand-held leather strap restraints that need
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the thread through a section; and bring out your injured arm inside where it meets with this pillar at which point there is curved action of the staff." Here, "segua el hilo sobre una sección," refers to following or passing along something—presumably treatment equipment like splints. The phrase indicates that an injury (an arm) should be brought into contact with a specific part ("titillic de lu") where there is some kind of curved action by the staff, likely referring to adjustments made on a medical device using leverage or similar technique for immobilization and healing
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish the extension to be forceful, then hold it on the break and that other chain, letting both servants stretch their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	So if the break is close to the limb' extrinsic part, then let one hold fast the tendon over the joint and another immediately attend to fix the injury with a splint or bandage around it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	When a fracture is directed towards the groin, it becomes necessary to pause and place the sinew over that location and on top of the hernia.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "English this makes it easy and steady, and when applied as good practice, hardens that which is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you cauterize the ulcer, it should heal within a week and rest on waxed bandage in place for another day until its healing resumes; at that point, tighten that which has been applied to ensure proper recovery.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And when the wound from breaking is observed, and an external bandage wrap covers it with cloth over the plaster; then adjust their arm at that assistant' extrusion [muscular], holding onto his hand above the affected area.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the drape and strength over the assistant'supinates to ensure that the arm remains in place, preventing any bone injury from water-related causes (implying moisture or fluid accumulation).
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And when they use forceps (or in this context, potentially as a tool for medical procedures). Here is how each
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And when they pause over the fracture that has been pushed and prodded by other forceps; between each pair of them lies a distance, which is determined according to how much bone separation there exists throughout (in this case) three-inch sections of all fragments removed. Here it suggests medical personnel are assessing the extent or degree of fracture displacement when multiple pieces have been extracted from an injury site and using forceps as diagnostic tools during examination, possibly preparation for further treatment such as setting bones into place correctly (reductio).
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	When strength is applied over the bones at which I have mentioned, for that joint restriction.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your constriction at the site of the break is squeezed tightly.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When I lengthened the bone break as well as the lesser constriction.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	So if you see the situation of the bones and joints as having tightness in the moment when restoring your limb'dictum (body), then do so accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear apendicitis with cautery required, then today at the seventh hour apply pressure to constrict and stabilize the swelling.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are on top of understanding that there is no cause for this fluid (presumably referring to the humors mentioned earlier), then do not remove the bandage until three days have passed, or perhaps even longer.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And his malady of the humors lies upon his back and their hands are over his abdomen.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And when the helper cushion is fully woolen wrapped around, and at any given time of day or night that neither figure nor soft lint striped on the broken limb have been dissolved yet, then correct your action accordingly.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the food of the malady according to its course as dictated by our meal schedule, so that the food is subtle within consumption time and avoid heavy intake when you feel it'supesize in yourself (note: "malady" refers to a medical condition or illness; this sentence advises managing one’s diet according to their health state).
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom, these servants (cushions and ointments/bandages) must be strong for forty days; furthermore, if they become weakened or worn out, it should be cleaned with water and medicated oil (using balm), which will restore them.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the bone is set with dirt or dust, do not remove that from it within days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii. (The label "Capitol" followed
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Translation of your provided text suggests that you're referring to the treatment for a broken arm, which is known in
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	When translating the text about arm fracture treatment from a language that blends elements of Latin with Italian and possibly other Romance languages like Spanish or French, we get:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And only when either the large or small fire is broken and their fracture occurs simultaneously.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire below is broken down, it restores and heals you quickly, this being its cure.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the patient's fire (body/energy) is broken for a long time after an injury to them, their healing becomes difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that limestone from there was broken into two pieces (or fragments).
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken it's the small one above (possibly referring to a hip or pelvis), then it is convenient for the doctor, and you must provide restoration of it until such time as this becomes comfortable again for the patient.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that if a large fire is what you seek (or desire), then cease the vigorous extension of force/energy immediately.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two flames are entwined together, then when you withdraw the incision forcefully, do it with strength.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of the hand must be rested and extended over a pillow, placing their palms on the parts below them, and putting each other's hands as well, along with ears positioning at the base of those hands, and hanging mallet above a lowered cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if a hernia is present now or has just emerged from within the patient, to ensure that the hernia does not worsen further.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Extend the arm of the party pushed from below or above with their hand on it (the servant extends upwards), and another minister does so similarly downward.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	When the doctor bends the patient' extrication where it best fits, according to what they can manage optimally.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone' extruding process (satagia), you perform a full cleanse of all flesh within its place using your willpower alone,
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in the patient separate symptoms that pinch the spine and are not within your hope for restoration, then you must act upon them according to our instructions herewith described below:
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May if the bone is broken and swolthy with water (indicating an injury where fluid accumulates), then take it to that particular springs alone for its care.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you harden the cauterization at your patient'supremacy', then tie cloth soaked in olive oil and white wax around that area to allow for ulceration; afterwards, place a plaster made from powdered mold of clay (used as gypsum) while keeping pressure on it until the hardened cauterization yields. Then remove the wax and apply reinforced cast padding prepared with talcum powder mixed in lime putty applied over that fracture which was previously filled with filler material, holding your hand steady to prevent any displacement of bone fragments.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Even know that the bones of the arm are in major positions or a fracture occurs at one focus point or two points simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place your pressure on the spot of the fracture firmly and vigorthy, and when it may even out the protrusion at the parts above or below the breakage, then relieve the tension with a little moistened touch as soon as you remember in the meal'dictum.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the body part and its natural lubrication today.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any cause that requires correction in the limb where you apply pressure (implying treatment for pain or injury), and if this needs to be done quickly, then hurry with what corrects it at once, applying force until the urgent sensation ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let it not be constrained inside while resting, and return its tightness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the extraction has been softened and the bone seems similar to them again, then straighten out all of it with your movement.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if the nourishment is prohibited to prevent harming the member due to excessive tightness; when this happens, softly alleviate that little and strengthen it for as many days as needed until nutrition returns there.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If in the malady you find not any cause for those mentioned herein, do not attempt to draw out within forty days or so from these causes.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place its belly of the malady lowered by its active motion disturbed into sleep on their backs.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Be aware that this fracture will be healed in either xxx days or xxxii days, and at once if it is fortuitously restored in xxviii days, all according to the complexity of complications and the disposition of vitality.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (The translation could vary as there is not
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	La traducción a inglés sería: "Fracture repair of the phalanx and metatarsals in the foot.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You understand that when there is a break in the knee and hip joints of these patients due to old age or weakness, do not attempt to heal them but rather provide gentle care with repeated movements (motions).
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you have the injury or detachment of bone, then cover it with wax so that blood flows evenly for ten seconds each time, and place your hand over this extension to prevent bleeding from continuing.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Whenever the minister extends the broken bones and doctors perform that which is good for proper connection,
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	When the bandage and stocking are applied without curative compress if scurvy appears, apply pressure according to the extent of the area already covered by cloth; you have now wrapped that part in a woolen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	May it be if the wound is in the parts of their entrails that you have to hold with your hand, and appears like a drape'suponce (seeming), then command the malady (disease) to tighten therein at its spot; make sure also for drapes long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it is necessary for the body' extraterrestrial (stelha) to be covered by cloth such that the body itself rests on the palm, then tightly bind or clamp down this part secondarily with strength;
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the parts beyond, then rest your hand on two pieces of the broken part from below, so that it becomes covered and tightened; also pause the swelling, as you turn it back to forth between the limbs' ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break one of the bones in your leg, and it is said that there are cracks (fractures), do thus: if it's a thighbone, then cauterize according to what covers it with fire from its palm, and as desired, pause for four days so that the fracture will be raised upwards and not become swolthy.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be so if the fracture is in those places mentioned herein (the knee joint), or at that spot specified above, or on the earlobe, or around the ankle; and should they heal there entirely without interruption, then similarly apply as when you have them here in the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider when you are restoring him/her, and remember that the application of warm poultices or treatment is needed—this what happens whenever a cause for his/her condition comes to light as told by her.
Capitol .xiv.	The provided lines are in an archaic form of Romance languages
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Regarding the treatment of a hip bone fracture, here is the translation:
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are cracked and declared according to what is converted into motion downward toward the buttocks, which pertains to their sensation below as well.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of him is done so that the sinew tightens over the fracture, and another sinew immediately afterward, with the humors being pressed upon his stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Whenever the minister extends it entirely along according to its quality wherein there is bone breakage in place of joints:
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	May it be for the benefit of the thigh's joint, then apply pressure with bandage to that area where they bone is broken apart at the hip joint; and another strip applies immediately afterward as a means to extend their leg back into place (into position).
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the dislocation is due to wind, then it will be set with silk and stretched out over the parts immediately (or right away).
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And place the doctor' extricates the two halves of their legs together in a natural manner and aligns them for good union; if there are constrictions or spasms present which prevent healing, address those as well.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If there is an ulcer present, then you should keep it bandaged for several days until the ulcer heals and return to your usual care routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The constriction of him is caused: the covering that wraps around the fracture, and folds it twice or thrice times over, removes excess; then apply another wrapping until reaching up to the ankle bone and kneecap stone (the patella).
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	When you insert a long pin far into the thigh and leg area of each department as needed for excess from the bandage, turn it over to those areas where the extremities of the inserted pin are found on the upper part of these departments' limbs, ensuring that no additional length is wasted.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Return pause over the crack in that area of injury and place one stone on top of the bone of the thigh; a cushion is placed above it there.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	When filled with empty spaces between the sheet and thighs (presumably referring to bandages or linen used for medical treatment), thus allowing for constriction of the external outflowing.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here begins the treatment at the strength of mercury above the location of the three-layered or fourfold enclosure around the breakage site; and as you move away from this spot with your bandaging, its tightness decreases, and moisture is applied more gently.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the limbs of the foot to where they enter at their respective parts until reaching the cavity of the thigh, and tighten those extremities with the other straps from another part, ensuring that the ligaments are not displaced from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Return the structure to that area so it does not wound or injure by incision and cauterization nor festering abscesses and semblances related thereof; if you do incur any of these causes, then prick yourself immediately with your finger for diagnosis, and correct what has been injured thus far according to the course we have outlined.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	May if bone is pressed against the other which set it in place, then you should gently massage that second one; otherwise, press on and cure what has been remembered before healing begins.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases this pelvic fracture is also strenuous and requires adjustments using the straps we have mentioned earlier on the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Even in the act of restoring him like this he does not alleviate his leg cramps; and if it is restored alone, another cushion must be applied thereafter as well for that limb which was previously stiffened.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You understand that the thigh is tense for forty days or a few months, and everything depends on the variety of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv. (This line does not contain text from the
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of restoring the dislocated shoulder.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Understand that dislocation of the shoulder joint can be eased through regular movements and stretching exergy (presumably referring to vigorous or energetic actions).
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If you break the bone of him/her (the patient), it is not simply a crack or dislocation in their parts; rather, they feel pain all over as if affected by pus or putrefaction within them.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of him is done by pouring warm liquid that has been broken down from the parts inside where it can be added and combined as necessary for balance, according to what is required in terms of correctness and ease of creation (or treatment).
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	When an application of plaster and pressure is applied to that round stone, if you find difficulty with it from thereon out; apply firm downward pressure above (presumably the affected area).
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvi.	Capture (Capitol). This line appears to be an identifier or title
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	The treatment of the calcaneus fracture." The phrase refers to medical attention focused on healing a broken heel bone, known
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the calcaneus there are two bones of which one is large and called heel-bone (calcaneum), while the other is smaller and referred to as talon." This line from a medieval medical treatise describes anatomical features associated with the calcaneus or heel bone, identifying its major component – typically larger for support – and referring to the subtler part known colloquially as 'talon'. The terminology used here draws upon classical Latin
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And for the healing of these waters that strengthen both bones in the arm and likewise aid restoration here alongside general limb repair, it is considered surgery." This excerpt acknowledges a therapeutic practice involving certain liquids – possibly medicinal or mineral-rich 'waters' – used for their alleged healing properties on both bones in the arm. It further indicates that such treatments are parallel to standard limb repair surgeries and therefore categorized as surgical interventions themselves within this historical medical context.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If you find two bones in the calcaneus entwined with each other," suggests that upon such discovery within an individual's heel bone (calcaneum), this structure effectively becomes 'entirely divided'. This statement likely pertains
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the small bone is fractured," indicates that within such an event concerning delicate or lesser-known parts of the calcaneus (talon), these pieces are likened to segments named 'Denants'. In this context, it appears as though
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If you have broken your large bone, apply that quickly, and it is from those causes which are not under your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Here applies extension and flexion as well as stretching of the joints according to that mannerism.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Indeed when a crack in the thigh bone occurs with strong movements, let it be stretched and placed on ice, and apply your willpower to heal it.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you clamp down with tongs to perform the entirety of the surgery, take wooden splinters that have been paused in time already (presumably from previous treatments or injuries), handle them carefully as white palm fronds; apply these same ones where there is swelling. Do not use fingers for this task and ensure their length corresponds to that of the affected area, inserting into it immediately after stopping any bleeding has occurred within seconds.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrap a covering over any cloth on the patient' extrications as per their length; pause one at the juncture of each leg cushion and place it within the body cavity below the joint, made up entirely of flesh (tissue).
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Here comes the sentence to translate: "Apply bandages at three points of extremities and on the midriff area; here it is forbidden for the cushion to touch the right or left part of the body, which serves as a good measure.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a bone cuddle is administered according to the length of the sling, and it's held on the limb to maintain that state of motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you make an incision for a break, and at that moment it is done properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvii.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise translated into English
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	This line appears to be discussing issues related to the break of the calcaneus (heel bone) and the phalanges (bones in the foot), as well as possibly referring to tendons
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The line translates as follows: "Not all heel sprains involve breaks of the entire calcaneus; some may affect only parts of the foot bones (phalanges). Those with tendon injuries do not break but instead become detached within their joints." This sentence from a medieval medical perspective indicates an understanding that different types of fractures can occur, and specifically notes how tendons are affected differently than when bones actually crack or shatter.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	The translation of this line is: "If the foot bones are fractured and sometimes those very same bones rise above one another, then gout (a type of arthritis) will place its burden on the patient's feet upon preparation for rest." Here we can see a medieval conception that not only does joint pain manifest in conditions like gout but also has specific implications about how such illnesses affect parts of the body, and an understanding that certain fractures might lead to further complications. This reflect
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	This line translates as: "Then stop the foot above what is raised from those bones and apply pressure to them within their respective places." This suggests an early form of medical intervention where specific techniques, such as applying direct force (pressure) are used in treatment methodologies. It indicates a belief that proper positioning can alleviate pain or harm caused by fractures – possibly reflective of the kind of home remedies commonplace during medieval times before advanced orthopedic procedures were
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Return and apply pressure above, stopping bleeding from the abdomen into which two cups are placed; here is where you will stop blood flow with these small containers (cups).
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Return strength to that part of the body with its structure for downward movement, after you have wrapped it and addressed other potential reasons related thereto by which weakness may arise.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then you will loosen the ligament (ligament), fracture/displace the bones that are groaning downwards (depressed bones), and surgery is needed to deal with these issues.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	May if you also have joint pain, those will be restored and their pains cured as they were used to in the healing process of your body.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And impose rest on this cracked stone according to its length, and place your pad under it; apply pressure immediately to that part of the table which you have recommended for me, tightening those areas affected by constriction.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May it be that when the bones are broken into two or three pieces, then you rest on any part of his body enveloped in a lion skin and harden the tablet under the chest, keeping one hand upon either end of the tablet to ensure good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not neglect to consider all the causes mentioned by others in these accidents we have described, and apply yourself fully to this water-borne incident.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.: This line appears to be referencing a specific section or
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	From the break of the uterus (possibly referring to an issue with reproductive health) and the bone of the pelvis, as well as the hip joint's ligament:
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the woman is broken, let it rest in that which has been crushed, and incline it towards the middle portion of the two-part assembly; keep its tendon behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Here applies pressure on the two of them, and when urination reduces discomfort for ease, and returns that second person to their original position according to which manner they were taken away earlier; return back this first one initially.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	E for seven days or longer, during which time it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take once upon the sheep'sup and tighten over his chest with a reed; insert all of the bladder into its cavity, then blow through it to inflate the bladder inside so that if there is a fracture (possibly referring to an injury or issue within), it will heal.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Return its inflammation with bandages and keep it for two days until healed inside where we place them.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of either a man or woman are fractured, administer to them in rest and treatment the water they have received recommendations for their thighbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	When the crack is not hidden in these joints and scarcely ever occurs, it mainly pertains to that which has been studied by you herein my free text; this fracture indicates your major dispositions towards restoration and strictness, so understand (or comprehend).
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the wound in the home occurs and apply honey with an axe, placing it there; cover over it with a cloth wrap, wrapped up tightly, leaving for three days or sending them away until healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. (The specific meaning of "Capitol
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When a bone is broken while it'dict young," in English would translate to:  
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	With such an injury where you have fractured the bone and notably if your jaw or adjutant'se (aide) is also large, which resembles yours as well since that’s when you will cut and cauterize it right away provided that this operation with a lancet follows suit like those of our superior fellows.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the patient faints and you find them in this state because of lack or absence (of strength/power), then grasp it tightly where they lie until their breathing becomes regular again; provided there is not another cause for its occurrence.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And begin restoring the fracture on that very day, do not extend it further unless you have caused suppuration (infection).
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you apply cauterization if there is an ulceration present, so that restoration can occur within one day while the ulceration recedes, and not until the third day of all this; then you will cause harmful accidents to happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	May it be that if your bone is fractured above the navel you can reduce and splint it with what'sup for easier handling and a short extension time.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it not be extension beyond your preparation and the position of the patient, then reduce that which is in those thighs on yourself; this limb made from iron, its length being seven digits or eight (a finger's width), its circumference according to the size of the body - for these reasons, a physician must extract it accordingly based on what you require during treatment for any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And as soon as it is ready, and there's only a slight swelling on that area during the operation time, take care not to press too hard upon it.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it goes:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E fornito in Greco "lapsus artistis ateleare", è pallida.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that cause wherein his limb has ceased and become raised above its bone, he should make an effort upward upon it.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When it enters a convalescence where the bones are returned and one is seated on any kind of cushion.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so you should grasp the ends of the fracture with them, and if the patient' extruded limb is delicate, do not apply that good instrument to it; instead, insert what tool has power into that bone where the broken part goes in.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May you not be able to reduce the entire amount of fluid we have recommended, then divide and administer that portion which flows from the insensible bodies with us today; or cut one piece for any method at your disposal.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	When it is necessary to return that which has hardness and sharp bone fragments into the bone of the body, do so gently.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced (meaning brought back to its original position), and with that reduction, atrophy pain vehemently presses inward, so you understand that the bone will not return to its natural place; therefore, now provide great care for the joint.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and you submerge the cloth in a wet moist black material, especially in summer, without touching the ground or any other cause that might oil it up; thus preventing it from getting spoiled by rubbing or decay.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And administer balm in the hour of meat digestion restoration, and place what has been discovered inside her wound with poultices and wrappings according to its size.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Guard your whole body with caution to not strain the child who has a fracture; as doctors often go about their work carefully for fear that an accident may occur upon them, making them ill or worsening their disease (sickness).
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a loose ligament strain (unlike other types of bone breaks), then so be it.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the child is large or a bad one and has concerns about those harmful accidents they have had upon that spot, causing pain therein, do not pause over that bedpan; instead, may you wrap it in hard linens at the place of sheets and clothing for them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once a day or two times have passed and the worm is generated within it (the patient), hold under their drape where you placed your pause above that spot of moisture, apply soothing ointments on these substances which are in our custom to treat pains, as when applying liniments mixed with four ingrediens and similars for this.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And when you have prepared the ligament and considered the swelling in each day' extrication during morning and evening, until it is solidified and closed up, prepare your limb in such fashion that draining will occur from there to the parts throughout the rest of the night.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the patient spends days without rest and their bra doesn'thy not heal or fall off from there at all times, then you know that small pains are present which will lead to seeking help again.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (which are separated and extracted), the ones that cannot be kept apart and place their limbs causing pain, do as instructed by you who can manage it: insert them accordingly.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you suffer from the plague of urine or excrement, it is considered sickness, another type of corruption and putrefaction; consequently, pause at one of those waters that were mentioned in the previous description of treatment as necessary for recovery.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xx.	In this line of medieval medical text translation into English word by word (
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the healing care you apply to any bone fracture on a limb part.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Movements are guided in the process of healing a fracture, mostly at joints, and directed by its limb shape; forcefully preventing the member from performing its natural movements.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	And consider if the nodulation is recent; administer in that medicine which has tightly bound itches or boils and pus-filled sores (abscesses), either some of these remedies, all of them, applied to those affected areas with a soothing touch. Apply this mixture on top of the swelling wrapped in linen cloths; bind firmly around there for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May if the knot is already turned into stone and tightened in this way becomes necessary to provoke that which extrudes from there, cut it down where part of its body has protruded outwardly excessively or prominently; remove any superfluous parts within so as they might be inflamed with pus, ensuring the affected area is cleansed for healing.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: (The provided text does not contain enough context
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the restoration of the broken bone is completed and in accordance with nature's design, subtlety and flexibility are restored to the limb below the joint (implying that proper healing should not only repair but also maintain or restore normal movement). The sentence suggests a holistic approach where attention is given both to structural
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When the bone fracture is healed, it's not merely by chance but due to causes: among which one may be excessive manipulation of the ligament and joint (which should not exceed what nature has created); or too much restriction within these tissues that nutrition cannot flow freely; or an abundance of embrocation used for treatment, as well as movement beyond necessity at a time when it is unsuitable—or swelling in the area below the joint and inflammation present.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: In giving care for the humors, it is necessary to drain off excess and make the patient'thy blood soft within such a way that its essence becomes multiplied therein; apply washing therapy (bathing), and administer gauze bandages with linen soaked in honey.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place pressure on the limb so that it draws nourishment back into its normal form within whereby food returns and circulates properly in the body again.
Capitol .xxii.	Given that "Capitol" is not part of an actual text in
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	When the bones are set crudely and it's forbidden to operate on them again, translate this as: "When the bones have been crudey fixed (set), no further surgical intervention is allowed."  
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you have restored the health of his body from tortuosity and prominency in bones and joint knots, as well as its natural form, yet he is not prohibited to undergo natural operation; but if there comes someone who exists whose member has a new protrusion or outgrowth, then you receive the word.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	May you stand as masters and restorers, who have done much to our healing here, but this action is lost due to great fear of the title by which one might die.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	When limping and knotting are recent (just starting), in the water basin where you have placed their thighs covered with soothing herbs, as they were washed with ash from above and cleaning substances like lye or soap; there is a need for application of mollifying plaster both on top and at the bottom. Or if it' extraneous gummy secretion (gum) coming out of alkade rinse area or chest, covered by linseed grease/olive oil in that place—or when they are fatty flesh cut into feather quills applied to breasts as part of these medicines known among women for strengthening.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some liquids are dissolved by constant exposure to cold fire that is applied at all times and parts of the body, administering motion throughout the entire day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May it be that tightness has been here and now present, becoming stone-like in painful form, necessitating its care by means of iron forged tools; furthermore, when the pus beneath their cessations is expelled continuously, and excess fluid accumulated above such joints as a result from this metallic doctor'thy work flows downward into those delicate bones below them—herein lies an indication that intervention has been provided.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De sermo en dislocacio.	At word in dislocation." This line appears to be referring to a situation or topic related to
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	On the topic of dislocation (dislocatio). It is an injury to any part of one's body that results in immobility and requires medical attention; it brings about painful bruises and serious injuries." The line describes a condition whereby something has caused a joint or limb within someone’thy body structure ("lo seu loc") to become dislocated, leading to restricted movement (immobilization), necessitating professional care. Pain is likely experienced as large, potentially severe ('lesios grans'), and this may also involve bruising due to
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Then when you suffer from a joint or limb being out of place (dislocation), urgent measures must be taken to return it back into position, and if not promptly done so, the affected area may become swollen with painful difficulty in reducing such dislocations." This passage stresses immediate action required for correcting a dislocated joint or limb. Delayed treatment can lead to complications wherein inflammation (swelling) makes repositioning ('reducing') more challenging and potentially agonizing, highlighting the urgency of proper medical intervention in such cases during medieval times as depicted by this treatise on medicine from that era.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	Therefore if someone is not restrained or straitjacketed during reduction (the process of setting a dislocation back into place), it will lead to muscle contractions and sharp pains." Here, the treatise warns against unnecessary movements ("not being restricted") in patients with joints that have been manipulated for repositioning. Movement can induce spasms—involuntary muscular contractions characterized by severe pain
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When you have cooled the humors (achieving temperatures conducive to reducing inflammation), then cover yourself with flaubotomia of the malady's region and allow restoration; place your limb encased in water scoop or oil, for its facilitated reduction.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	When all of a member is treated with the water from which memory will return in its place,
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when you order for loosening of displacement since it follows after a fracture, take from the upper part into the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.: This line does not appear to contain actual text from
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The phrase "Curacio de dislocacio di mandibula" translates into English as "Treatment for dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Translation: If the jaws are dislocated and not set properly; then fractures of their locations by a little force can be treated (this refers to minor repositioning interventions): or if they were entirely displaced with accompanys, when saliva from within is present in great quantity preventing that portion being held back again inside the joint and allowing no speech due to mouth closure—the tongue becomes wrapped around one' extran.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the displacement of it is little, then back in its major positions returns for a small cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May if the dislocation is whole and complete, then it should be treated with immediate reduction of limb movement, and not delayed in total.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the medieval medical treatise to translate:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce him/her (the patient), and mostly if both jaws are dislocated, then apply hot water or oil enema gently until the reduction of both has been achieved; thus have we discussed this matter today.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are swaddled up again, with the opening of the malady not softened nor closed by mouth silk cloths, its fire is poured over these fluffy layers using wax and oil for lubrication; thus their saliva becomes more easily expelled.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And let him lie on his backs, and his head rest between two pillows, so that it does not move from the fourth part of the body nor to the left side; do not forcefully massage any cause thereof; having in his mouth food forbidden for consumption (such as strong wine), he will begin to moan when pains become aggrasuponent and the jaws are numb, then spit it out.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is administered easily, and not work over the mouth's opening where food goes in and drink comes out, until the jawbone becomes numb and heals.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of two dislocated jaws at any time and not converted to their respective places is difficult, then you will experience persistent fevers and frequent urination; furthermore, severe abdominal pain in the stomach area occurs, as well as clear-cut or bloody diarrhea.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it again, then you realize that I have lost it; and after taking it for these many days (a specific number of days not mentioned in the text), something happens to me as a result.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv. (The ".xxv." part does not
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	La traduzione della frase medica italiana fornita suona come: "Ridurre la dislocazione delle scapole (ossa dell'anca) e dei tendini degli arti." Questa descrive un tratt
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	La traduzione della frase medica italiana fornita può essere interpretata come: "Non è stata trovata una lesione delle scapole (ossa dell'anca), ed alcune dislocazioni possono avvenire nella parte posteriore, e questa viene dichiarata dal sentimento." Questo suggerisce che nonostante ci possa essere un senso di dolore o disagio nelle regioni posteriori del corpo (possibilmente il bacino o lsia), nessuna les
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	La frase medica italiana fornita tradotta in inglese potrebbe essere: "Il malaujo si aggropiglia al dorso del corpo ed estende i suoi bracci." Questo descrive un'azione clinica, dove una condizione o lesione (indicata con il
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	La frase medica italiana fornita tradotta in inglese potrebbe essere: "Applica anche una leggera contusione alla parte della mano dove si trova l'arma ferrea per farla ritornare." Questa raccomand
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	La frase medica italiana fornita tradotta in inglese potrebbe essere: "Pon poi una leggera pressione sull'impianto ed esercitati su quella." Questa sembra suggerire un tr
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	La frase medica italiana fornita tradotta in inglese potrebbe essere: "L'estremità di chi si trova al corvo (cioè, la gamba) continua lì accanto ogni giorno; lei non è dislocata alcun dato. La cosa deve quindi essere ristretta e avvolta come abbiams fatto a detto." Questo descrive uno stato in cui una specifica parte del corpo (probabilmente un braccio o gamba) rimane accanto al corvo, indicando che non è dislocata né il giorno successivo. I soggetti sono
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place rest upon that plastering, and pillows, and compression; command the humors to settle down and regain balance while it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	At this moment of treatment in this place, reduction is achieved for the patient' extrinsic part when it gets separated from its original location.
Capitol .xxvi.	The given text appears to be in an archaic form of Spanish or Italian
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	When it comes to the reduction (manipulation back into place) of a muscle dislocation, here's what this might mean line by line in
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	When it comes to the reduction (manipulation back into place) of a muscle that is not actually dislocated but rather torn apart or separated, here are three ways by which this can be addressed: one way involves realigning what was presumed as 'dislocation' at once. Here’s how we could interpret and translate the provided line in contemporary English for clarity within medical context:
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the tendon'dict, and this pain occurs therein; nor in parts behind by the shoulder joints or forwards through nerves:
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is a displacement and departure of the body from its parts, especially in those areas where bones are thin, dislocation occurs; possibly also when there are movements involving thickness of the bones, they exit with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And with the cold applied through pressing or casting, and his body is set apart from asthma by application of heat to it, where he has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now that you have called out what has entered overly into yourself and are proceeding with the treatment of it all at once, continue with your healing process.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the first source sentence: When dislocation occurs at joints away from touching; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and its counterpart; wherein within the concavity of the affected limb'sup, neither metal hook nor malady allowed reduction to the area under examination by any means.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If you have a displacement of either hip or shoulder, and it shows signs through touch without causing pain, do not attempt dislocation correction yourself.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation it is felt that cooling and inflation of the malady occur.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of the swelling is what makes its minister lift it up from undernethy thereupon placing gentle pressure on the pulsing parts below, and raising that part to their location; as well as lifting its mother tongue back into place slowly until return homeward again.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May it return not and from the commencement that dislocation occurs, hurrying days when the humidity is high (and thus bloat), then apply liniments made of honey mixed with coriander seed in wine, administered to both legs above their joints where they are bound tightly by thongs.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish, reduce that second symptom following this manner: and make a present home long than the belly, from where it belongs, and insert your muscle quickly into the area of the abdomen through which the belly has protruded; another servant should immediately pull out the ma (intestine) within those parts just above while you are doing this.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the thigh is swolthy (possibly meaning "swollen" or having a distended appearance), then when another cause becomes apparent that keeps it hanging down, after returning to its place so severely may it be dislocated again.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another reduction method is as follows: make a long staff with which its figure can be seen like a mason' extraterrestrial tool (which should not be thick nor subtle), and set it up on the patient's thigh, ensuring that it rests firmly there; place this stick atop of the staff cover, keeping the malady in line with the length of the staff. Extend your hand over each section immediately after placing them to strengthen their connection back to where they belong quickly for a secure joint return.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment: grasp a stick with its length equal to two arm'dicts and hold that at an angle of four digits from the thumb knuckle according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Over his head place these heavy cloths in such a way that it does not press on the belly (the abdomen).
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And it is placed timely on the tightness of the patient' extramundus (the exterior parts), and its arm or hands are extended over/inside the carriage within their divisions, holding onto the cart with both arms and hand-extension as well.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the patient's interior is completed in any way that you can do it, and when you pause to stroke their hopeful wool lining with its quantity; a poultice made of molten lead mixed with egg whites has been prepared over all muscle tissue as needed for turning away from above (likely referring to reducing swelling), intermittently stroking the area tightened by stricture, and binding it together. The padding is placed on top of this preparation; attached to the patient's chest, tied down securely without making a hissing sound over seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When food from humoral excess is stopped and the body part is comforted, then healing begins for them.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And when food is given more in portions seven or eight and exercise with it so that they do not close tightly shut nor soften up, then already the disease will be cured.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	May the joint be dislocated due to humidity that you introduce into it or for another reason; in such cases, administer three treatments as described in the manual of therape extrictive measures:
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all of a sudden there is pain and the ligament and joint are not fixed in place for several days, then reduce swelling with plaster or tightness over time; moreover, that arm cannot be raised to the parts above, which means you understand that these patient'se nerves, which are located at the top of their muscles, either as extensions/stretching outwards or softened (mollified), and know that joints will never remain fixed in place on their own.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation that you feel in your pelvis and thighs (peitz and mammilla or lower parts), reduction is made by force and extension until return to normal position; within this context returns back.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it is administered in that other stricture, and care for it while healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you harden the healing process in the limb and slow down its movement, then let the humidity be bathed as directed until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: (The specific translation of this Latin-influen
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the care for the dislocation of the hip: "Curaci de dislocacio del coyde." translates
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You understand that the hip joint is dislocated and appears difficult; it's generally displaced towards the back part of its cavity—whereas if you gently manipulate or touch as per any form in which it has been dislocated, then this becomes evident when realigning the misaligned pelvis. This indicates a concavely deformed joint that cannot bend one'thy arm nor reach for oneself with said limb.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And when the restoration of it is possible – that is to say, its breast should be extended with both hands and arms widened outwards, along with the doctor's hands being on their hips and thighs, while they press down on the joint located at the tips of one’se hands or in the palm of their hand where it returns into place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the parts ahead, return it by bending your hand around its own part, entering where you touch the groin area with the back of your hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If dislocation does not submit to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and motion forcefully.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	When two ministers stretch out their arms, they hold that instrument with both of them to prevent it from being overextended.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And turn his arm completely over it (the body), wrapping the drape or cord around its middle, holding on with a leather strap.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil there to help alleviate those causes that aid in lubricating the joint, and strengthen it by pressing firmly until its return.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And reduce the pressure where it has been paused upon that coating in which there is stiffness and accumulation of phlegm within the constriction, with the arm hanging from the shoulder, being held for a few days by hands.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if it is necessary to separate them (the parts), then there must be separated in that place the sinew of him/it and make such separation therein.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not being stronger (meaning weak or inflamed), then apply bandaging and binding it tightly for several days until it protrudes out again, and afterwards remove that which has come outside.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you apply pressure on the joint for its reduction and positioning is in motion, then use moist wetting combined with dry friction while inside that moment it has been alleviated; or pause over the joint which corresponds to a fatty movement area; and bind it securely, leaving those hands placed above the joint throughout the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Return that one and immerse the other in bath; when they suckle (suck), rub the joint where it is cold with warmth quickly several times so as not to cause dizziness or motion sickness—the first treatment, second application after a pause.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Am inserted within that which is moistened (likely with some form of liniment or medication), wherein it resides securely/com
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish to do so, pause over that moistened and split gap at the cow's border edge, and press on it firmly; apply several times until that area becomes dry/wet again (referring back) returning its natural state or positioning. This line suggests a therapeutic action where liniment is applied to an injured part of the body near calf muscles – possibly for treatment purposes like reducing swelling, and then reassessment after applying multiple times until there's no longer visible moisture from exudation or persp
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol XXVIII: (This is likely a reference to the chapter number in
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	About treatment of joint displacement; it's located at the junction where the arm meets (or connects) with another body part or limb—possibly referring to a shoulder injury in context, which would align well within medieval medical practices focused on physical dislocations and their restoration
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the joint of your body part is dislocated and returning it to place (repositioning) involves ease; however, in other junctions more caution must be taken if relocation happens quickly at the moment when displacement occurs or developments into an apoplectic condition occur. This suggests that while some immediate action may suffice for joint repair without specialized treatment required urgently (likely referring to a shoulder dislocation), in other cases, extra care is needed due possibly to complications such as compartment syndrome when the affected area swells rapidly and pressure builds up within muscles preventing proper circulation. The mention of 'apoplectic' could imply an onset or exacerbating situation requiring prompt attention by a medical practitioner, considering medieval medicine’s limited scope in dealing with such acute conditions without modern interventions.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you stop the joint'sup (groin) of the malady above a table and extend it outwards from there; then let your doctor or palm rest on the imminent juncture, pressing gently until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Even if it is considered that the palm is protruding towards the belly of her/him, then let the hump press down on two sides of her body onto a table to extend and reduce; and if dislocation precedes, position her so that her center overlays the tabletop directly, thus enabling the doctor' extrication hand to rest upon the imminent joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon enough, good things; but if not, that painful spot will harden and cannot be cured here anymore; do not attempt to heal what has passed these days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Even though the knee joint follows its twisted nature; and there is no cause in the malady itself, but it becomes softened and cannot be stricken for a reason—know that your nerves are compressed or squeezed, and you should not rest them here. Rather, prepare to strike with cautery specifically designed for this treatment (and make sure any additional causes of discomgy by water accumulation receive proper attention).
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when the treatment is returned, place your pause over what we have prepared for them (recommendation), and let it be laid down with strength for days; furthermore, cut and exercise their limbs' flesh, as well as exerthyze that which lies on top of it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	May it be that if the patient'se movement is stiff and painful in there, apply warm water to his tail end and some herbs for several times until he feels relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (This line appears to be an in-
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	From the treatment of displacement.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Alcùmes times have led these joints out of place for the entire body.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a limb is dislocated from either side of the hand or abdomen of him/her, then they bend and thrust to return it into place until restored.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the head of this person, and suspend that which is where it has become displaced, allowing for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Return those within it that have been raised up and extended into today, placing them there where they currently rest or stand.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When the pain worsens during the day and ceases at night, he (the patient) should listen to that second account of it as well, not neglecting either one in daily life and movement; this happens for a few days until relief comes.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems to be water (referring likely to a fluid imbalance or excess of body fluids), and if displaced from the abdomen, bring that element back together with this first operation in order for healing to commence.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it appears as if fluid is coming out at other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx.	The given text seems like an excerpt from an old medical document
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	This line appears to be in a language with roots that are reminiscent of Latin, as it pertains to the treatment of vertebral displacement (
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in your back or neck are completely dislocated and scattered around (in that case), it's not treated here; for then death is brought about by internal bleeding (
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	This line discusses the consequences when an individual voluntarily increases their internal bleeding (
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So it's already been dislocated to behind and is said not to heal properly or recover, leading to poorly repaified conditions (
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	This line suggests that when the patient is a child and still developing (in infancy), it's not treated here nor healed (
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	This line indicates that in some cases the treatment for these injuries may involve lifting or tapping on them (asymmetric movements, percussion), and if necessary even cutting to remove it because of its proximity (
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	When you injure the spot that is already painful on the chest, it's neither healing nor recovery for that injury here; and similarly in this one where there is suffering.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From those it is not healed except for that which you apply directly into them, as recommended by water (presumably a poultice or treatment).
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The malady is extended over the patient'thy face above their chest as quickly as possible during emesis (vomiting), and it spreads moistly throughout, to ensure that not even the patient’s breasts are exposed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place one staff upright on the ground at the foot of the bed and another in the arms holding up their feet on the other side of the body.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the staff and it is not fixed in a pit; another minister grips the other following that shape.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Envelop the sinew above the thigh and tighten it with strong bands, extending its tip to where you must secure the head; bind that part in place, and attach another band across the legs' bones, securing them as well; fasten all straps together on this staff which holds your patient'se feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here the minister extends the ligature to the part of the beam where they are fixed, but not allowing it to tighten excessively as we have mentioned before.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Here comes the medical treatise to translate: And let the doctor place their palms on the spinal column where it is strong so that it can return (possibly indicating healing or stabilization), and adjust their weights upon this structure, ensdicting them as per customary practice.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	May it not return in this way, then take a table of which the length or width is three feet, and cut into the wall where we have indicated that the swelling should be within the extent of the table' extrême.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to turn the quality that has been revolved in your ma (body), then stay on ground until the head of the malady is at the back end of two sticks; and these lengths are one arm'sup, and for its head again reach down till the end of a stick. At this length between each staff stands a palm-sized space, in which you have already become sick (the condition manifesting itself). Each foot that turns there is fixed firmly on earth so that it does not wander off.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When one has a staff in which they turn it between the two halves of the sticks,
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a defect where it forms wood of such length that equals a handful when turned over, and in the other two sticks they resemble each other.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical treatise:
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And for each turn and position that you need, apply one minister who turns it at the patient'se place, whereby the doctor manipulates the spine as we have described.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes: (or This is the form of injury)
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And apply that the spine is returned, and its cavity has been refilled with albumen paste, and putty; place it over the astragalus stone of the chair from which three fingers or an inch are removed outwards, length according to what puffs up the space where there was a hernia, on the spine itself.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And return its ligaments as we have mentioned before, and place it under the nourishment humidity within which it can heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any urgency in the location at the end of healing, then those who are administering medicine must use ointments that moisten and cleanse for a long time to be applied as directed; and this has already been applied on that spot with a layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And when there are signs of impending danger in the lower back vertebrae due to dislocation; it is this one that you have noticed for which no further pain will arise from now on with this medicine, lest great harm come upon you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVII. (Note: The text provided does not contain
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Regarding a hip dislocation, it might be translated as "Concerning the treatment of a dis
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Concerning the joint of the hip and the muscle connection which only becomes dislocated singularly, without causing harm to those other smaller bone connections with their respective curvatures where you might otherwise injure them if injured elsewhere in your body.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the wide is dislocated according to four ways: at the divisions of the bones above, below, in front, behind, or undernethyre/towards it.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is dislocated at the joints below and scarcely in the parts ahead or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	When the dislocation of his limb is broken up here in these parts it becomes long and narrow that has been stretched out from healthiness; this malady cannot bend its knee nor use tongue, whereby the appointed point for apostemy cautery arrives at this location via the thigh'dictating landmark.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And when that which causes his displacement is located outside the body parts, these accidents are contrary to it.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When the patient's dislocation spreads to their knee joint from here and cannot bear weight on it anymore; urine is retained in him/her, and his or her footwear becomes calloused (hardened), walking must be done with bare feet on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May reduction of these spices for this dislocation that you consider is that if the dislocation is old and ancient, then it has already been addressed by your previous management here in Rome according to its disposition; hence, there'dict not be a prognostication made about it. And so we shall continue without making any further predictions concerning her condition at this time.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that where the dislocation is recent and among the four species of dislocation, then take up what has been displaced to restore the joint' extraneous or misaligned parts must be returned (to their original positions). Moreover, ensure it returns firmly on both sides; no further treatment will suffice.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May it be that if the condition does not return in this treatment phase, then you must prepare strong medicine and extend the cushion under your patient' extricated justly at intervals (or immediately), or over their bodies overall; another servant extends said remedy from below upwards to where they touch my hands.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	When extension occurs from here or at the end of this section related to the shoulder joint or between the ribs and sternum area, it means:
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	When all of them experience extension for as long as the malady is lifted up and falls down on its ground,
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This particular type of extension is common throughout all four (Italian/Spanish). Here's my translation for each line based on context and vocabulзу from the text provided:
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns when we have mentioned it (implying previous treatment), then such is required by water that they've spoken about for healing itself; but otherwise, entirety of what has been said herein regarding its own remedy must be applied. Here I translated 'E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.' as "This particular type of extension is common throughout all four (Italian/Spanish).
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated and located at joints between its muscles (the limbs), wherein water has risen above one's belly; hold pause for tendons in that area which lies between thighbone ends near what shoulder bones attach to their respective skull parts. Here I translated 'E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela.' as "In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated and located at joints (the limbs), wherein water has risen above one's belly; hold pause for tendons in that area which lies between thighbone ends near what shoulder bones attach to their respective skull parts.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Here comes the next sentence to translate: Assign another servant with strong forceful arms and massage deeply into the hollow of the thighs and extend it over all parts for vigorous extension; when that returns to its place, you understand that the method is effective.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular substance is for purulent inflammation with which this limb is reduced, and the other species are beneficial as well.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you are able to stand on your feet and do not obey the entrance of this specific healing practice for both thighs at once, which serve as pillars strong enough like ligaments in each leg bone and muscle tendon, then:
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of the body exceeds four cubits in length and when one thigh is extended as much as two cubits, that indicates a certain condition or imbalance within the patient'dictated by humoral theory at this time (medieval understanding).
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And raise the patient' extramundane body (the humoral balance outside of oneself), and have it on the head like a crown; thus, two cubits from the ground is its length upon earth.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Appoint a strong lad to shorten the head of the thigh, and have another boy suspended therein by it; yet another boy will lower the thigh at its strength, so that the juncture returns swiftly to its place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it is dislocated from its place outside, where the hump of ugliness presses on the knee according to what we have recalled in this manual; and his ligaments are placed directly over the swolthy part and chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	E two stakes are set up, one under the patient's foot and another on their head; and with these stakes in place, adjusted according to where they lie upon which clothes have become damp due to sweat (which is enveloping them), so that moisture doesn'thy can not wet your tunic (clothing) between the thighs of you, preventing exacerbation from displacement.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends towards its respective portion, and the doctor takes hold of their hand for reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So then, if you obey the reversal, it will be great; and if not, pause over that attentively, for we have spoken about this in a gentle manner.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayhaps the thigh has fallen upon its knees so awkwardly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When dislocation occurs towards the parts below, then cover that change with bandaging as directed hereinabove; and let your doctor's palm rest on the affected thigh area for some time while holding another hand over it to pause extension of this injury at its location in lower body.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is in the parts behind, do not cover that which has spread to the lower parts and stands on earth—there are those who have covered it over a hard cause; their face and ligaments should be extended as mentioned earlier (in this text), there being no need for further covering.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When compression is applied with a table over the location where joint pain occurs, it means that medical practitioners use pressure at this specific spot to alleviate discomfort caused by issues related to body humors as per their customary treatment methods for such conditions like
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So once the reduction is complete, as indicated by our term for 'reduction,' it should not bother you to do so yourself (meaning that after performing self-treatment or manipulation of an injury), and when those who have been previously instructed extend these cushions back out on their legs, they push further until the swelling outside has spread beyond this point; thereafter, make sure to adjust your hips and pause pressure with a bandage that does not strain too tightly across any part of the body. Stick it in place for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the strap and bandage, and compare one cushion with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those joints locked in a position, then you understand that the dislocation has already been set, and thus proceed with treating the humors.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of softening, then return and bandage that part according to your first application, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Return that part of it and make him walk on these crutches for as many days until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	The given text seems like an attempt at translating medical terminology from Latin or
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	From "curacio de dislocacio del denolh," we can infer a translation related to the treatment of spinal dis
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The translated text appears to be describing the stages of spinal dislocation according to medieval medical understanding:
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The translation of the first source sentence would be: "It is his name for loosening, that you command the hump to apply its cushion at the thighs; heed well when it becomes dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it is necessary for the patient's cushion (or pad) to attach at the hip joint without labor, that becomes its role or purpose in recovery care.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Return that and apply it to the couch at the thighs, applying those adhesive pieces there for three or four days, and return them as needed:
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Not use the humoral fluid from walking for more than a few days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of him is considered excused (presumably by the patient or doctor), then apply a strong extension to his ligaments, as previously narrated in the treatment of the joint.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide contextual text or specific
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The phrase in question appears to be related to the treatment of a tarsal dislocation, which is an injury affecting one of the bones
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The phrase translates to: "Sometimes the ankle is sprained for a short period of time and sometimes it's dislocated, which can be due to forces applied either internally or externally." Here are line-by-line interpretations in English:
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The translation of the medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May the cure of his return be through gentler relief and to make it easier for him both in walking outside where he can retreat again.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the treatment of him comes according to the second complement, make sure you straighten his hips and hold that strong minister behind his back at the place where he lies down there.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Return yourself the sound of your left hand to where it belongs in the place of the abdominal cavity and apply pressure with your right hand on its position, which is at the bottom of the thigh'dictating from below the knee joint.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Return the leg to its cavity and adjust it with your left hand for two passes, then extend the leg further using both hands while guiding the foot' extrusion back into place by force of three beats from each side.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Returns the foot'se bone to its proper place in the cushion gently and you are at the navel (referring possibly to where someone might hold or support something using their hands). The original text seems to be advising on how a healer should handle patients with joint pain, suggesting gentle movements back into position
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So you return the foot's bone gently into position and if done correctly (with gentleness), all is well—and in that case, no further action need be taken; but otherwise repeat this procedure until proper alignment has been restored for which additional attempts may be necessary. The text continues to give guidance on how a healer should treat conditions like joint pain by carefully manipulating the affected body parts back into place if they have become misaligned or dislodged, emphasizing gentle handling and patience in treatment methodologies typical of medieval medicine practices.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are not permitted to reduce it (the dislocation) when we have applied pressure on him/her already, let the hernia speak about its two positions over land; and first throw in a winding sheet firmly into position upon earth's surface—and between his thighs place your hands wrapped within cloth as protection so that he does not expose himself to further injury. Here, we see an alternative method whereby if direct manipulation is contraindicated or forbidden due to the condition of the patient (possibly because too much force could cause harm), a more cautious approach involving observation and providing support with cloth bandages might be recommended by medieval healers for treating hernias. The advice continues in line with maintaining safety while still attempting conservative treatment methods where possible, showing an understanding of when to apply direct physical intervention versus protective measures or alternative
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The minister of his tongue holds their thighs together, and another minister extends either the body or the bandage that lies over the chest area; this one expands against the patient'sextending part so that it is not drawn back toward the parts.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	When the doctor applies pressure on their own joints, and another minister holds the healthy hernia in place at once intervals for when the dislocation returns to ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Therefore, when dislocation returns and it is declared to you that the reduction of your limb has been accomplished, then immobilize strongly with bandaging what remains loose thereof, and bind the limb to its sling.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When you fear or protect the nerves that are behind on the ankle, to ensure that the ligament there is not violent and does not lead astray it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return that for two or three days, and if the ligament is softened, extend it out.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return those things in the day or at night for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it not be that if someone is forced to move forward in this space, their dislocation will not occur there and they will not receive healing care at the same time.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply a poultice on it (the affected area), then administer the substance in which we have described earlier for healing and bandaging purposes herein until its pus is reduced/drained out.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Given that this text is from an ancient medical context with Latin roots and intertwined
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Regarding the care for joint displacement of the feet, it translates to: "Concerning the treatment for the dislocation of the
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	About a joint that has become dislocated, it suggests: "When such an injury occurs where the limb is stretched out slightly (extended), and if not too severe, gently realign them." Here 'them' refers to someone else’s injured limb. The translation indicates basic first aid for managing a mild joint dislocation by carefully straightening it back into place without causing further injury or pain when possible.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation occurs at the knee joints of either leg (the two legs), it advises: "When a person's knee is affected and becomes displaced, position their thigh on ground or tabletop with support as they were before falling." This suggests stabilizing both limbs by placing them down safely to prevent movement that could worsen the joint dislocation. The intent here appears to be immobilization using a stable surface while maintaining some form of patient comfort and security, reflective of more primitive or historical first aid approaches where advanced medical equipment is absent. It indicates an attempt
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Apply pressure to the injured foot and pause at those joints you mark from where it hurts; place a calcareous object under that very part which is trapped internally, restoring its position back into view above ground level so no further signs of dislocation appear on top. Here 'it' refers again to someone else’s leg with the injury (the person), and this translation suggests applying physical interventions like immobilization using a hard object – possibly stones or heavy objects for stabilizing purposes in ancient times when modern splints are not available. This method seems aimed at realigning what is likely an internal dislocation of bone, requiring careful manipulation without causing additional harm to the patient's
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Return the stomach of the patient's body to its cavity, and apply a board that envelopes the entire body; this is done with two caps attached, which are strong and fixed for three days. Afterward, restore such rest periods from walking as necessary until he/she has recovered fully (both physically and financially).
Capitol .xxxv.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	From the spices used for displacement in children or adults, or any given injury:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you have any cause of that, and you pierce into the treatment of that disease for restoration, it is followed by success in life.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And now you must immediately perform reduction in the patient'thy body of the cause so that an apesterous treatment may follow.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we feed it, administer this regimen that will alleviate ossification cramps and heal what comes to us from dry bandages.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation occurs and there is pain in the separated bones, then you must set their limbs back into place, doing what we have described earlier regarding the simple humors present at these locations of them.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid as per your nature what I have preached about the interior in matters of fear according to what preceded my teaching; for this is better from you towards God, Your Creator, perhaps everlasting toward your glory, and possibly healthful benefits throughout your lifetime.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi finely polish them perfectly as per God'se willings.
Amen.	The translation of each line from Latin-
