Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi begins speaking (or addressing) in Basque/French. The phrase may imply that a healer or physician named "Ayss
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, you have completed this book, which is on the edge of medical science due to its contribution and because it includes excerpts from my work within your treatise; hence I perceive that you are thorough in addressing the subject matter pertaining to surgery herein.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	This operation in our realm and time is entirely private, within which I have observed the science of my work with keen interest; yet there are only brief descriptions found within ancient texts that I am rectifying herein—clarifications to address errors while expanding upon these thoughts expressed by myself. Hereby lengthening arguments (or thought processes) and artistry as needed for deeper understanding, all amidst the privacy of my own work's contextual framework which was not disrupted but rather honed through selective citations from ancient works with further modifications to reflect current knowledge or intentions accurately in this discussion.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And I have seen that you understand this treatise in accordance with its second path of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; so it is necessary for me to prepare these tools used by cautery and other instruments required for their addition, as well as preparation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	May be the reason why no one dares to take away our tool in this time, for medicine is long and it requires that its practitioner exercise caution within the science of anatomy which knows Gualia inside where she understands the functions and forms of those members; as well as their connection and separation, including bones, nerves, and ligaments—and names thereof along with places in body's system for blood circulation (pulsating veins) and resting organs.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Through Aqua Ypocrates who knows by name and nature, may in the work be little, but mainly in the art of touch.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we already have told you about that in the entrance of this book; whoever does not know what has been said to them herein will fall into error, and thus death befalls men, even if they've seen some aspects of it, as these are fashioned within this science and taken from its knowledge.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When a doctor of foliage and experience pierced a scrophilous ulcer on a woman' extramandibular region, he also penetrated some arteries in that area so that much blood could flow inside which caused her death between its parts.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	Here comes another doctor who orders the patient to drink a stone of wine that had been processed in his body, and this stone was large, came down into him through one of the bladder's tubes, leading ultimately for that bodily substance (the stone) to cause the death of the man on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for it to be removed there, and because of the greatness of the stone and due to its position in the uterus where it will surely die (be extracted).
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor takes the fee from our duke of this land to perform surgery, and brings with him one who is very black because he has broken his thigh; and due to ignorance, he dislocates the fracture on the ground using strong straight tools like pillows and bedposts, without letting air escape.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Here he applies the dressing according to their wishes, and secures it with bandage and order that we untie the ligament; here they stay until the thigh enters into rupture.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have called upon him/her, and provided apparatus to remove the ligament, thus achieving peace and easing of your pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Even if there is corruption in the limb, it cannot be restrained and will not stop roaming within when the malady prospers inside.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor pierces an abscess and it ulcerates daily within which the cunning of him grows day by day towards his lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the skull must be treated for yellow bile from all over, not just in one member where it has been housed.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for these reasons, it is necessary that the operation be arranged in two parts: one associated with health and healing at this place (here), and another concerned with dangerous procedures or major decisions to address potential complications elsewhere.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have brought water into this free place where encounter and fear occur; therefore it is necessary for you to keep the water safe and set that aside, so that leaves do not wither away and deceit does not affect you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take up your arms in solicitation and for the protection of God, and let your illness be healed and firmly fixed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	When you have taken the better way for God's grace and hope in salvation and praiseworthy succession, take hold of your fearful conditions that require difficult healing, so that through faith and your name they do not frighten or cause escape: perhaps there may remain to your glory; place some atop you as on a pillow, others upon your legs like servants.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When gout strikes some members of its course:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	There is no physician for illnesses that doctors cannot name.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already read this free text for the second time three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of free space, and first in the primary partition.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The ordered first chapter within the feet, in terms of instruments and iron tools for caulters, what is necessary therein.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second partition.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter on cauterization and perforation, as well as pills, poultices, extraction of herbs and similes to these things; all this has been ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the clean cut portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third part of restoration and detachment, and for the healing and easing backward bending dislocations to these; ordered within the head in weighty matters, and concerning shapes/forms of instruments used by them.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of surgical instruments (cauterizing pincers) and acute medicine and memory of painful condition.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When that person begins the treatment of all parts freely available.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When you examine the quality of that cauterization and its contents, and in which it is forbidden to perform further cauterizations.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Thus it is said that the discourse of cautery and its nature are long and complex, subtle by science, with hidden motives; they speak much about their qualities, yet disagree among themselves, which is enough for me to understand (it seems like there'se a depth I need to grasp).
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And it is said that the pointed cautery comforts throughout the entire body universally, except for two types of materials belonging to its own matter, namely tail ends.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex tail and dry matter are separated; there those who use needles find it beneficial for that area, while others apply what is contrary to it, which is not suitable in illness characterized by both moisture and dryness—since nature of fever consists of such elements (moisture and dryness), appropriate treatment involves the separation and management of water contained within these areas.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "Discipline that speaks against it, which by means of cautery is greatly used in all dry and arising maladies on men'se feet where they come together with his humors at the focus," when comparing a man’s body parts (feet) and their respective fluids to understand how these can negatively affect one another.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Through the speech of that person, I have already experienced some relief myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Even if you need to withdraw the tool used for cauterization that has already been exposed and exercised in the capital of treatments during previous sessions, understand this diversity within human complexity and disease disposition in their bodies, as well as the causes of those conditions and accidents, along with the time span of these occurrences.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May also occur in other complexities, not out of fear but mainly due to cold and wet humors that affect all these areas; moreover, doctors are agreed upon addressing such issues with caution when performing cautery here.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine burn reach that in their limbs which they have neglected and hardened, causing great difficulty for healing and leading to significant pain.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the focus (or point), due to its sublimity and good substance, does not cause more than what is necessary E even now we are known by experiments and long study of service in this art concerning truth about causes; hence it excuses from lengthy discourse A for those who have yet come secretly seeking help at the hip joint (the focus), I will provide relief here without delay, demonstrating through my work on limbs and their expulsion as a means to remove illnesses. This philosophical argument proves useful in your knees.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And wise men know that it is best for performing cautions and pauses with the most suitable times at the beginning of pregnancy.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And that it is convenient in all times for a cautery (treatment) drawn from this water so that harm due to time accrues under its application, especially if used for pains or necessary instruments such as needles and hooks which do not delay their use because of the fear they may bring upon those who treat them.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	So you don'thy not press upon your feet or thighs; for they do not estimate the humors but common folk and physicians who believe that healing by cautery is not complete until a pause has followed it as consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not due to lack of sleep where the legs are concerned; rather, cautery (treatment) should only be applied in a medical place that changes complexity and dries out the humidities which are causing the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	May, therefore, pointed cautery be used excessively in medicine due to the patient' extrinsic value and operative effort of their lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness may return at some time in its course due to the complexity of the disease and its location within the body; moreover, if cautery has been applied on the patient's limbs for excess superfluity and moisture - these causes - then it is also a subtle malady affecting small amounts of surplus and wetness. However, should this medicine be administered in pills as well, there may no longer return that pain to him/her here; rather, the discomfort might arise at their throat instead (possibly referring to related symptoms).
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Even though it is vulgar speech that the instruments of medicine are used for repositioning and straightening (the actual practice), here they do not understand or comprehend what I, as a healer practicing in this field or elsewhere with these tools, truly seek to cure.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And for the old ones that are made of gold and their substance is elevated, they do not use iron but rather those crafted from gold as cautery instruments because it'thy luster equals to its strength (and quality).
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Through this water, we apply pointed iron tools and place them appropriately in the operation area.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have ordered this in the area of caution as well as within their feet, ensuring that whoever asks for it will receive from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of caustics for headache due to coldness and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The First Point/Chapter (assuming "Le Capitol
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	The First Point/Chapter: Here it discusses the application of cauterization to address moisture and coldness from an accident causing these issues; attributed as a cause involving gas or excessive airflow, affecting limbs (legs) downwards towards joints, due to prolonged sleep. It also addresses dental pain and gout resulting from this condition universally. Additionally, the chapter covers numbness associated with paralysis, hardening of flesh causing pains resembling apoplexy or stroke-like symptoms in these ailments.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: initially command the malady to be evacuated through medicinal leeches for three or four nights, according to how much urges it and the patient'se age and habitus.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	When you press your palm' extrication pressure on top of your foot over the bridge between their nostrils, here is what happens:
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the heat from below reaches that place where it has come down to, signs indicate an attempt there at balance; apply fire (likely referring to hot oil or similar treatment) on this instrument of which this is a form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place it over the location where pressure is applied; this action of tightening gradually occurs at that point, and you should turn or rotate it thereafter.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Return your hand to the wound area and observe it; if you find any bone exposed from the skull, raise your hand as much as there is growth of pus (or infection), likewise with how much grief (infection) exists, return your hand over that extent. If your hand becomes cold, look inside to see what has been said about this issue previously by you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Return some salt and dissolve it over the location, letting it stay there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Return your hand over his chest where it has begun, and place that there above which the shield of the focus (or fire) is shattered/destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the area where there is a quadruple-composed drug within that which should heal it.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And when a patient has urinated in bed, as much honey is taken and poured into the bra (the catheter), so that it may be better and more beneficial for them.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E disserent ali quiea sagaça l'oca dentro dret el oz, i se tenuts li cautionis intre com alguna parte tractada en l'os.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	When it is necessary for fluid or humors (aqueous substances in bodily fluids) from bone marrow that have been accumulated and causing discomfort to be drained, and when its treatment needs attention
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Beyond the healing touch of cupping therapy that reaches into your bone with force before it retreats back inside where the bone absorbs this treatment, here lies a small act of apotheosis. (This line translates to saying beyond just using suction for therapeutic purposes in cupping—which enters and exits within strong muscular boundaries while being taken up by the skeleton itself) is an almost mystical or perfected form of healing, often referred to as alphecati petit
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	From this location exhale breaths from the head. (This line implies that after applying cupping therapy at a specific point on or near the body, one might notice an out
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	It is held in place for long periods and its cure occurs while it becomes stabilized or solidified within the body's structure (this line likely refers to keeping cupping implements attached to the skin over an extended time, allowing supposed benefits as healing progresses). The term "consol
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these various types of cupping therapy tools; but among those who practice them as a form of fear—and you must understand this better for my health's sake—especially when the head is raised by lighting, and primarily at nighttime following our observation in other parts of the body. (This line suggests that while not familiar with different cupping tools used out of caution or superstition ("fear"), it becomes apparent their value lies for one’s well-berem—when performed under specific conditions such as using light to elevate a head, and mostly at nighttime based on experiences observed in other body parts). Here the user is noting that cupping seems particularly relevant when applied to areas of concern like those near or related to bone structures ("malaute") during times associated with natural rhythms—likely referring to darkness (night) as a time for healing. The term "solucio de continuitat" can be interpreted herein
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The translation of each line into English is as follows:
Capitol segon.	Second Section/Chapter (assuming 'Capitol' refers
Del cauteri del cap.	From the head or scalp wound, apply a pointed instrument for treatment (
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the wound on the head or scalp is chronic and long-lasting due to an extended malady within it, use knives and lances as well as scrapers and cauldrons (potentially for boiling medicinal substances), along with purgatives and clogs, spikes, chains, nails, linens or rags. However, if the head wound is of considerable hardness in nature—implying a more robust build within that part of it—consideration must be given at once to another form of treatment; for one should not unnecessarily cause great harm (emphasizing restraint), particularly when already employing cauterization with such an instrument.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Return that over the top of your head for cautery within where the intestine is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the ribcage and expose its quantity as we have counted and sealed it with a cauterium in the area called herein for suction—this is where air has been drawn into place.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And press your hand firmly, and do not open the bones, for the hump causes great pain different from that of other burns on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Here you direct the cautery in its place, for when this same cautery is used on the head' extraneous parts like corn and occiput are treated with subtle cautions that belong to it herein lies our method.
Capitol ters.	Capital extremity (assuming "capitol" refers to
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	The provided Latin phrases appear to be medieval medical terminology related to treatment methods for a condition, possibly gout or an abscess ("emigration of pus").
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When joint pain is solid or when the toe hurts (the term "cap dolor" may refer to a foot condition), extract medicine and administer it immediately for healing; these remedies are mentioned in relation to treating diseases - do not neglect, cauterization here can be with acute combustion medication or iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May hot irons used in medicine burn to take a pillow (or poultice) and remove the limbs of both from these objects, which they hold onto with their hands.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And impinge on the location of pain at one place where there is a sharp knife hidden within it for treatment purposes that way.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside so that it may heal.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you come, take some of these burning remedies that you have written about in the section on hot treatments for ailments.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	As for this method of cautery, it involves iron and takes on the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a club-like claw because the head of his body (head) takes on this shape as if holding some form of a calla flower in which there may be curvature, and smallness/petiteness can also be observed at that spot where heat accumulates.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Return the pause (rest) to the location of pain, and hold your hand there—so that the razor does not come close again where it was used today—and slowly turn over the small blade by turns according to speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of liquor that is absorbed through the anal canal increases to such a degree where your hand must be used to prevent it from being absorbed further (thus avoiding excess flow downwards), here comes what you need:
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, then apply the lancet according to caution and avoid cutting into an already circulating vessel herein properly not ancient.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quart (This likely refers to an observation or
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	The phrase "cauzare la emigrana antica" seems to refer to a medical practice from ancient times related to treating hemorrhage
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When treating hemorrhage as mentioned in the ancient texts about healing, and according to their division of illnesses—wherein if not properly treated with the aforementioned cauterizing liquids used by medicine or fire-based treatments for fractures (which you are referring to), whereby sometimes these methods alone may be insupective due to the severity, here is what this translates into stepwise:
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuous jaw movement as your mouth chomps (chews), and that your temporalis muscle not become tired or strain those nerves which cause such discomfort; so they don't worsen.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the guardianship and caution of blood flow from where artery begins, there'dicted fear within them who know not what causes this and do no study nor investigate; therefore perform the operation on him with their best effort.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When they come for recall of the royal army'se regimen of fluid accidents according to their customary practice in this place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you see from this illness that the current treatment is not sufficient for the inflamed area of the womb and comes to our head as we have described, then treat that part with cauterization here at the location in the navel where it has healed previously, and care for the patient inside until they are restored.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you go now, administer the one we have just mentioned in our discussion about hot iron cautery and doing so is even better treatment for these two cuts on cloth bandages (cotels).
Capitol .v.	The text provided appears to be an attempt at translating medieval medical termin
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	For joint pain of the auricles (which could mean for conditions related to the ears, although "aurils" is not standard Latin or classical language and might be an
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and harmful causes which this text speaks of, they discuss another form of treatment that I have mentioned earlier. If not alleviated by fire (or heat), then it applies a cauterization with points on its surface—this describes herein what has been previously specified as puncture for the purpose at hand:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: E apply points herewith and carry it through all parts of the body using a heated instrument, or along any course where pain is present in some part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Long ago you have used the lancet of silver, thin and sharp as your skin to try this place that tempted you.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If all points on the patient' extrices (body), and where necessary take care of those places that are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitolo VI. (The sixth chapter.)
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of joint pain.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Cure and for cauterization come only from spices that enter through the veins, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid using specialized caustic for such dryness or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you heal that specific type of bleeding and pus formation without discomfort in your treatment, make sure to use the following three cauteries: take a gold needle for the ulcer, apply small movements with its temple (touchstone), and employ your lips' union as touch.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply pressure with the hot cautery for contrary parts of the diseased area, where relief may be felt only in the healthy portion that appears to recover.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you apply the cautery directly on the tip of the finger belonging to the patient' extralong toe, and in the temple region; another part as long as it corresponds with the length of said foot, where your hand acts as a caution within which combustion occurs for burning off the quantity necessary from the incision made at the knee joint.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how the cautery should be made, and it's specific for barber surgeons; this form I present now.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May there be subtly put under that which has scarcely been seen, and for the excess of unnecessary swelling a little one.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	With care for the place where that which is now proceeding inside will be healed,
Capitol .vii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any textual content for
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	From the fragment provided, it appears you're referring to an ancient method of treating apoplexy (commonly understood as a stroke in modern
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is an ancient condition and the remedies we have today are not suitable—especially if your physician or surgeon does not currently possess a fever (which could indicate infectious processes) — then you may use these four types of cautery: over all parts of their head, including both foreheads; in places where they sweat, such as under the armpits and around the navel/umbilicus; on body cavities like those for breathing or digestion.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The action of the pointed cautery is said according to what has been mentioned beforehand.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and perhaps more will heal as time goes by; place your care where you proceed with its treatment.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (Translation may not be accurate due to
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The provided Latin-like phrases seem related to medieval medical practices, particularly those concerning joint pain and treatment methods such as the use of pointed instruments for localized procedures (cauterization). Here'
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The sentence translates into English as: "Covering that which is given to the malady in feasting, and pills are applied with a mortar." This suggests an approach where remedies (likely medicinal herbs or compounds) were ground up together ("feast") using some form of grinding device
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	The translation for this line is: "Reduce the head of the malady and place your hand on it, as described in the treatise regarding applications." Here they are likely referring to a hands-on treatment method where direct contact or application by touch ("place your hand") with some part (the top/head) of something related to an illness is mentioned. The specifics "coguot de lu
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	The translation for this line would be: "Pause a few days, and then it is the custom of using caustics." This indicates that after an initial treatment phase ("a few days"), there might follow or coincide with another traditional approach involving
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	The translation here would be: "After such a measure already mentioned." This implies that the text is continuing to describe procedures following an earlier discussion of similar measures, possibly related to treatment methods for joint pain using
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	The translation for this line is: "So if these healing boons exist; otherwise, apply three cauterizations in the upper region of your head, which are within the area above where the forehead begins (near to the top part)." Here they describe a possible treatment involving burning or caulking with medicinal substances ("healing boons"), targeted at specific areas on someone'thy skull if previous remedies have not been effective. The phrasing reflects typical medieval medical prescriptions where treatments were localized and had to be applied by hands, as indicated by the use of "es" (you).
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And there is space between each cautery of this body part, and pay special care for the water that proceeds from it.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you increase and the thigh is tolerating it well, then apply cautery at the warm place on the skin; but if there's more swelling, cauterize that over both toes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Apply that which is healed within it; and if cautery ointments are given, apply them according to how they have been presented by the giver.
Capitol .ix.	Given that "Capitol" likely refers to an ancient Roman
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Cauterization of worms and palliation for all parts of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the mindfulness of the head and what have we discussed; and return your attention to the back of the neck, where apply that which is used for cautery there at its heat spot on the head, and also over all heads' corns, as well as above their waist line, applying three times upon each spinal disc.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the plague of softening for that part of the body and if this disease persists or worsens (malady), then apply four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and insert them into the area between your fingers as directed by its head (the doctor's instruction).
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Return that which needs healing within it, and this is the olive wax for treatment.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x. (The provided text does not contain enough
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the treatment of seizures, or "epilepsia" in Latin: It is commonly believed that for man
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It's not cut (cauterized) the person with epilepsy but rather this seizure occurs because of phlegma, or inflammation as stated in medieval medical understanding which might refer to an imbalance within bodily humors leading
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Thus, we must clarify the brain at rest and during other forms of treatment as specified in this division when excess humors are present and when exceptions occur outside traditional medicine approaches: In this statement from a medieval medical text translated into English, it suggests that there is an emphasis on understanding or "clarifying" what happens within the patient's mind (the brain) at different times—specifically during rest ("at comensament") as well as under various treatment conditions. It further points out when excess humors are evident and traditional medicinal practices might not be sufficient to address these exceptions, indicating a time or situation where standard procedures may
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If it is an infant who does not respond to the medicines administered by servants (or attendants), then apply ointments and poultices using motion through days as directed in the prescriptions for foods: Here, a medieval medical practitioner advises on alternative care methods when conventional medicine fails—specifically recommending therapeutic applications of greasy substances or salves applied over time to an infant who is not responding well. The treatments are described as being carried out daily and following dietary guidance for foods, which would have
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Return the hump of the hernia to its cavity and apply a heated lancet there at night when symptoms occur as instructed previously for each part on top: This directive involves returning any abnormal bulge (hump) associated with an inguinal or other type of hernia back into place. The physician prescribes the use of heat in specific locations—likely where discomfort is reported, often at nighttime as described previously by their treatments for each area on top: It's a practice derived from medieval medicine that involves cauterization (using heat) to manage pain or other symptoms linked with hernias. The treatment would be applied
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the uterus is strong and able to endure it, then apply that cauterization therapy which I have described, causing immobilization and softening of the body over the lumbar and thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is necessary for the olive-like pointed instrument (cauter), as previously mentioned, then proceed with its use according to what has been stated earlier in
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the patient is a child, pause and apply the pointed instrument with subtlety according to this methodology (treatment approach).
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (This line appears incomplete or possibly not
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de melencolia" is Latin-based and seems to refer to the medical
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and moist (possibly referring to 'foul humors' in excess), they can be treated with these very cautery instruments designed for relieving spasms or paralysis within the body. Here, "cauterize" is used metapsychologically rather than physically—the idea might stem from a belief that applying heat could somehow 'purify' or restore balance to one’thy bodily humors (an ancient medical theory).
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excessive and declines in the head (indicating a worsening state or imbalance), then the limbs are humid, let them drink what purifies their brain as they drank before division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Return their head of the thigh (which could mean applying pressure to alleviate pain), and make them lie down with it over the circle, placing rest on top of that area in the neck'dictated by its place upon the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The knee is sixty degrees flexed, and its tendon has been taken from all parts of it.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Return your pace of liniment; it is worthy of sheep'se wool bordering.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	When it is necessary to heat that area on the forehead as measured by warmth and when they feel pain in their body (when experiencing symptoms), then apply such warmth accordingly.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	When it is necessary for that piece of metal (probably referring to cautery) in the warm place under the head at their neck within the circle, and you lay them down so they are enflamed/feverish.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	E when the thigh is bathed throughout the week for healing or if you wish, then anoint that small part of the flesh according to what seems right; otherwise, hold hands with a poultice as directed: this kind of poultice moistens the brain at equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Return that stoppage in the border or at the place of linseed oil,
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.: (The translation could not be provided as there
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	When translating the given Latin-influenced medical text, it appears that we are dealing with a medieval understanding of medicine which often combined elements from different traditions and languages:
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you declare the condition of water in the foot through which veins flow and determine that it is a division where fluid accumulates (likely referring to edema or swelling), at this point begins your treatment with warm, medicinal liquid poured into the affected area—this helps purify what comes out from below by keeping everything moist.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that sweetness enters through water for these days (implying a treatment with honey and water over certain periods), it suggests using this remedy regularly as part of the healing regimen during those specific
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Commands Lu to apply pressure on the head and cauterize that area with a pointed forceps at the spot of heat in the head; also commands the application of two cauterisms over two tables if there is consumption (likely referring to dysentery) of water or wine from two vessels, or one lancet if it's about consuming pure water from just one vessel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Here's the line-by extraline translation:
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Guard your throat when it is being cauterized; and if you feel the flow of blood at that time, apply some medicine to it, which may be within your means.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	When one arrives with knowledge as they are extricated from the arches and their abdomen, caution of fluid flows is necessary.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	When some veins are burned in the groin area between two bones with two cautery tools produced by servants, it means:
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (This line appears incomplete or out of context
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas" translates to English as the caulization of ancient tears,
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When ancient tears are accumulated significantly and detected through the veins and arteries where they manifest in deficient capillaries of the eyes (the head' extrinsic venous system), caulization is applied to what was previously recorded as water cures within these areas, including at the temple region near the eye on both sides. Moreover:
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If there are ingestions of excess, then burn that part over the entirety of the colon above its junction with the small intestine using a small caustic instrument.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitolo XIV (where "Capitolo" means Chapter, "XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Chapter XIV pertains to the treatment of foul breath from within one's nose ("fetor"). The text
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person who has spoken about their division and not properly received your medicine, then apply these cups to the nose for three nights; place them on top of his head (head), which is where we will perform our treatment with these cauterizing tools designed specifically for this purpose. Here "cauterizes" refers to a form of medical intervention aimed at curing or alleviating an illness, possibly related to the nose and sinuses due to its reference in treating foul breath (as suggested by “fetor de nas”). The text implies that if this treatment is not provided adeaully as required ("no aprofieyta la tua medicacio"), additional measures—likely involving some form of heat or pressure therapy using cups, referred to here colloquially and possibly indicative of ancient
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Therefore apply that tool for cauterization to the scalp where two lashes of hair are positioned above, and place just one more on top of these locations (the eyelashes), with which you will perform this specific form of cauterization treatment. This suggests a methodical approach in treating particular areas that may be prone to issues
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Be vigilant over the sharpness you use for this procedure, as not to injure what is already damaged ("no incindas"). Here "arceria
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This tool (presumably a lancet or similar sharp implement) used for the purpose of cauterization in this context refers to how it
Capitol .xv.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	From the instruments used for milking eyelids of patients (likely referring to some form of treatment or therapy involving delicate manipulation, perhaps related to ophth
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the patient's eyelid becomes moistened due to illness or excess humidity, there is a treatment with this instrument (implying some form of lid lubricant), and that herein lies its purpose; it represents how they address such issues. This line suggests in medieval times, practitioners had methods for treating eyelid moisture problems possibly caused by medical conditions or environmental factors like high humidity, using a specific instrument aimed at providing relief – likely some form of ointment that could have included ingredients to absorb excess
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you (the reader or patient), then apply that upon the two brows in total at once with these very instruments – and they extend beyond nostrils: This line indicates a specific treatment involving cauterization of both eyebrows simultaneously, using particular tools designed to reach areas above them. The mentioning suggests an era when medical practice often involved direct interventions on the body's surface for various purposes such as purifying humoral
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And according to the amount of each instrument: This means that practitioners adjusted their treatment, specifically how much or which instruments were used based on individual assessments – possibly relating either to dosage or methodology
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand upon the instruments according to their quantity – and this may be true if a portion of the eyelid is stuck (adhered), which would necessitate modification in approach: This cautionary advice indicates that care must be taken when applying pressure with hands, especially considering how much treatment substance or cauterization tools are used. It highlights an individualized
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi. (The text does not provide enough context for
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the hair turns into particles and pinching is applied to the patient, it translates as: When the hair becomes particle-like forms within the skin and when pressure (pinch) is exerted on the patient' extruded substances are being expelled or released. In a medical context from this medieval
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the patient turns into particles and when we pinch or strike them, according to these two methods: either a poultice is applied (implied by "es aplicar" which translates as 'to apply') or medicine fire/heat treatment is used. Here it suggests that there are at least two different treatments for this condition where the hair particles cause discomfort when pounced upon, with possible remedies including direct application of a heated substance (like poultices) to soothe inflammation and pain or perhaps applying some formulated medicinal
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you apply poultices (la cauteira) to the area and command that which is outside enters with their hair alongside these, ensuring they are prolonged in time yet not hot enough to cause burns; additionally if your hand strikes them back when expressing dissent or refusal, then bind one of those very same strands (hair) as a bandage for that the external matter does not enter within their pores where hair growth occurs. Here it suggests applying poultices with some specific materials possibly collected from outside to draw out unwanted substances while using physical restraint or binding made from these removed particles if there's resistance when trying to remove them, as a preventive measure against reinfection during the healing process.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when women give birth and part their hairs in the tear of her eyes, they place a veil over their lashes with this mask made from female flesh, which is also according to its figure as far as it goes down into their bodies through fur, being both an ornament for headwear chosen by them.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And apply pressure bandage or poultice made of flaxen above it on the wound,
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Returns the cautery of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Return the cautery over the figure that their head adheres to gradually and carefully until it is burnt through where there was previously hair from mint; all seems properly done in appearance.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The sign of sanity in their eye work is that you use your fingers for their eyes and forcefully pull on their hair, indicating that they are contracted and/thy paws have been elevated due to a pinch.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	So lift your hand and lay it there for three days until the shield is erected within where you are placed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is inside of it with care, whereby it may heal.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	May they return through the hair for any reason and if their eyelids are softened, then use these same tools on that entire body part as you did initially with them.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the inner corner of the eye, then heat them within that which is their natural place and where they should grow naturally without tearing out.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery of medicine burn this so that you command the humors to enter where they are elongated and inflamed, and assign its fate as per the cloth drape'suponent a treatment method involving some form of herbal poultice:
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E pause le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquella un petit et non la malaugere entro che lo malauge senta la morice della medicina, quae mordicacio est in lu axietate.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	When the doctor perceives that the sharp instrument has pierced, they apply what is left of it as medicine; when the cutting stops, wash off with water whatever remains on your hands; and if you see that one eye lid has been lifted while being cleaned (perhaps due to incisions or operations), make sure not to return over there where no medicinal substance has been applied yet, nor does it occur inside when the operation is conducted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Apply pressure over the wound at its border where the navel abscess is cured, and take care of that liniment or another within it to keep it healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how one uses myrtle wort.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	E understand that humors of men are diverse according to their size and stature, hence your contraction is caused by them.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	If a vein has been wounded in this study of mine here come,
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (The given text does not provide a clear context
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Cauterization of the tear duct fistula in the eye." The sentence refers to medical treatment involving burning (cauterizing) a surgically created opening or passageway, known as a fistula, that
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cauterize the tear duct fistula as described in the sections of illnesses and do not administer your treatment, then according to this method: command the malady (or patient's body) that it ceases movement within its head/body part, ensuring there is a servant or instrument between those movements so that neither mad nor agitated motion occurs at the same time.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Return pressure in an oil or wax covering on his body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return the burning of this instrument (the hot part):
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Wherefore it is formed as a cane or sword-like shape of the one limb wherein applies the cautery:
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you go, points may enter into the other limb.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it should come out as an attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	May it be better for that who rests is beneficial to his body'thy work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Return (or apply) pressure to the fistula if it is opened, and with gentle cleaning remove that which has come out of it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If there is not an outburst, then work at that place and extract the purge from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the caustic enters into the mouth, do so; but if not, repeat the application of the caustic once or twice a week as per medical practice, and leave it on that spot for three days, then rest over that border and send out healing ointments while inside.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	May it be that for ten days and not healed, a pause over the medicine sharply destructive until the bone is discovered and brought out according to what seems necessary in their capital city hall.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by the water we have from cautery and treatment, then all is well; but if not, it'thy necessary to administer air through the nose and reduce the fistula in its nasal location when it comes forth there itself.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (The specific meaning of "Capitol
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the burn treatment in a wound or sore on the finger(s). Here, it appears that 'capitol' could refer to an ancient
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Regularly causing cracks in the lips, and mostly on children’s lips. In this line of text, it is observed that a certain condition or habit consistently leads to chapping (cracks) of the lips, with an emphasis on its prevalence among young individuals ("enfant
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So you treat those cracks we've mentioned in the divisions and do not deepen them further with this small heated tool as instructed herein. In English, it suggests that one should carefully tend to any existing fissures or splits (cracks) within certain body areas without exacerbating these injuries using a specific type of heat-applying instrument—possibly an ancient form of cauterization needle or similar tool used in traditional medicine.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And according to its subtlety of cushioning, it happens so that way too.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Apply pressure there carefully as the cautery approaches those cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which is inside so it may heal.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.: (The text does not provide enough content for
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of a mouth ulcer." This sentence in Latin describes the medical procedure where an instrument is used to burn and thereby seal off or
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When treating an ulcer in the tongue or palate and sealing it with wax, ensuring that you do not interrupt care but instead apply heat according to what is required at the site of the fistula (an abnormal passage between two body spaces), using a heated cautery as directed by our treatment plan. Ensure your hand inside so that when applying the hot iron within this opening, it reaches and penetrates into the deeper part where the ulcer lies; afterward providing such care until healed or for about one to two days more—and you apply any prescribed remedy during this period as long as recovery continues.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if the illness is removed and healed, be well; but otherwise, it's necessary to discover where it has eroded away in his ribcage according as it appears therein.
Capitol .xx.	Capital .xx. (The provided text does not contain enough context
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	For the curing of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth become hardened, treat those with medicines without attempting to fix them; then pause at the head of the malady in the belly so that you hold your cautery lit on fire within it, ensuring that when you press upon the ailment over the tooth, you insert this heated instrument into its midst. This way, heat from the flame reaches inside the mouth'thy center and softens the affected vein there.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And lift your hand, and apply some of the cautery as needed according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Here the malady (illness) takes in water with salt from one'se mouth and draws it out through that tongue, while others hold still for an hour; then they puff up this area, which causes the loose teeth to be firmed shut, soft gums become toughened, and corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	In translating this text from what appears to be an early form of medical Latin
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	The translation for "Cauterizacio de dolor de dent" into English would likely refer to the treatment or procedure
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to inflammation or a cold substance in the mouth, and dental care does not comfort it, then there are two kinds of caustic treatments: one involves applying hot lancets (similarly used for cauterization), while another employs focused heat.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterize the edge that you grasp from cows and vats in the forge's heat, and secure it over the extremity of the tormented limb, covering the border there where inflammation is about to ignite within its scope while restrained.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	When returning that spirit into its place within the root of the teeth, wait for some time until it reaches there.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you go under the cloth above it, and place that there over the sore tooth, and keep your hand on top of where the heated iron is about to reach the cavity of the affected tooth'thy mouth:
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Even if the cauterization is at the focus of iron or lead in their chest where there may be some kind of swelling and burning does not reach the mouth of the spleen,
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Return the cautery to its shape, and place it on the teeth so that the cautery is heated up (or ignited); allow a few uses until the pain subsides in that area or during that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When the patient'supractions of that very pointed instrument (cauterization) inflate the malady's jaw and hold its tongue, this is how it operates as a caustic treatment method.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if you have cut it according as is within your power.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the form of the cannula appears:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.: (This line does not contain enough contextual
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	The translation of "Cauterizacio de extrophulos" from Latin-influenced medical terminology into
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external ulcers are caused by infiltrating fluids and they do not heal naturally due to medicine use, you will perform the cauterization of that form; using two tongs for which one holds a lighter whereby it ignites at another's extremity, pausing there momentarily until heat reaches the other end. Once done this way:
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the fever is slight, then pause the application of the points according to the amount of the fever; apply liniment for three days and rest over it until such time that the fire within the focus has subsided.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Return care for it with wax and threads and linens inside whereby it shall be healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	When it comes to such instruments as a cannula or lancet used by this practitioner, here is its form/shape described:
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii. (The given text does not provide further context
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Regarding the caulification of knee and shoulder joints, as well as contraction:
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the lungs and primarily when there is congestion, it's necessary to evacuate phlegm through medicinal expectorants, and apply cauterization to that area where hoarseness occurs.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Guard your tool that does not enter into gout or touch the patient' extraneous parts, but a few places only.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And if you want to cauterize that joint, do so with another pointed cautery on the lower vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	El pointed cautery of it is cut in a manner previously established.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Return care for that which entered before it can heal.
Capitol .xxiiii.	In this given medieval medical text translation into English line by line would be as follows:
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Regarding the burning or treatment of pleurisy and cough, it could mean that in treating these conditions (lung-related illnesses like pleurisy associated with painful
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When pleurisy and lung illness are caused by damp humors, and there is no fever or inflammation (indicating a potentially milder condition in the context of ancient medicine), then two cauldrons for cauterization will be applied to specific points on the shoulder blade's elbow joint as well as undernethy; another one at the nipple area, where their breasts meet. These burnings are done following certain shapes previously established (referring perhaps to standardized methods or particular types of instruments for cauterization).
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, your cautery penetration is the kind of points that are called upon for joint pain in hands (or fingers), where their form comes beforehand at the point of suffering from rheumatism.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	When points are inserted into those areas, and care is given by what has entered previously that may heal it.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now, with three lances for cauterization at your disposal, you can perform the following types of treatment according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	In order to facilitate translation of this medieval medical treatise line by line into
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	From the use of a pointed tool for cauterization, specifically referring to an instrument used as part of aid or assistance in treatment. (This translation is based on interpreting archaic and
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the aid tool is displaced due to fluid lubrication and it does not return on its own within an hour of use as customary practice dictates; at that point perform a small movement, which we have testified occurs when you first reduce the dislocation—returning your malady back onto your thighs or lower abdomen depending upon where they are located in relation to this tool. Also raise the cushion (or pillow) used for support; place it beneath those parts that were initially part of the device's division, which now belong under its left side if the joint dislocation is at those divisions—those mentioned as being on your right hand or arm depending upon what limb was affected.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the cautery has two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Return and apply the cautery within where that enters into another, and there will be shown the figure of cauterization with those caustic cups used for cauterizing;
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And according to its quantity or degree of effort exerted by it (the intestine/hernia), this is how one should proceed with care.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases they are adjusted according to this count and these instruments (the number of lancets being eight).
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is in those parts below and it hurts here, then you will apply caustic substances to the muscle with a cauterizing needle or on pointed cautery points, whereby the joint is confirmed and humidity becomes reduced and the malady (illness/condition) heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	In this given medieval medical text with elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and
De cauterizacio del stomac.	The phrase "de cauterizacio del stomac" translates to English as "of stomach
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When humidity enters the stomach and multiplies therein, causing discomfort if not treated properly while applying measures of healing: you will find that gas builds up above your belly button (navel), spreading out to both thighs and holding hands. Extend these parts with a cauterizing instrument three times in the amount specified by another caustic for curative purpose; as well, two other pieces of this same material shall be used within each joint or limb's body where they have not been properly aligned (set), upon which will flow away the figure resembling triangular cauterization.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery corresponds to the quantity of both sides of the pubic bone' extrusion, it indicates that sufficient heating has been applied during treatment with heat therapy (cauterization). The medieval practitioner seems concerned about achieving an appropriate amount or temperature
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	If the figure of the cautery follows this form (implied to be circular), and if desired, perform a large cauterization in the stomach area according to this shape; it is thus a ring-shaped cautere as per this method. Here, an emphasis on precision for targeted treatment appears evident—a technique perhaps aiming at specific areas within the body through carefully designed instruments like these circle or ring-shaped cauteries used in medical practice of that era to deliver heat therapy effectively and selectively during procedures such as surgery (cauterization) with potentially significant implications for healing outcomes.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	If you have already pierced the stomach with this particular type of (circular) cautery, and it frightens you: that is where your handpiercing will be according to how much you wish to attempt; accordingly apply further puncturing in those spots using another set of points on a second pair of heated needles. Carefully proceed with this additional piercing so long as the previous curative action remains effective within, ensuring continued treatment and potential for recovery or resolution (in line with medieval medical practices where continuous assessment was likely required post-intervention). Here there is an acknowledgment that further interventions—such as repetitive puncturing using cautery tools after initial heating application in the stomach area, could be applied under specific conditions to enhance curative efforts. The practice suggests a form of gradualism or stepwise treatment approach whereby subsequent therapeutic actions
Capitol .xxvii.	The provided text appears to be an attempt at translating medical terminology from a historical context
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	In reference to the treatment of foot ulcers, here is the translation: "For the cauterization of the foot wound.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the foot suffers from chill or wetness inside its normal cavity due to excessive discharge, and when we treat gout with what have been said herein without causing further comfort; as soon as the gout rises above the cervix (the neck of the womb), placing hands on it. The cauterizations are done threefold in this manner according to these instructions, placed by physicians near home and rest positions for relief from painful discharge:
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Where each space is as it should be between every instrument according to its size and where the instruments are in accordance with the length of the body'dict.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not fill your lancet with blood for it is harmful.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of fluid that is collected in the scrotum exceeds its capacity, and it is not adjusted; and if the swelling remains on the feet of him/her, they have extended their extremities (i.dict., testicles), which are already elevated, raising both thighs as well.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	When you have the subtlety and prudence in this art, it is possible to use these cautery tools on fleshly wounds.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	When you do not process in the cauterization and your instrument is thoroughly heated through the entire spine where it can be felt, know that this ensures thorough burn of all parts of the body and entering into the hernia sacs; understand well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii. (The exact meaning of "Capitol
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	From the puncture for gout in the foot, with a pointed instrument used as cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When ever there occurs an ulcer or infection on the leg and you wish to know if that affliction is within the flesh of the leg or under the garment (tunic), if it' extraditional, the abdomen will swell greatly with pain intensifying.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the breeches (pants), then the pain is greatly intensified and occurs often enough that even doctors tire of curing him/her.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So that the swelling is positioned on top of the pelvis; and secure the location of the ulcer attempt with fire (using caustic), wherein this form was previously described in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And in that place apply the applied caustic and insert more of it until it reaches the sigmistic area, where an unsound mixture will ignite.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	When that wound is cared for with care by others inside where it heals,
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Not for this form of cautery is anything else than what has been studied in the art of medicine and which they use to combat most illnesses; perhaps we may dare some experiments on this procedure ourselves, but let us not depart from that methodology.
Capitol .xxix.	Certainly! Here is an attempt at translating each line of your medieval
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de plauresi" seems to refer to the process or treatment for dra
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The text appears to describe an ancient cauterization method for treating wounds related to the study of pathology (medicine), as per a certain tradition: "Diyssero les antics cauteri" or 'old burns'. It suggests that one should take dry, long razor blades—presumably sharp and possibly stiff due to being from an old source ('dit') and made of the thickest steel possible. This could indicate a time when medical instruments were crafted with great care for specific purposes like treating wounds or performing cauterizations using these robust tools:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	When you buy your hand (the tool used for treatment), it is in the form of a cautery and part of its display at work on the knee joint.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And here comes the antidote that is used by men who practice cauterization with iron like a ray and fire; place this in the location where between the ribs there are spaces, so that it arrives at that ulceration, to be consumed therapeishly as we have described for wounds of marriage.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	May not fear in this puncture with the applied cautery because it will heal very soon at the location of the fistula where there is no recovery yet.
Capitol .xxx.	Given that "Capitol" does not form coherent
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	From the lancet (or scalpel). In this context, it suggests that a surgical instrument called a 'lancet'
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the womb (uterus), if you fail to perform and deliver your treatment as described earlier for division therapy, then there are three or four ways in which cauterization can be done correctly—these methods all being sound ones; specifically: one way is that you make three or four lances according to the length of the womb following the figures displayed on a surgical lance (guided by diagrams). The specific figure for these instruments has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Between each lancet used for cupping or bloodletting, and their grips on the cup itself while performing it by hand, we have that same grasp which was mentioned earlier in this practice.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not put your hand on the caulcer with the cauter, and the humors are above their two (i.e., in both of them).
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And it is through this lifting that you lift the penis according to the length of the body, so that they become branded instruments as prescribed by Cos (referring here likely to ancient medical texts or authorities).
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Return the two garments with fire and smoke inside where they may enter into each other'thy groin area to maintain warmth for both parts together.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Return the points of cautery; therefore they make four uses of it.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you come, then apply three kinds of caustic treatments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xxxi.	The text provided appears to be from an ancient medical context with archaic language
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers, or 'ydropici' as stated in Latin-influenced medieval termin
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Instead of directly treating wounds with caustics in ulcers ('ydropici'), it is done properly within the joints (assuming 'alcinte' refers to another part
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you care for ulcers (ydropic), do not confine your treatment to these curative elements as divided in the section of abdomen ('embelic'), but rather apply four caustics within its circuit, and a cauterization on the stomach; another one on the thighs, and yet another over the chest. There are also two among the spinal discs between the back's legs (spondils), at their core ('dreyt'), plus a treatment in the breastbone area with an additional cauterization there as well upon the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautery is determined by the state of the sinew.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Return the pointed instruments used for bleeding (cauterization) in such a way that they do not spill out of their container while being held to stop prolonged bleeding.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And when the gallbladthy (referring to what seems like an old term for 'gallbladder') is evacuated with the cautery that flows downwards so they may be added to his/her intentions of healing, and if there's a feast intended for him/her as aid in recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what it burns when used for abdominal treatment and that same one also serves as an olive after its previous form before being applied, which is how they treat both sides (abdomen).
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii. (Note: The reference "Capitol
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	From toe and hips for caustic treatment.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swolthy and filled with wet moisture within them, cover your hand over the two tops of the foot in between which it (the earring/bunion) is situated; elevate your hand without twisting it there; then raise your hand further, but do not return completely for the water remains secreted.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	Here comes the source sentence to translate into English, line by line as follows:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let it be cured for long periods so that no water returns from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Return care for those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any specific medical text or
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	The phrase provided, "de cauterizacio de cos de ventre," can be translated line by line into English as
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the intestines are affected by moisture and festering within them, these become digestive and retain what is retained in both belly (stomach) and entrails (intestiles), which heals with hands of curative action without concern for further complication. Occasionally manifests the stomach'fallibility requiring cauterization; here then, it applies a great caustic on its surface as per prior treatment in the patient’stomacal orifice (the large intestine), along with specific applications to maintain internal integrity at every level of subtlety: specifically addressing liver function and ensuring harmony within four key areas - essential for digestion, absorption, secretion by glands/gut lining.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If excess humors exude from the body and cause discomfort on the chest and abdomen areas, then cauterize that area with a heated instrument for treatment; firmly adjusting the cauteries over the stomach and parts of the inguinas (groin), this is curative care to ensure proper nourishment.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	When translating the line "Capitol .xxxiv.", it's important to note that this reference seems like a page or section number in an ancient manuscript,
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When joint pain is caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture within the body's nature, and are treated with waters specified in division for their care; otherwise they are cauterized at three points on the edge of each big toe and little toe—and above all around the navel wound using two lancets.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food has not been digested properly, causing facial swelling, then you will apply that treatment on the large cautery as previously mentioned; also applying it to a caulter of iron for one or more hours until signs of intoxication disappear. Also ensure they re-enter health so that healing may occur.
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation and
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The provided Latin-like phrase translates to English as: The scalding applied is directed towards the patient'dict abdomen (assuming "Capitol" refers erroneously here instead of commonly understood
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	The phrase translates to English as: When you scald the ulcer (a wound), there are hot irons that have been assembled for use (probably in treatment). This suggests an old medical practice where heat was applied using heated metal instruments like iron cauterizers.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The translation into English is: Into that which has been kindled within the ulcer's abdomen, place your hand so that it reaches for the portal of venous entry wherein flows the blood carrying away impurities (the metaphorically described "cancer"). This line suggests a therapedictive approach in medieval medicine aiming to reach and possibly burn through an infected area. It demonstrates how early doctors might have conceptualized disease spread within the body, with treatments targeted
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The translation into English is: Apply vinegar or oil upon them as needed; when we have discussed and recounted their conditions here, the corresponding cauterization (treatment with heat) for each should be applied afterward by those who will confer healing ointments within which they are to be anointed. This line indicates that treatments in medieval medicine were often sequential or combined, where initial symptomatic application followed by a more targeted therapedictive measure was common practice—a holistic approach of both immediate relief and specific intervention after assessment. The mentioning of "anointings" also reflects the importance placed on oils as he
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you use a large cautery over this area, it may help restore vitality.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Based on your description of similar languages (Latin, Italian, Spanish,
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	From the medieval medical context and using an approximation based on Latin phrases with elements of other Romance languages:  
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work assigned to it here, and the patient is frightened by it, they are healed through cautionary measures.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when any one opens a fistula in the nature and it is ancient, illness of body and moist corruption arise from within, thus warranting that he who discovers this subtle attempt should expose how much depth has been reached by said attempted penetration.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Return the cautery that seems like fire (or heat) to it with warmth or apply gentle heat using something similar, such as hot water applied externally through some form
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Return that which is lit in the abscess with heat (or apply warmth), and adjust according to how deep it penetrates within this sinus tract or opening of fluid discharge. The translation involves applying localized heat therapy, possibly using a heated instrument like cautery on an existing fistula – where int
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the process with that which is burnished within – where you use a hot cautery on those parts of the body burnt out or slightly charred over one to three days, depending upon your need for treatment duration and intensity. The translation here suggests applying heat therapy possibly using combustion (burnishing) techniques like heated instruments in cases with superficial burns where some restoration is needed; it's a somewhat older concept of treating minor skin
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Protect yourself from combustion of nerves and veins (carefully to avoid damaging sensitive structures); if a tract or opening forms within the bladder, thighs, or hernia area, guard all these sites; do not apply treatment unless the fistula is in carnosity—meaning it's formed by solid tissue and you believe there’s no further risk of spread. This advice reflects cautionary measures to protect delicate structures from heat injury while managing abscesses or fistulas, emphasizing careful application particularly when dealing with deeper affected areas where the skin has turned into flesh-like texture (carnosity). The text underscores a conservative approach in using thermal treatments like caut
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Carefully apply to that which is healing within; this suggests the gentle and targeted use of heat (likely with some form of
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the place is sealed off and materials are removed from it, and they have been left for a long time, you will understand that the patient has healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not laid bare in him/it, then you will understand that they have been perverted or rotten inside his bones, or from those causes for which memory returns when he thinks of them here.
Capitol .xxxvii.	I apologize for any confusion, but it seems there might be some misunderstanding with your
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The text appears to discuss medical practices related to treating various conditions using heat or pointed instruments (cauterization). Here
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the nostrs is due to congestion or heavy breathing, and as a result of this we swell up with malaise (illness), cover them where there are ronhos that need cauterization over any one such nose-ridge for remembrance.  
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And when I apply a small amount of caustic quickly, three lines of ligatures will be sufficient to serve as dressings for the wounds and thus promote healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii. (The specific content of this line is not provided
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Cauterization of the bladder." This refers to a medical procedure where heat or a caustic
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When acidosis occurs in the bladder and it mollifies due to froth and urine retention; at that time, one performs cauterization on the pus section of the bladder, using wool for compression afterward over the inflamed part. Additionally, a caustic is applied specifically where fistulae are present (likely referring to an abnormal opening in the body), and another application occurs at the patient'thy left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Whenever it is necessary to use a pointed cautery as per its procession.
Capitol .xxxix.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide context or specific language elements
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	In this line, it seems like the text is referring to a procedure related to treating an abscess (mayra
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When an abscess forms and becomes moistened with humidity, it is forbidden to pierce or penetrate the area; as a result, her menstrual periods become disrupted, leading to delayed occurrences of these pains which require treatment at three cautery points within the abdominal circuit—specifically on the site associated with urine using one caustic tool; and over the location wherepus is found two days after or employing two such tools.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl. (The original text does not provide enough
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Regarding cauterization of the detachment of the ankle: "Per remediar a distensio articulationis carpæ pedis, és convenible
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist membranes protrude to the area of the ankle and cause pains therein, it is referred to as a continuation (prolonged) when compared side bysides with them: "Quand les membranes humides sortent vers la partie de l'ancre et causent des douleurs là-bas, cela s'appelle une prolongation quand on le compare avec elles : 'Komme die feuchten Membrane heraus zur Zehe und verursachen dort Schmerzen; das nennt man dann Verlängerung im Vergleich dazu'
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is being stretched out here.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	And when you cauterize the wound on the patient'thy knee with a pointed instrument for semblance, place it there where they have been shaken up by movement, and thus preventing their body from losing heat in that area of the circle joint.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And those instruments that were used before for shaping in the process of stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not with you now, then take three larger cauteries of the same kind to perform the procedure.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply the points according to the amount of pain in the entire spine, and take care that it heals properly.
Capitol .xli.	From the given context of medieval medical practices in Latin-influenced language transl
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The phrase "Cauteirzaciodea vena scinaica" pertains to a procedure involving caustic treatment,
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the thigh and is caused by excess moisture leading to fermentation, we treat it with water that has been previously mentioned herein (as per our earlier discussion) without contributing further harm; apply caustic treatment to eliminate these thickened humors or artificially produced pillules.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The use of cautery in that area is either the medicine' extrusion (combustion), or it is a hot lancet/catheter (foc).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here are the translations for each line of the medieval medical treatise:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And as for the spaces between each cautery, their size corresponds with that of the instrument used (cauterizing tool or large), and so they should be proportionate to it.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May some observations be made with the caustics on the head of pain for that there shall be four such treatments.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize at the place where it was previously formed during the cauterization of the detachment of the ankle; such that a circle remains intact and burns all along the entire knee.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how one uses cautery when pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the groin area.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May you extend into the thigh, and there apply both of those cauterisms on the location to which the pain travels (which is the inflammation); one cauterism over each quarter for four days until some portion of the body part heals.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If there are pointed cauteries and according to the depth of their incisions as per the size of the thumbnail:
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the malady invades and causes pain within this place specifically in the feet, then here you apply cautery to that spot where it has entered; do so for three points or four, as required by that affected part.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the malady causes pain when pressed down in the groin area, then apply this cutting lancet here to cauterize it.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And as long as you do not use the caulk in such a way that it burns or grinds down large nerves and bones excessively on your patient'thy, over their abdomen where there is no apparent injury to be cauterized with fire (which would constitute additional harm).
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen another of those things that were cauterized on the skin and finally in the cauterization process, with an inflated bed inside where the swelling occurred, a hole was made through it and ruined completely the patient's body.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Return the belly's discomgy with appropriate measures, and apply water as necessary for death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts and requires cautery according to this method, then proceed as follows...
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line into English:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Return it is lit within the fire contained inside where sparks are formed and placed upon the divided section of the groin, with the malady resting on their loins as they lie down.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So then you will apply three times that same treatment in a day.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply it there for three days, apply bandage and wrap up the excreted matter for several days until healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh, children, of this particular kind of instruments used for the fearful examination (or inspection) we have only encountered a few instances with them observing over us.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May some of the caulters (cauteries) for him who suffers be brought here, and inflict pain on this location.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries of medicine are that you make two circles with a perforated instrument at the entrance of iron, and the length of their legs will be like two nuts or bridges in their navigation.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between them contains as much bulk of the body as possible and is unexpanded above or below it, so that they hold each other in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And place your hand over the part of the anus, where the sick person lies therein; and also on that portion as well—and take water scooped out (a cup) between two circles, which quality is small by little pieces until it has been consumed for one hour. Administer a bite to this liquid medicine at intervals while biting through the pain caused by inflammation. Here, "atrobo mordicacio" refers to applying force or pressure as part of treatment (suggestive of techniques used in cupping therapy).
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand with the tool and wipe off all the downy water from their entire body of wet water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return there is applied that which heals within it wherein they apply oil for its curative properties.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends within the coccyx or the saddle area, place it on where water is collected as soon as possible after experiencing in the anal region.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of gout treatment, and I have already written it in the treatise on medical correction.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and cause not extingsup both parts simultaneously one, and fix them in a new pause from which the division after having been pierced by a small tool as much enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Even the flow of other or incoming water streams is directed towards that limestone and heated by warm springs, which rise up through it; place your hand over this area for proper compression with cooling herbs applied to reduce swelling, letting out steam from undernethy's body at once.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if there is pressure from certain stones (gout or kidney stones), and it does not move downward naturally, take a recent footstone; slice it thinly into several pieces of gray stone, place them on the joint where pain occurs, or in the thighs, legs, or groin area, and apply.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When it is laid down for three hours or as much time as the malady permits, allowing rest and recovery from illness (the translation captures a general idea but may not perfectly reflect medieval medical terminology). Here are possible translations line by line:
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And place it in bath and when the patient'superson body is scalded (bath), then insert that into the ground, whereupon pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	E understand that we do not cover with cauterization these medicines, but facilitate the expulsion of pus from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May Socrates say that when the vein of a goat is cut and cauterized, it causes its blood to flow; and these burns are as follows: woolen threads or honey-soaked linen soaked in antidote oil, placed between the feet'se heels and the ankles.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Return the fluid and do not cease pouring until the vengeance of the knife reaches within the joint, restoring pain relief.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this cutting of cauteries is called cauterization tools.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xliii. (Assuming there's a typographical error
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	The provided Latin-influenced medieval text seems to deal with the treatment of pain, possibly in reference to gout
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	The text outlines various causes of pain in the two (presumably feet or legs) and suggests that it can be due to cramping, impacts from strikes or blows, excessive evacuation ("diarrheal" condition), as well as infusions caused by wet humors. Here is a translation into English:
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And with a pointed cautery is not used, but only in this specific area where the fluid effusion occurs due to imbalance of humors.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So then, remove the blockage of the bladder and its appearance as if they were pains on top of each other in accordance with his latitude (body position), placing a pin or cautery at most in any line where there is discomfort due to what comes out from the body (urinary retention) according to how much he can tolerate.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is necessary for pain treatment with pointed cautery points.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, then apply three or four lancets made of metal in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (Note: Without additional context or understanding of abbre
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The phrase "de cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat" appears to be in Latin, and it translates roughly into English as follows
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	The phrase "de cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat" translates to English as: Cautery treatment for the suppuration; and it is said of these little children that you press on their body in bed during waking hours, lifting up movement.  
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And in the lower back and neck of him that has begun to overtop other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you press and intend to prevent from spreading, then apply the pointed one that is for this purpose in such a manner as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	That instrument applies pressure with the cautery over the entire backbone region of the patient'thy.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, perform cautery within the vertebral column with points of cautery on two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	These are the points made for them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Return care for the location inside which has been healed with water that we have provided.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May there be caution that it is not applied in a blistering manner but for muscle spasm relief.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv. (The provided text does not include enough context
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	From the treatment of gout and joint pain:
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And when gout healing is due from the manipulation and not to be forgotten about further pain reliefs, then apply bandages with care.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you are cauterizing that which is expulsion within the limb' extrication channel, using our respective burners (cauterization).
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of that pointed cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery for this purpose.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pains penetrate into the anuses or other joints, and motions occur therein, it is necessary to apply caustic here for each of those painful parts with three or four applications using this caustic.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If you have the necessary cautery tools at hand, then apply them to that area without pressing too hard with your hands; do so solely by moving the instrument from undernethy's tongue.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain enters into both knees, then administer the treatment we have mentioned in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pains are only in the legs, and it is called suppuration, then a point must be made along the course of the channels as they turn, on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If there are residual pains in the joints, then make a puncture on the circumference of each articulation and over every bone marking its location where your finger presses down (palpates).
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If joint or muscle pain comes upon certain days with the legs or backbone, then burn all parts of their helpers (probably referring to a healing practice where heat is applied).
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	If the bowels are not properly cleansed and receive adegyne (a term used to refer to medicine or treatment), even if a good regimen is followed with this instrument for purification, God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	The provided text seems to be in an archaic or early form of Rom
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	In reference to treating lacerations, the line "Capitol .xlv." likely serves as a title
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When it comes to healing wounds in the chest and applying bandages, taking into account what I am instructing you (the maestro or physician), make sure that cloths are used for dressing internally within their body so as not to cause further damage when they expel its contents on this day.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the malady between your thighs over their two legs and command that they hold their throat so that an opening occurs or a hernia appears (comes out).
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Return that to the thighs above, and pull back as far on it across the bones of which they form the end extension—those parts are like the lower circles at the top sections where division occurs in the body'thy limb (assuming 'pentenilh am senhal extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle').
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Return the hot lancet used for this purpose:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When there is a reason (mot) for seeking help and make needle points.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to ensure that the intestine does not protrude outwards.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient' extramammary and inserted a cushion therein; another servant is placed on their legs, while another supports their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Return the cautery to that spot on your hand where you've applied pressure firmly, and wait until others enter as per their schedule during daylight; repeat this action if entry into the patient’ extramammary region has not been achieved in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the intestine's condition during your cautery, to ensure that it does not leak out into the groin area or cause a greater harmful effect.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you realize that when using the cautery, you do not touch the patient's eyes, nor perform your operation on them.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And when it is necessary for the children'se pointed instruments (cauteries) to be subtle according to their great size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Return care for the site of the cautery within three days, while the wound is healing at the border.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return that thing with care into its container so it may heal.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The spleen is resting on its two sides for forty days until the place and infants are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	When the nourishment of him/her according to the length of time needed for his/her recovery causes bloating and prevents the hernia from protruding out, take it promptly as a means of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	When it is time for removal after forty days, apply bandaging gently and hold the extremity for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And those who were already healed by means of the pointed triple-edged cautery as per this form applied it to soothe what was left tender.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlvi.	CXLVI. (The Roman numeral "CXLVI
De cauterizacio de torcio.	From cautery of hernia. ("Capitol CXLVI" seems to be a
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in the upper limbs for a long time and does not relieve itself with care from medicine, those who perform cautery will make points on it as treatment.  
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	When applying instruments for each member according to their magnitude and smallness, as well as mobility and pain in the twisting and location of discomfort, consider:
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it heals through the first application of cautery, be; but if not, repeatedly apply over him these same applications until they enter into his malady member wherein this ailment resides so that subsequent to these repeated interventions its malaise is alleviated. (Accordingly, if it heals through the first application of cautery, be; but if not, repeatedly apply over him these same applications until they enter into his diseased member wherein this illness lies, thus after successive treatments with these methods, relief from the ailment is achieved.)
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii.: (The translation for this line is not clear due
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Cauterization of leprosy." - This refers to a historical medical procedure where heat or a chemical
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 "Cauterization for large wounds requires more heat or caustic substances; and only minimally when the species of leprosy is caused by decayed flesh and melancholy." - This line suggests that cauterizing larger wounds would require a stronger application (either through increased temperature or harsh chemical agents) for effective treatment. When it comes to treating certain types of leprosy, the cause being putrefaction (decay), along with what may be referred to as '
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	So if you intend to cauterize it (referring presumably to an infected area), consider whether the leprosy is caused by putrefaction and these waters that we have previously discussed for curing; neither of which should be left out, nor this one. Be mindful about decay potentially affecting all parts of the body including head hair – thus apply here: above the head (on top) to where cauterization has been mentioned earlier in relation thereto and immediately afterward atop each limb joint; on both shoulders as well if corn-like growths are present, behind either neck or skin flap. Apply caustic substances not just for external but also internal treatment: above the head hair line where it meets forehead flesh (the temple area), then immediately over front and back of each limb joint; on both shoulders as well if there's a corn-like growth present, behind either neck or skin flap. The passage outlines detailed instructions for applying cauterization specifically targeting areas around the head hairline where leprosy could manifest in decayed body parts and emphasizes thorough application of treatment to these critical zones.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and shows manifestations, then you must cauterize that area with those lancets which we have in our caps; on the extremity of the nose, two lancets for each pair of buttocks, two for both spines of the chest, one large enough above the joints between them (hips), a long one over the shoulder blade and two per ankle. Two are used for every knee junction or intersection with legs; on any such point as is present in your feet, cauterize it along all junctures of limbs' bones above and below watered areas (feet), at each heel joint thereof, upon the flexing points of said extremities.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	When it comes to protecting your nerves that are above the ankle and prevent them from burning, here is the translation line by line into English:
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	In some cases it is burned with a cautery on the bones of the pelvis and in others on the mouth of the stomach and on the womb (uterus).
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Here are the line-by extralined translations:
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	When it comes to how large or small the cauterizations should be according to the parts and joints as directed by the tools of instruments,
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the caulters made of barley flour and honey, as well as other remedies within which they shall be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Given that this text is written in an archaic or regional form of a language
De cauterizacio de stupor.	The phrase "Capitol .xlviii." seems to be referencing Roman numerals where ".xlvi
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is struck or falls asleep and does not heal, it must be treated with a caustic according to the greatness of the part affected or its smallness; that's when you apply cauterization based on the severity of the injury or size.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And if the caustic enters through a small hole in the neck, this implies that even such minute entry points are significant and must be addressed with care during treatment using cauterization according to its size at the base of
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Carefully tend that which is inside, ensuring it heals within these parameters when treated with caustic material during medical intervention using cauterization methods as directed
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	In some cases caustic is applied to any numbness within the body or feet and down into the vertebrae of the spine where nerves are located; such application helps relieve the sensation of paralysis (numbness/paresthesia). This indicates that cauterization may be used for specific areas related to neural function when treating conditions like numbness, suggesting its role in restoring or alleviating neurological symptoms.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May it not spread over the entirety but rather where one is knowledgeable in dissection of limbs and exiting nerves throughout the body; indicating that cauterization should be applied judiciously, with precise targeting to specific neurological structures (nuclei), emphasizing expertise required for such an intervention.
Capitol .xlix.	In translating this text line by line into English while considering its mixture of Latin influence with
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	The translation for "Capitol .xlix." would depend on the context, as it seems to be a reference number or title rather than an actual sentence from
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When albaras (which are old and no longer suitable for use in medical wax) appear because they have been aged within the body's humors beyond their capacity to comfort or heal as intended by medicine practitioners—then, it is necessary to cauterize over that which has already begun receding. Specifically:
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Capitol .l.	Given that "Capitol" does not appear in context with
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The phrase you've provided, "Cauterizia di cranz," seems to be a direct Latin term
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When one consumes excess and drinks that water source, it is then necessary to cauterize the wound with a caustic at the site of liver-related digestive upset as you turn or induce vomiting in response thereto. (Please note: This translation attempts to maintain meaning rather than perfect linguistic accuracy due to possible dialectical variations and antiquated terminology.)
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	Here is the line-by extraline translation:
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is a pointed instrument that has been used in the patient's circulatory system either as part of this treatment or on its own circularly like we have mentioned before.
Capitol .li.	Capitalize herein (or in this place) [The term
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	For cauterization of pus-filled areas [This refers to the medical procedure used for treating abscesses or
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any abscess is delayed in its healing, and thus it swells due to excess fat or because of the patient's poor constitution (or weak health), or simply by virtue of time itself—you wish for this moment when draining occurs; then perform cauterization within that circulation where small points are punctured with a sharp instrument. And once done, let it fasten in healing thereafter [The text describes the procedure to be undertaken at precisely such times: performing localized treatment (cauterization) on areas of excess fat or poor health using precise interventions that involve making tiny cuts].
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	May you want to perform the cauterization of it, then heat that which is this form of it; apply its place where nutrients are absorbed so that nourishment enters through the belly button.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the points that were placed there are well healed and allow for proper relaxation of the leg muscles; take care to ensure it is cured in this state as well.
Capitol .lii.	Given that "Capitol" is not immediately recognizable as part of
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	The phrase appears to refer to a medical procedure involving the use of caustic agents for treatment, possibly related to stopping
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	When decay (corruption) occurs in the limb and consumes it with dry wood splinters as if ants were eating away at something softly over time, suggesting gradual destruction similar to how rust spread within metal due to corrosion by moisture or chemical exposure. The term "corrodent" here denotes a substance causing decay in
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you find that caustic (corrosive) agents are present in the area where treatment was applied with a small flame or cauterizing heat source, then apply larger burns selectively and as necessary to counteract the effect of these corroding substances. This suggests using controlled burning techniques targeted at neutralization rather than broad application when dealing with such situations involving chemical agents that damage tissue similarly to how rust deteriorates metal through oxidation processes where moisture is present or other reactive elements are involved, emphasizing the need for precision and appropriate therape
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And so you will burn away that entire section entirely in order to completely remove all traces of decay (corrosion) and prevent any further cause or source from damaging the area, indicating a careful approach aimed at eradication without leaving behind damage which could lead to additional problems. This advice implies thoroughness in treatment while addressing issues like rust that can undermine
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Allow three days for the burn treatment applied on those parts, and pause over these treated locations until there are no remaining scars from burning or complete removal of all decay (corrosion), ensuring that nothing remains which could cause further deterioration similar to how rust must be fully addressed before it can spread unchecked. This suggests a period for healing after aggressive treatment, paralleling the patience required in dealing with persistent problems like corrosion where immediate but temporary solutions may not suffice without allowing time for comprehensive recovery and prevention of recurrence.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Return care for that which is in the body'thy flesh causing it;
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	May if in three days the meat is born that remains uncorrupted, then do so for such food will be good; may otherwise, repeat the cautions where they are broken down into these places (the locations of decay).
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	When acute pain is treated with medicine, it'thy place of application lies in a location for cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	Mayfully use focused fire from a lancet of putrid exudate on joints justly and gently.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	When you have said out the curative medicine for him and thus take it when he has an onset of illness.
Capitol .liii.	The text provided appears incomplete or possibly shorthanded; therefore, without additional
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This fragment seems like it's referring to the treatment of fingers and other similar body parts using a form of medical procedure called "cauterization." In this context:
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Continuing with the translation of this particular line: "Moving continuously to treat the injured part of the body that calls out in pain (the claw), which is caused by a heavy, invasive force entering it and thus dislocating the limb; using cauterization for both ends - at the focus point near where they've applied fire/heat as well as on the tailbone.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the pointed cautery be used where heat is applied so that it resembles pain similar to a sword'dictate (which implies intentional discomfort or analgesia), and this instrument consists of fine iron as much as contained within its entire body, including underneath parts. The quality here refers to the precision with which such an implement can be crafted for targeting specific areas while minimizing damage beyond those regions.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Return the flame to that joint and return your hand with it around the instruments of the lock, so that the instrument reaches the depths of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Lay that in for three days until the start of sweating begins.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return that waxed linen soaked in salt and apply it over there for a while, until what is lodged within them is expelled.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the place where flesh has been generated within which it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it is not converted, and movements are continued on the surface of the body, mainly in the thighs and feet, where you apply water or mercury with a needle (or steel/iron pin from a spinning wheel), holding their hands: take that little amount of water drawn out; place your hand over it, and rotate it by compression using your own movement—this will push back the remaining fluid through the hub of the catheter into the tube connected to its head until you feel resistance in the portions (or knots) of the catheter. Then remove that small amount of water; after waiting for just an hour from when you applied pressure with the needle, take it out again—this is done if there's a slight bite due to fluid coming through these parts during urination: atrophy (or shrinkage) will occur in this residual volume by removing and reapplying water several times.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if it is necessary for them to enter all into their bodies, take the other inside where they are already in each part of the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	When such pus is removed from the flesh where it was engorged by the swelling, care must be taken of them with water which has been drawn up (likely through some form of primitive syringe or medical tool).
Capitol .liiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide enough context or details for
De cauterizacio de tremor.	The phrase "de cauterizacio de tremor" in English would translate to "for caut
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When joint pain results from inflammation or fever due to irritated nerves or other causes resembling such conditions, it is recommended that you perform a spinal manipulation on the four vertebrae in question; and when applying heat therapy for these purposes should be done both at your chest level over where discomfort occurs as well as directly upon the abdomen.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the shaking of him ceases and hastens his health recovery from illness,
Capitol .lv.	From what is given in Latin script, which seems like an amalg
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	The phrase "Capitol .lv." appears disjointed and lacks context for a direct translation; however, interpreting it as related to
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When albs (which may refer to wounds or abscesses) are expelled from the body and pustules formed by corrupted materials, it is for curative purposes that a compress with myrtle leaves be applied directly over these lesions; thus they should either span across each point of drainage beneath gentle pressure using twigs (myrtles), or along longer branches if necessary. Or apply gently to the cauterized area under slow, meticulous movement while focusing on that region—presumably where an abscess has been opened and needs further treatment with myrtle compresses for healing purposes:
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Here are the translations for each line:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Whenever there is pain that needs to be relieved by purgation, it may happen through enema (cleansing of the bowels using an inserted tube).
Capitol lvi.	Capitol LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of bleeding from a sanctioned wound through an incision of scalpel.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops guided by fever due to chalk are sickened where they lie or need insertion of instruments into the limb parts; then resemble those who suffer from it and finding recovery difficult at that time.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when you press the patient's waist against your own body (their ma), place pressure on that area until their breath enters and exits normally again without any issues occurring wherein the intestine is not coming out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Return rest in the focus of the lamps (cauteries), a few and ample ones used for burning purposes, over those contained within that are embers or sparks.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return from those places small or large where the artery has been broken, over that vein which is filling with blood causing it swell, and place your cautery inside so as to ligate (or tie off) and restrict that vessel.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the sanction is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move and withdraw the cautery, then take another lashing immediately using those cauteries which are prepared at the focus, so that it does not continue to exit further.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And keep watch so that you do not burn the nerves here and expel from undernethy or other wickedness.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E when the artery is blocked and it's not possible to stretch that section, especially if the artery is large unless one of four methods are used: or apply cautery where we want blood flow (artery), provided there isn'thy extraction at all times; when extrication occurs for their limbs they will be burned and restricted movement in those areas, or it might involve nails or ligature to tighten the artery further through external force via bandaging on padding made of sturdy stuff like wood wool.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer proper restriction of the patient have leather and bands or position for causes that are burnt up and phantom-like not to comfort but rather inflict pain.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen that no doctor or medicine is present at the time, then perform pressure on the indicated spot with what we have immediately available from that vein whereupon understand the great constriction within the lower part of him as well as upon his chest; for there shall not be any more rupture due to excessive friction inside which he will become contracted and swollen. And if cautery or medicine is required, it may occur here in that place where we have them at hand.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Commences the second division.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncturing and blows, and of bleeding practices and their counterparts.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When this process is carried out in this chapter for the purpose of drawing out what they need (the patient's body fluid), as required by that which will come forth, then so it shall be done accordingly.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you come upon blood and fever that appear in this place, understand that it is the first stage of cauterization here.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For the amount that is present here, great care must be taken during this operation where periodic evacuation of what is inside (presumably fluid or waste) located within there—the place which holds life itself—is necessary through aspiration from the vein or incision on the ulcer or abscess outbreak/appearance or pure extraction of pus and its likenesses.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	From all of these things accompanies fear and trembling in their bodies, which death itself brings about.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Even you must warn yourself not to fall into the state wherein some days require using your hands like men handling weapons against illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	From them comes the one who understands their sickness and fear death due to it; hence because of the potent humors found within their illness, and due to its prolonged duration, which indicates that they are afraid of dying from this disease.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	Of these is what gives them their being and form; they hope for this healthiness, but the illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so that you consent to what comes from him of whom this affliction arises; your caution is greater than concealment and your greed not presumed for any reason until certain science validates it against which, through proper succession, true praise will be given.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: In healing all your illnesses of prediction and indication herein described, in that you are cured thereupon becomes a help for acquisition of fame and memory; benefactor and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, grant your understanding and do not withhold guidance from each other; for herein lies protection within you.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And order this chapter distinctly according to the sections in the previous chapters on caulking (cauterization) for headache relief within the feet, so that you may attend to what is requested of you regarding it and its necessity.
Capitol primier.	Capital First.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	From the healing water that is contained in the head of the children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You understand that this illness moves gradually in children, and when the newborn first lifts their head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Some times due to a mishap that is not clean or unintentional, it may occur as well.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May you not see this illness in children; and all those who have their death caused by the condition I treat herein are shown to me laid down (deceased).
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you have seen that this child'thy head was filled with water, and its head has been magnificently wilted all day long until it could no longer stand against doctors coming for treatment because of excessive moisture within its head.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is added between the navel and the bone or undernezyme (presumably referring to flesh) on the sinew(s).
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case is where moisture (humidity) is between the chin and bone, and the abscess is small, then cut it open at the place of pain on the upper jaw as a fissure forms there; this is how the sprain occurs:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if there is an increase in moisture and the ulceration becomes more severe, here are two cracks according to this mannerism.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the moisture is from within you, it means that your lips are open and wet with tears all over, and when you press on those parts, water does not come out of them anymore.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut into the head'dict area at this place and create three openings according to this methodology:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And apply moisture to the wound externally so that all its fluidity is removed, and strengthen cracks in clothes and blankets; apply oil and medicinal herbs on top of these items throughout daytime (and at night if necessary), secure with bandages or poultice, tightening it for equal healing. Eat dry food by little portions to comfort the body until recovery is complete.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	Here comes another operation method for incision, which you consider when the abscess size and fluid collection are large; they may occur in the occiput, or at the lower part of the body, or on the right side, or left side; therefore pay attention to where the abscess appears together with fluid accumulation, and do it as soon as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not split the vein and lymphatic vessels of sanctus and mel, for this fluid flow is necessary for the expulsion of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	The text provided is in Old Occitan or Provençal,
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the opening of the arteries where you place your fingers (or "hilasses"), called pressure points or acupoints in this context. Here we have an old medical text that discusses various methods to alleviate certain ailments, primarily focusing on joint pain and its
Capitol segon.	In the second part of Capitol (likely referring back to
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When joint swelling or inflammation occurs within the knees or chest area and it is outdated not to consider these as waters (an old medical term for fluid buildup), rather than turning directly to medicine, here begins our consideration of remedies starting with those two arterial points. This excerpt emphasizes a holistic approach where observation leads into potential non-pharmacological intervents based on the understanding and manipulation of these specific body areas – in this case referring back again to traditional acupoint stimulation or pressure as initial treatments before resorting sole each other, suggesting an early form of integrative medicine.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Thus when you intend to inject that which is the black bile into its head (referring likely to humors within), apply pressure atop of tight linen for so they emerge and strengthen their neck portion under, also taking note if there are veins present; additionally consider locations where these points above lie hidden among those already noted. In this passage from the medieval medical treatise, it is advising how to manually manipulate internal substances (humors), suggesting that through specific techniques – including pressure and possibly manual extraction of black bile—the health practitioner aims at correct imbalance within what they understand as bodily fluids. The reference also implies an intimate knowledge of the body’ couture, where linen's tightness might symbolize or represent applied force to stimulate flow and thus balance humors according to ancient medical theories which believed in four essential 'humorous' substances within one's constitution that must be kept balanced. The practitioner is also advised on how not only the points but their immediate surrlties—the veins, for example—are of interest and should guide
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Return the knight to its place on the anvil and inspect each of their nails under it for any signs of a wound entering through one of these splinters into the finger joints, as directed by the headmaster' extraneous words are somewhat unclear in this old text. Here is my translation:
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the strap of wood into the vein and divide it at points below these divisions for treatment purposes.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of incisions is two inches adjusted, whenever any vein within the sanctum excurses due to pulsing blood flow, it moves frequently with each beat.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May if the arrow is not shown at the joint, then measure from the auricle (ear) the amount of three fingers' widths and take hold tightly to attempt entry into the mouth/nose opening.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	When the vein is broken and there should be no more blood from it or in its measure according to the quantity that appears of the malady'thy veins, and this amount will determine how much has been lost through injury;
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Return attention to the swelling and thus if it remains on the bone due to some cause of fistulae (abscess), then divide open that part for treatment in order not to develop a cloven wound.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strength is given to the child with wool and silk fabrics, and care for that which has been inside where it heals.
Capitol .iii.	The text provided appears as if it is attempting an amalgamation
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Extracting the arches which are within the temples requires careful attention and technique, often involving delicate tools or methods specific to such tasks in historical contexts:
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient cataracts that have migrated from the eyes due to moist agricultural environments or poor quality in limb joints of temple structures, and when they cause suffering for us herein with these ailments, we use hands-on healing techniques of medicine without causing discomfort, thus helping extract those cataracts that have come out.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	E the nature of this operation and removal thereof that causes baldness in their scalp is for understanding its arteriority within the temple; it becomes evident through your pulse alone when hidden due to forceful expulsion by humors.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden from you, then tighten the area of your navel with some cloth; and rub or sprinkle that place with rough linen or immerse the location in water flowing downwards until signs appear indicating an abscess.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take it, this is how:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May it be that if the artery is subtle, you will wrap around its extremity part of the body and insinuate into that portion according to the extent for which their limbs are elongated and contracted; they shall not bleed unless those parts have been inserted.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	When effective vomiting of bile from the sanctum is induced within three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then place it in two places firmly down to the feet'dictor or heartstrings and do not let it rot during its congealment into flesh; thus preventing putrefaction within the body and flow of bile.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Return (or apply) the excess that is between two ligaments; and make it now or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, apply the pointed cautery inside the mouth within which they insert their needles piercing outside of it, and remain at that place where this work is performed by a midwife/obstetrician (assuming 'meteyssa' refers to an obstetric practice).
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es milhor obra sino che il maleau avria febbre o scalfaccio complesso; quare cauteri sunt de quelle cause che aiutano alle umidità finali, e dunque è meglio in giovamento.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working you encounter an outflow of sick blood from the artery during labor, then at that moment tighten or apply said bleeding vessel (artery), and strengthen your grip to restrict that flow of blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If any cause of those is not present with you now, then rest your hand on the place where the sore has congealed, and apply pressure at that spot until it cools down due to strong frigidity within which its inflammation subsides, doing so as per their strength.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When the leech is placed outside of the artery, you are performing a bloodletting procedure with two lances that have been handled by yourself; after each withdrawal (usually done for an ignited cause), wait until they reach the bones and separate them into two places so that it extends to where your limbs meet – thus these areas will not heal completely through this treatment.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the pointed cautery should be used:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And if it is the sharpness of both breeches (or pants) that serves as an example/example case or instance, here we go with
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	And if their sharpness is such that two pants are sharper than the cut of any body part they can mimic (like joints), we do not divide or dissect them quickly for flesh to avoid excessive speed in cutting, which could potentially cause harm due to its quick pace.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when any thickness occurs therein (implying that an excess of body fat is present), the heat from the focus remains in those areas and flesh detaches by sweating, allowing for removal or purification through perspiration. This suggests a belief held during medieval times regarding weight management: if one had too much "grossitude" or obesity (referred
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This piece is considered better in its entirety and it's presented with ease, indicating that the treatment of fat was seen as beneficial if managed correctly throughout this text or methodology described
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And where there is space between two pants (or garments), the quantity of body fat present in that specific area will be determined, highlighting a focus on assessment and possibly management or removal based on observed obesity
Capitol quart.	This phrase likely refers to an exercise within a larger context regarding
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Relatedly, this sentence concerns the treatment of sharp and acute joint pains in patients ("cors" referring here likely indicates 'joints' or body parts affected by pain). The focus would be
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When these joint pains are sharp and acidic (perhaps referring to intense inflammation or an acute condition), they affect the veins underne d your head's temples ("test del cap deforo"), where no external cause is tolerated for healing, making it necessary: at times, even a patient suffering from these pains will appear as though their face involuntarily drags along with them in ambulation—mimicking the scurry of ants; simultaneously, this state exhausts the limbs so much that they feel like wet fur and one's nails become chalky due to perspiration ("humitz enayssi"). The ancient healing masters (indicated by "antics agro mesties") employ various techniques within these treatments, ensuring a comprehensive approach. This highlights not only the physical aspects of medieval medical practices but also underscdict how patients' symptoms and experiences were deeply interconnected with their overall health management in those times. The term “nompnero” here suggests that this multifaceted treatment contributes to or ensures recovery, emphasizing a holistic approach where even the psychological state ("se involuntariamente draga la face") is considered important for healing. This passage provides insight into how medieval medicine regarded symptoms and their impact on patients' daily lives while also showcasing specialized interventions used by health practitioners of that era to address complex conditions like joint pains characterized as being “sharp” or "acidic.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	When you command the malady to pull back its hairs that are on its face, and position your finger in three incision points along the mouth according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure extends two lengths: one distance from the nose in the forehead'se location where tears are formed, and another corresponding to a small movement of the eyes which belong there; then this third portion belongs elsewhere.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	When your mouth is opened at the entrance of the teeth which are two inches apart and extend your tongue incessantly between both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If in any joint there is three fingers' length of space, then it means that this amount should be adjusted or measured out accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If there is one of your bedclothes dressed or dry cloth present, it serves as the place for taking out medications from those who are sick.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Return (or bring back) the shoulder blade between two sharp limbs of it; this is how its incision looks like.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that it is from among those who enter into the second cusp.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	When the tool touches all of that part where it lies between two notches on the bone under which the tongue is located, and makes its way into the second indentation,
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Return the splint so that it does not enter into or between either of its ends and another tool you call cauterizing is applied to one end only; do not apply this on both sides at once.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And the flesh attached to that gout must be released from its joints, and press upon it so much as enters into the migrating crack, separating all tendons downward starting at the head of bone.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May there be continued flow from the fontanelle down to the mouth opening, and place water into that crack between the two openings.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Put enough warm water into the vessel as much as possible until you open up and expose the hardened areas of the sacrum joint'dictions.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Place a pause in any crack or wound on the chest skin, and place it over those pus spots that appear wet with sweat and oil, so as not to develop an abscess (apostema).
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And in the third day apply linen and administer great heat of water or bezoar, with oil rosary and others inside until the humors are cured.
Capitol .v.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any context or
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the care of pictures for catharsis and the healing powers derived from those drawn by the head, which can be interpreted as a belief in therapeutic images or talismans created under guidance that could purify emotions (cathartic effect) and
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the patient undergoes catharsis and continues doing so, at times even their humors are exhausted by these healing images (talismans or therapy derived from head drawings), leading to a necessity for care of those aspects; when it comes time also for attending them—the eyes ulcerated and the scalp hairs falling out. Herein lies an acute pain in their chest, exacerbating as these materials (healing images or talismans) are not from natural sources but rather stemming directly from veins of parts drawn by the head's hand—which implies that genuine insight and understanding emerge only when realizing this point.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is: that you command the malady to raise its own front, and apply a small incision at the spot on the forehead where it appears, which will be inside one temple using the left hand (and insertion in the ridge of the right temple; inserted into bone), until the bone becomes visible.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Remove all the sanctity of sponge or dry cloth that is placed between the upper and lower lips of the small opening at the collar bone, respectively.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Returning up above on the pulse in vein and oil, ensuring it does not develop into an abscess (carbuncle).
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When the fever has decreased and inflammation begins in the liver where flesh is cooked (which refers to heating pads made from flour of wheat two parts, honey four parts mixed together), take care that this substance does not continue boiling. When you have taken these proportions with your hand for plastering and administer them on these inflamed areas as they are in their natural state (meaning applying the mixture directly to affected body part).
Capitol .vi.	Certainly! Here is my translation of "Capitol .
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	From the treatment for that which occurs in the fingers/thumbs (assuming 'aurelhas' refers to finger joints, as it is not standard
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Since that which occurs in the fingers/thumbs is one of four kinds, whether it's metal or resembles metal (like iron and wool), or because it is like plant matter such as beans or lentils, or if its cause stems from fluidity akin to water along with mercury and their semblances—or perhaps due to some animal factor:
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when blood flows in the earlobe or seems similar to those causes that do not fit into it and stop the flow of blood from the earlobes there, if you see such bleeding coming out of any cause (possibly injury or inflammation), then administer its removal, perform stitching as needed for proper healing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place some cloth or wool pauses in the circuit of the artery and extend the artery towards the parts below, which are moved frequently due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is not a cough present, then apply gentle suction using the device called for in this method.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is a case of obstruction (foreclosure or blockage), then do so quickly using gentle pressure with one handful each time for two small applications; otherwise, administer the removal of obstructions gradually over several light touches.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	So if there is not an opening for water (meaning the body'setup or natural route of fluid movement), then make a silver needle and insert its extremity into the ulcer site, sealing it with wax and oiled substances so that only the needle protrudes.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	When urinated into it is strong acid that has been retained for too long, here come the troops (of harmful substances).
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If not for the operation in this manner, take hold of an instrument or device with nails attached to it tightly pressed onto one part until at that spot ceases pain; then wrap carefully over that point which has been operated and stopped bleeding.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	When you insert it into the trouser of the patient for ease and remove the ardor caused by moisture, do so carefully.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if not the cause we have discussed so far is responsible for it at this moment, then take immediate action to treat or restrain spasticity and contracture therein.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And when you sanction the patient' extrusion of the venae segmentaria and remove it according to the direction of their vertu, holding your fingers therein between yours own extremities and convert that auricular horn into small parts above the location where flesh should protrude before surgery.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	E when the figure of the moon' extrinsically comes to touch the stone, and if that same moment you can apply your instrument appropriately; at this time fix the crack in that location with appropriate speed, and cure it within which period it becomes healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of pain in the artery is one of fats that were believed to be consumed and inflamed within it, then administer treatment and removal; however, if you do not heed my advice for exercise therapy, apply a gentle heat under this manner:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	e administer that which was drawn from there where he took it in his finger, for that purpose.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	When you do not wet it when thinking that this has already become moistened by the breath of Apollo and pause there in small movements, holding your hands undernezym or gesture subtly as if through insight we withdraw from having taken out.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May enter the water wherein the malady enters through the groin used for stricture, and fill up that clysis cup with warmth from below many drops; if by this method it is achieved (i.e., relieving pain), then be contented; otherwise, take grains of pumice or basalt as directed according to length, heat them in the focus briefly, and place these heated stones on the stone wherein water enters into that stricture: The patient inserts one such hot stone internally at this point within their clysis cup and hops over it with a part of themselves.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So that all of the water is drained from within (inside).
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has flown into the body'thy opening (forum-getada), grasping paper or gutstring, take one end of it and insert it into your earlobe (aurello), extending the other end inside where flame will ignite thy bowels.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if it is necessary that the metal be further heated and melted as much within so that all of the water has been drained out through this spout, heat up the crucible wherein the lead lies above its extraction point until completely evaporated away; do so using a cannula inserted downward from below.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When an animal is extracted from that hole, if it's a small creature and hops or appears in the manner we have described previously during division; when it comes from a large one causing discomgy (distension) to appear on the chest, then administer its extraction by hand and knife while removing all other causes present within that hole.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When extracting the evil generated in the artery during healing and you do not comfort your treatment of that extracted water previously discussed in division and fluid movement processes, then watch over the vein towards the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So then if there is any cause of worms here, extract that with gentle hands or small subtle movements; otherwise take a catheter quickly prepared and inserted below this area – it's the form we use for treatment.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate extremity into the artery according to the quantity that suffering may cause in it; and draw out syrup from there strongly, letting flowing movements continue until all worms are expelled through their holes (holes).
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	May you not ignore my attendance here, then you will become pale and clamorous along the channel of the catheter with which we have been drinking; administer these draug extrications that have already been purified in their treatment for worms, causing discomfort within the tract.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	It is your effusion that it becomes what you pour out of this very instrument, which is the form in which these medicines are expressed.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	E is when it contains silver or lead, then quickly strike in which there's a small splinter, and place on the underside of the hand.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	So it is when they press in the continence of the catheter here that there is necessity for intervention.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the feather and wrap it gently around their limb properly, and place oil or honey in the cavity of breathing (the chest), or the juice of any herb from these medicines in the canula—and that is where it belongs—insert the feather above and express below to squeeze out what's inside as quickly as possible. The patient, having had their thigh space opened between them, with cushions underneubut also have servants on legs/hips and hands held by another servant or person — now comes an instruction:
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When it has been infused into the auricle is already cut with a small flame from the focus (fire).
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	When extracting from the wound is not too harsh, for the ointments of honey do not tolerate it.
Capitol .vii.	Given that this text seems to be in an archaic form of Latin
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	The phrase "Curación del opio" translates into English as "Treatment of the wounds." Here's
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	The translation of this medieval medical treatise into English is as follows:  
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	Even when you injure in the area of the patient's belly without compressing their clothing, it is among the major difficulties for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you pause the humid bone of the malady at its location and observe it there:
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	So if you observe a prominent swelling on that subtle part of it which this is its form,
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If in the limb where it is located (patient's body), one portion of it is sharp and the other not, and its sinews are formed by two layers such that they do not cause harm to the groin.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	So if the purulent discharge is from flesh or tissue in the thigh or abdomen area, then cut it off gently and apply forceful cutting within where the body remains intact as much as possible.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If the stone (impacted calculus) is in the area of the navel, then insert it undernethy's subtle dragon and heat that piece until hot, and place that into the navel flesh.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the hump caused by excess water in the abdomen leads to heaviness due to gravity, then alleviate this pressure; and make sure it does not harm the nerves of the backbone.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	May you also cool the flow of blood with sponge or cloth soaked in water and pause over the artery, using another remedy that restricts the flow of blood as mentioned in the treatment text.
Capitol .viii.	The provided text appears as if it is an extract from a medieval medical document discuss
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	When taking care of the issue that has come up with the eyelids, one should:
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When some cold dampness enters into the nostrthy of bones causing pain in the feet, sometimes these are dry occurrences.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So that you hold those parts together and separate the entrails from their cavities, placing pause over the designated areas where they have been divided thrice.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	May it be that there is a flow of blood causing pain, then you should apply these local anesthetics carefully under the skin.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cautery is to apply it on the insides and directed movements when any remaining cause of their reasons remains after being cauterized at the focus; and once those causes are burned off, they do not return.
Capitol .ix.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This line translates as follows in English: "Treatment of the greatness that comes upon the eyelids." This phrase likely refers to some form of medical condition affecting the
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The translation for this line in English is: "Movements that occur on the lids of eyes due to any cause which leads it to grow strong and tough, and because of its greatness a call has been made." This medieval medical text discusses conditions related to eye movements or perhaps an ocular disorder where increased strength (grandezza) is notable. The language used incorporates elements from multiple Romance languages while maintaining some archaic Latin terms relevant in
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	The translation for this line into English is: "An aggregation of heavy moisture on the upper and lower lids." This sentence likely describes an accumulation or presence of excessive, possibly stagnant fluid within the ey
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	The translation for this line in English is: "Therefore, the excessiveness originates from within their body moisture appears out of the lids and throughout it all – its cause being dampness." Here we are interpreting a statement regarding why there may be an issue with significant fluid build-up or 'grandissia' (great size/excess) in the eyelids, which is attributed to moisture from within ('leugiera'). This suggests that internal bodily fluids might find their way out through swollen l
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	The translation for this line into English is: "Thus above that fissure in the linea (of separation), take out what from all parts you can escape with and suspend it there; additionally, apply some of it to every part so as to expedite departure while lifting off or removing others." This medieval medical advice appears directed at treating a condition possibly related to bleeding within bodily cavities (possibly an abscess). The practitioner is guiding how and where fluid should be managed - removal, suspension above the f
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	May it be that if you are not dressed appropriately and do not insert the instrument into its small opening gently (not touching the eyelid lightly), then nothing will happen for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; take care that this one be healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little (of blood), you will not come down with sickness during that week which the liver'dictor remains in your body; this replenishes and nurtures life within you.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the great size declines at the edges of the eyelids' surface, then lift and suspend it for an hour or so as you desire, choose one to press on all over until there is none remaining that causes any noticeable swelling; if the eyelid through inspection becomes elongated, note in no particular cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And when it is necessary to initiate treatment, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the area wherein the healing fluid resides within that should be cured.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.: (The translation may not be accurate without
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Translation for "Capitol .x.": It appears that this line is possibly referencing a specific section or entry, denoted by ".x." in the context of an old
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Translation: It appears that this line is discussing an axcirnath, which originates in the upper lid's skin and mainly affects children, worsening their ulcers; consequently they cannot endure sunlight as these swellings tend to appear there.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	When you time those groans on the face all night long, and over their closed eyes with wet brows that are already swolthy, it seems like an impending cough when you touch where they lie between their teeth; whenever you feel that spot, you catch coughing inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When you cut the belly and enter up to where arthritis begins, in those days, joint processes of articulations proceed according to the white gate form.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So extract those clothes which you have wrapped around the upper parts of these limbs, and turn them between the right and left sides until they are evenly distributed throughout the body.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you ensure that it does not reach the hip and backbones, thus preventing harm to those areas:
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May it not appear at your waist in the opening of the fissure, may you adjust within that space a small instrument to allow the intestine to pass through; and take out what has been placed there for this purpose—the instruments used herein—and place them underneзуng cloths immersed in water.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	When it is necessary for salt and rest to be applied in the cavity of that fissure, thus allowing the fluid that remains therein to dissipate.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return that which needs healing inside back into its cavity; place your hand over it so as not for the intestine to pro
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Return that which needs healing inside back into its cavity; when the lodgment wound is treated here at this point of care, tend to that piece within it where discomfort has become weakened and retreating towards health.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.: (The translation for this line is not
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Based on your provided text, which seems to be a mix of different languages and possibly medical terminology with historical flavor (
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	The provided text appears to be a mix of archaic language and medical terminology, possibly from medieval Latin or an early form influenced by it:
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	So that you stop the head of the malady in its throat; take your left hand and put it over the eye'dict (palpitate), if converted then signifies a disease, else insert the needle into where the hair is attached to below the eyelid. This will penetrate through with the point at which there are no fur—on this margin of the palpebra; on these furs and pull back the thread from above it in contact with the eye lid till you convert that very spot, thus forming a lesion (ulcer).
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Even if the figure according to the extent of eye elevation is different, among men, those who have a large quantity ascending through the eyelid and for which reason it becomes softened are identified as having diverticula (which refers to outpouchings or sacs).
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	When applied forcefully on the sinews of which lines you have marked out earlier, and starting from the greater tear duct to the smaller one:
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your natural hair split is as large as the king'se body size,
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Return the stitches of the wounds within three or four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, tie up the wound and attend to that which drains and constricts it, for when removing pus is necessary one must take care of what has been done; thus healing may be improved through these measures.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Whenever it is necessary on him in his thighs, and this operation is good work without fear for the patient.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another manifestation in the head is like feather dusting with myrtle juice, and lift the eyelid up three times using these prongs arranged according to this pattern.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	May it not be possible that they have their nails removed, for when this is the case we use a needle with thread and place that in the figure's mildew; also take another thread to insert into the major lacrimal (tear duct), as well as one into the minor tearduct, adjusting these threads so they are equal between the nails for balance. Raise your hand upwards along this elevation of both thumb and index finger simultaneously with lifted chin resting on top where we have previously discussed together how to apply treatment measures (the second source sentence).
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Now adjust the wounds of the patient' extrémité(s) with suture and treat that which is healed inside them.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have an ulcer or crack on your mind or body, bandage it with wax and make-up to resemble its appearance, and apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And when some rubbing occurs on their eyelids, as a result of dryness mentioned earlier, you may also perform stitching if necessary in such cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxinycle are second in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And convert the eyelid and divide its shape as I have described; apply thin cannulas or fine needles under them, following the length of the eyelid and their mandible' extrusion according to the extent of the sacrum.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already inserted into the limbs of some parts divided, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Above each subtlety beneath the excess fluid above the eye's lid, tighten the canes of several divided parts affected by severe constriction, and apply it daily for a few days until the waistline shrinks due to stricture mortality and refusal; then insert into itself what is needed through its own means.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then strike the staff on the thighs with care so that someone enters who will heal them.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When secured or fastened, the eyelid is lifted up and the hair does not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you make the thorns mentioned herein:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	e there is no limit neither in length nor duration of it.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.: (Note: The provided text does not contain
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hair of the tail is struck, it hurts when touched in the belly as well.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and sharp (indicating abnormal or unhealthy conditions), it is then time for intervention; grasp gently under that delicate area where relief begins subtly like a gentle descent beneath which there lurks something fierce as a leopard. Adjust the limbs of your patient carefully, and move each part tenderly in small motions.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When it is the length of a thumb'dictated by the quantity of fields (likely referring to body measurements or perhaps markings for treatment).
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And place your second fine thread under quickly as you wish, and hold their extremities of that if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Return the hernia or intestine to its cavity and place your hand over it so that your work is recognized; for this is a subtle and minor operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Inject or insert the needle into the tight part of the skin that has required it, and make sure this penetration happens through the eyelid blinking movement until you remove it from there naturally.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Return and insert the hair inside them, placing one or two (or at most three) therein; do not overfill it.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Return your hand inside where it originally was, holding back the eye's pellucid fluid that has come out through the eyelid as a result of its innate state.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is necessary to pull back the hernia and ensure that no protrusion occurs in its place, then draw your attention carefully where you have previously secured with glue (the area), until such time as they become situated properly inside their cavity again.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	When that vision of the humerus appears before you and when it is played with hooks and steel, causing pain where each strike lands and looseness for two or three days until the pincers adhere to its good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If it is possible to shorten the hair, then adjust one of its natural length and lift that up; raise it until it reaches as far as appropriate spaces allow, and keep raising it according to those laws (presumably referring to some kind of traditional medical practice).
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: This line appears incomplete or possibly referencing an item
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	The provided medieval medical treatise excerpt is in a language that incorporates elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text seems to deal with the treatment or understanding of certain eye conditions (
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye hurts and there is contraction of the eyelid (whether it contracts on its own or as a result of poor conditioning/constitution), possibly due to parasites infection, incomplete developmental stages, cauterization effects—this causes inflammation. Such occurrences are referred to by leporine and can either be natural congenital conditions (hereditary) or acquired from their supposedly harmful environment ("le porrajns").
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the reason for performing surgery on him be that you cut through his conglomeration and separate his lips apart while pausing in between them where there is a cloth as an instrument of operation, binding those parts together once they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And when you use the cure for healing this which causes pain to return or worsen at any time without a focus, constrict it; if such returns due to pox that cannot be drained out by any means of treatment so far applied.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that which causes soothing with fenugreek and immerse the water it'setup alongside their hips and waist (or linseed oil), liquefying within these joints to cure them therein—immerse this concoction directly into their body.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	When your treasure of healing is that you penetrate each wound so it'thy form does not solidify according to the manner intended,
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is not any correction of humoral imbalance unless it restores the form of the area as directed by the focus (the doctor'supreme authority).
Capitol .xiiii.	The provided text seems to discuss treatment methods for certain medical conditions in medieval times using language with
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	When it comes to the care of cataracts (assuming "ehacrati" is a term used here for what we understand as 'cataract'), which occurs in the eyelid, how should one proceed
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	Regarding the cataract (the condition) that occurs in the eyelid and is referred to as 'vertaderment', there seems to be no known cure according to this source text from medieval times; it appears naturally occurring or possibly incidentally so, without specifying an external cause.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The cataract (the condition) that occurs in the eyelid and is called 'vertaderment' may be caused by external factors such as insects, cuts, use of caustic tools or possibly from other unknown causes according to this medieval medical perspective. It suggests these
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for treatment in this text involves taking a needle that creates double threading and keeping it fixed within the body's flesh; as the string passes from one tear (lacrimal) gland on the right side into another, reaching eventually to both ends of your limbs. This description implies an attempt at drainage or extraction based on a rudimentary understanding consistent with medieval medical practices for addressing certain conditions potentially related to eye blockages described by 'vertaderment'. It should be noted that this interpretation requires significant extrapolation and historical context, given the archaic language used.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	The procedure further entails stretching or extending the flesh away from where there is an attached needle and with that same needle in hand; you would then insert it into a large numa (cushion). This suggests using local pressure to facilitate some form of medical intervention, perhaps as part of draining fluids associated with 'vertaderment', according to the practices
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	So if you return the shape of the eyelid as it was before (cover), be; and if not, take a stick and pause on the fractured part, turning that fragment back into the eyelid'dictum, and fix those cracks in the lid's flesh immediately.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "These are the extremities of the diseased joints where they occur and their angles inside when they gather, causing a figure-like pain.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek letters: the limb (or possibly refers specifically to a part of the body). Here's my translation line by line,
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And restore the flesh to the amount that it has been cut off from by lightning strikes, which is done where you touch your eyes (the location of a potential eye injury). Here's what I understand and translated for each line:
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Adjust those separated parts and place them with that thread of wool; take care for these, as have spoken about in soothing medicines and poultices within which one is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If it's for a slit or stitching (fracture/wound) repair, then cut at the incision site according to what has come before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Return (and place) the cushion between the patient'thy lips as we have mentioned before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the discourse on gout treatment when it is taken away or in small doses as part of the operation procedure, once prepared according to its form (which takes various shapes).
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The skilled artisan prepares for any necessary intervention in one manner or another that can be done according to what is needed by the patient and their operations, as well as on major devices used during surgery.
Capitol .xv.	Given that "Capitol .xv." is an ancient Roman measurement
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the eyelid to the conjunctiva and/dictorily up through the cornea, indicating a possible examination or issue that spans these ocular structures starting from where we find tissue in
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation is affixed to men who have their belly swollen with humors and whose natural movements are restricted by painful joints; thus ensuring that you pierce the outer membrane of the eyelid, lifting it up or extending it outward along its course.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return your incision below the subtle spot where it is not accentuated by any incisions previously made; this way, during surgery, the bone will not be disturbed and you can remove the splinter without affecting its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: And if your finger is used to scrape that adhesion back into its natural shape and heals completely, then so be it with regard to return of the eye lid according to its normal form, ensuring complete healing of the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	1. Apply your hand in the salt water which you wash with, or extract from it a distillation of juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Return the space between the eyelid and the eye lid (palpebra), placing it over the softened eye lens in an album of humors, using gloves for three days as curative measures to allow healing while preventing further contamency or damage.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.: This line appears to be referencing a specific chapter
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	From the sloughing off of skin and prominence of flesh in the lacrimal (tear) sacs.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You understand that the second point of pressure is either nervous or gentle as a cobweb undernethy; when touched with hands it becomes sore after one touch and falls off within an hour without remaining in place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not enter except from the greater tear within that gradually covers the eye and prevents light entry and its motion.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May the action in his skull be that the malady pauses its head atop the chest and directs its humors through him, lifting the eyelid with your hand on top of it, and collecting the mucus from one finger'thy nail, twice doubled over.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Here is the line-by extraline translation:
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	When you climb up a ladder or stairs like this (implied meaning), it is recommended that your leg be held within its cavity, ensuring the intestine does not protrude outwards
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then insert the knife or small tool into the corner of the eye socket (tear gland) under a thin layer or at ankle-height, and cut away the body tissue to ensure that through this incision, there is no interruption in the continuous flow of humors.  
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	At times the joint is inflamed or swolthy as stated by them, and it has been elevated to the shape of its ligament:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And whoever touches the cornea of the eye and causes it to break open, so that the pupil is pierced through:
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Apply salt or quick-firing fire to the foot wound today and let it stay inside for another day; take care that what goes in remains so it can heal.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the lancet is not sharp and you cannot insert it or leave it there for a while, this kind of lancing tool will be healed by medicine as long as you keep using it in its division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that one, work the belly of the malady and gently apply a soft pad undernegy wool as follows:
am subtilitat.	am subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that which is rare and congealed enters into it at this time of day or night, then take the cold water from your head'dict cup filled with saltwater for gout pain relief today, pouring its contents within tomorrow.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And apply your operation there until he is cured.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The semen of the tear gland, if found in the vagina and causing great harm, is suspended for an hour; as well as that from another part, do not inspect further to prevent the flow of humors.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Return it into the teary eye's cavity and apply poultices of linseed, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (This line appears to be an identifier or reference
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	From the insight of barber-surgezymes and their origin derived from meat adjusted in humors,
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some women are born with rough flesh and there is excessive puffing within the eye, or it approaches too closely to touch the lids and pieces of skin gathered on these parts together like lacework atop balusters.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in it is that the swelling stops at his waist; and with those hands of yours take all the meat you cut conveniently for him, using either a pair of forceps or tweezers; and bind the flesh together until everything has been stitched by your needle, ensuring that none of this remains on your tool.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your insides are complete and the flesh is healed all over, then salt sprinkles upon it or drips out as powder in smoke, along with appearances of medicinal corrosives, pause above where there'sintern alabaster seal to ensure secure application against absorption.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If any cause of strangulation and sorcery comes upon us, then take care with caution as if treating an abscess; treat that which yields to treatment at once, repeating the process until healed within the operation performed for this purpose, making adjustments in flesh where pain is felt on these cushions.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Even though you remove all care for the patient'se body fluid entirely either naturally or accidentally using iron tools, do not put your hand in any of these operations while observing that this member is suffering from it.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. (The reference appears incomplete or out of context here
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Translation from Romanian into English for the given text: "From the chest to the collection." This line suggests that there
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Translation from Romanian into English for the given text: "From arteries to veins which are hard over the chest and forbidden their workings, they develop swelling in the limbs over days." This sentence likely discusses a medical condition where there is congestion or blockage of blood flow through vessels that supply the arms (chest), leading to edema or swelling as time progresses. The context seems related to circulatory
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Translation from Romanian into English for the given text: "Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether your chest veins are strong and in them there isn't any other illness than varicose veins, then I will collect that venous." This statement implies a need to assess not only the presence of strength or normalcy within one’s own body (specifically referring to their 'chest-related blood vessels') but also ensures no additional medical issues are present beyond what has
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	Translation from Romanian into English for the given text: "Then you command the intestine to cease its movement in your belly, and place pressure upon those veins one or two inches at a time; these small increments should be doubled according to this method." This guidance appears to offer instructions on how to manage specific symptoms possibly related to venous issues by suggesting controlled cessation of intestinal activity (which might refer metaphorically rather than literally as direct control over such processes is not possible) and applying gradual pressure with a potentially manual technique, likely for the purpose of reducing swelling or improving circulation.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or thus in this manner with cuts made progressively:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise into English:
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Even if you do not read the humors in the extremities of the spine; and if your operation during daylight occurs under the sun, ensure that nothing is inserted except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it all, then draw spirits from the head' extricable water or request that they be summoned so that your wounds may heal quickly what has been brought forth of evil essence.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of this at once, and if you must bandage the amount that yields pain from him/her, apply it quickly so he/she can rest in bed until the pain subsides and assure treatment with a plaster cast (cast).
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	When applied over him after his mother's madness enters that he is cured,
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how they use forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.: This line appears incomplete or out of context without
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The phrase "de reduccio de arizati al nas" seems to be in Latin, which translates roughly
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you care for arising inflammations that are acute and have not been described as such in the narrative, they do not occur within your body but rather on a suppuration site; moreover, extract all moisture where it's lodged inside until discovery of bone is made. This translation attempts to capture the essence of what seems like medical instructions or observations from an old text relating to treatment procedures for certain conditions:
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you discover bone and at times in its decay or ruin, it is then that this form of structure takes shape.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is made of sharp nails, and its flesh consists of iron or silver, with which points are pierced for a delicate touch (as you will follow in this manner).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When the pressure is applied to that spot where the bone has been crushed, turn it back between the thighs and gradually press your finger inside until you know that this crushing damage has been smoothed out.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When there are some remedies needed, and restore the place affected by drying or puncture causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So that the place is consolidated and good flesh has arisen therein from illness and disease for forty days without renewal or puncturing and without accidents occurring in it, if you know this, then one is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	Et if not in the womb is growth but to reduce the crack or opening back into the shape of the nose, and according to this method: when you discover two forges or acute medicines, take them as they are upon discovery of these tools.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external part of him is forged into a three-sided triangle shape, and his sword is most worn out within the hilt with each use like this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then with medicine that dries out through use, it is healed in this location where you have applied the cautery.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and location become hardened, then return that material which flowed to the parts above into the groin area, thus placing urine upon it there.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX. (The given text does not provide enough context for
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	From elevation of pride/arrogance. The phrase "de reduccio de la eminencia del huel" in English
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hump is present in its entirety and does not harm or diminish within the vesture; at that time, cover it loosely with moistened malaute (which implies a poultice), followed by gentle venting of coughs on one'thy chest after scarification for good effect. Also apply pause over the hump using liniment made from acacia and aloe, seeds or plant ashes (essentially an emollient mixture applied to soothe skin inflammation often found in medieval medicine), along with powdered seaweed known here as sarcocolla—a binding agent derived traditionally from marine shells. Additionally apply strength through the use of a poultice over the hump when it protrudes (likely referring to exactional swelling).
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The following is the line-by extralinguistic translation:
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Return those between them according to the amount that he needs for his health.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If during movement the ligament is softened, then it means that there is a pulling force at play here.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Return or fix the bandage as of today evening when we have spoken.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has been reduced already, then that is sufficient; otherwise, repeat the plaster on the pillows and strapping/bandaging until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	In translation from this medieval medical context into modern English line by line, we get
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the inflammation of the sclera'supremacy (the clear white outer layer that covers the eye).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the tunic of the eye is disrupted and it protrudes outwards like a grain under pressure, which causes its shape to change as if water were entering (which means when surgery comes), then you insert one needle into the parted section of the eyelid, and another with doubled filament from the tear duct area; have them penetrate according to their arrangement, place both in the location of the folded thread thereof, remove it upward along the path of the inserted object (needles), tighten that motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Return (or take back) the needle and pause over it on the stuffed wool in an alum or liquor, letting your hand enter where the thread is at the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Return care for the wound with the water that comforts it inside where the patient resides, so as not to allow any part of the intestine (implied by "budel") to protrude again.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And for some guided movements of all parts within the circle formed by the bedcloth under adjusted heightened prominence, puncture through the subtle sponge beneath the coverlet and channel moisture into the bone-forming marrow inside, bringing down/descending it there.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Return strength within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.: This line appears to be referencing an issue related
De curacio de alconati.	The phrase "curacio di alconati" suggests a medical context, possibly referring
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	Translation: This illness that is referred to as "alconatis" (which translates roughly to water-like in English) is not just an ailment resembling the humors being dispersed and detached from the body, specifically relating to bodily fluids. It seems this line discusses gout or rheumatism—a type of joint pain associated with uric acid crystallization within
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Translation: It is the manner of action that causes uric acid to crystallize and deposit on a device (possibly an instrument used for observation or diagnosis), with your hand placed over those parts where discomfort arises, aiming to dry them out so they do not worsen. Additionally, this prevents further detachment of the humors within their respective divisions upon entering as it were through yesternight'dictions (perhaps referring to symptoms or signs appearing from recent events). Herein lies where uric acid comes about—the causes intertwine with its appearance like a nocturnal tale.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not descend into joints, understand that water has come down there.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	May it not be prepared yet the descent to health, which we have mentioned before; hence, inflate the swelling between your thighs and place a subtle cushion undernethy there as well as on that area of the pancreas visible beneath the cornea (within the mouth region), until one feels healed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when you are taking a bath (for medicinal purposes), draw the hot water in which sugar or honey have been mixed, along with fenugreek that'sup already added to it.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Return it is for other causes within that healing which should be cared for as well.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii. (The reference appears incomplete as it lacks
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	From water treatment of the well, comes care for the water. This sentence in English could be interpreted as follows: "Derived from treating the source or
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have these spices in division and it is hereby declared that they should be drilled according to health conditions; as such the necessity for drilling based on well water treatment can vary depending on medical advice related to its purity or lack thereof. This sentence translates roughly into English like this: "These are our spices in division, and it is hereby declared that they should be drilled according to health conditions
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You must ensure that you separate the issue of malady between your thighs and securely fasten their belt; in this way adhering strictly to these instructions is essential for health reasons: The translation here would be approximately as follows (with some liberties taken with phrasing): "Make sure you keep a clear space or separation at your hips, if present between the thighs and tightly fasten
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Apply pressure between the patient's eyelid and their left eye if it is on the right side of the water source (belly), or apply to your dominant hand’dictate area; this aligns with traditional belief that applying direct pressure can aid in alleviating discomfort associated with imbalances linked to body fluids: Here's a translation into English, attempting faithfulness while also rendering it understandable for modern readers: "Apply pressure between the patient's eyelid and their left eye if this is where the water source (belly) resides; otherwise apply to your dominant hand
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Apply pressure with the right hand if it is on your left side where there's water (belly), or apply to your left hand instead when dealing with a position that is considered 'right.' This instruction implies using one’s own body as an instrument for healing, suggesting that physical contact and manipulation of certain points can help balance the humors: In more modern terms, this could be interpreted in English like so:
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Return the limb extremity above the crown due to the heaviness of the head on its back in the album where lies the tear from the lower part of the lake, and hold it with your hand as directed by that moisture which is wetting up around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	When entering into the spleen and you feel that it has already been reached due to fever,
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it is the buttock of the chest that measures from the pupil inside to the end of blackness, and this is the crown of the humerus; where you see at the pupil as in the vision of the humerus through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And if rest is needed for one who sleeps, then when the water descends and has not yet been dried up completely, delay that other period of sleep before it occurs so that there will be no wetness remaining in them.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is secured and does not descend, then extract easily the amount you need with your hand, dissolve a small clear crystal of salt in water taken from there; place that mixture into the wound'dictly outside any stopper or stuffed cotton soaked in olive oil mixed with alum and chalk powder, respectively.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we now rest upon that which they have sat on an album of flesh.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your doctor's instructions in the inside of the house due to his stubbornness—these are men whose joint (huele) is hard, like a crab shell from which this form arises.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus pierces through that joint aqueous fluid, and does not extend it into the injury site; nor is there any need to reach an underlying delicate place undernethyre (under this).
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Return now the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; place your hand over it so that the intestine does not protrude again.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	Here you go with the translation of your provided sentence:  
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	When there is moisture in his nature, and it does not weaken the head to the fourth or left side of him entirely.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	When it is placed according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Return that which is there in that dark and gloomy place of night, let some causes be seen by it, and return the ligament back to day seventh.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	When pouring water for healing or so soon after preparing the infusion, do not cover it up immediately.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have you separated out this water that ascends very quickly through powerful and intense gazing upon it?
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you apply a poultice for an ulcer today and correct that which yields to the water'dictly,
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Absolve his sight and place your hand over his face for several days until he exists in the dark mist of May (possibly referring to a time when people believed that certain conditions could be cured by exposure or immersion in darkness, possibly related to lunar phases).
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Return it gradually from that humidity, discussing its causes in them.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You understand that there is no exemption for the student from occasional wavering during surgery, and you are skilled in performing it.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has reached us from those who are of that art, and they said there is a focus in the Ailac Magna where water was sucked through which effect occurs.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Even though we have not seen such water in our land that has provided it before for the free of old times, nor have any among them today brought forth this new water; there is a possibility that this new water may be beneficial.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the medicinal herbs for which they ignore that over those,
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv. (The ".xxiv." likely refers to
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From meat-eating nothing is inhaled into the nose." - This sentence, when translated line by line from a
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various meats (possibly implying certain types of food or substances) enter the nose for no apparent cause, leading to conditions like polyps in the mouth and nasal passages; this illness is called 'polyposis,' which seems similar to a bee sting." - This sentence appears to discuss symptoms that could potentially relate to allergic reactions or sinus issues (such as those caused by food ingreds, dust mites in bedding) and their association with nasal polyps. The mention of 'bee' may symbolize an irritant triggering a reaction leading to the formation of polyp-like growths inside the nose ('scorpio de motz pes,' or
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	From it (presumably a type of meat) blackened and spoiled comes - from there the flesh is discolored dark brown or black; whereas in here we are not referring to such corruption as indicated by this comparison." – This sentence contrasts unspoiled, natural coloration with undesirable changes like browning/blackening that may
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in these meats (carn), which are free from fraud and spoilage ('leon' means pure or untainted here; 'cankroza,' meaning decaying, is negated by the subsequent phrasing indicating purity/non-rottenness) conduct a thorough cleanse between your legs ("malaute sezer"), place them in sunlight to dry out and air ('huebre las nars de lu'), then eat (or take as needed; 'picot' can mean bite or pinch, thus referring here perhaps to eating the meat) these pieces with careful attention." - This sentence gives instructions for preparing a type of food that is presumably clean and fresh. The
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Extract that from the main parts of the body, and insert what you have understood about those arterial pains beneath which part of the body is aware; if any rupture in this patient can be caused by a certain cause within them, then extract it using one of the delicate instruments available to ease movement due to that particular reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	May you hold onto sanction or accident of apothecary' extrication if necessary; otherwise (in case it is not), then restrain the flow that comes from within, specifically for malignant abscesses where both sank and cavities are abandoned.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	When his breath is caught in his nose or throat by moisture and air, it can occur here (within the nostrgy/nose), indicating that he may be experiencing congestion due to excess humidity affecting these
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	When his nose is stuffed and the process of absorbing moisture occurs in the mouth, it means that healing has already begun (the body's natural response to restore balance).  
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	May it be that if humidity does not penetrate soon, you will understand that the flesh of your patient may rise bones from their joints where there was no fracture before.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you encounter any obstruction within the patient'thy body and their navel moves in discomfort, count each use of motion (and rest) between every exertion they make throughout that day or part thereof; then manipulate the malady with force, inserting a limb extremity into its place—either at the groin area where it resides within them by default or elsewhere due to some other cause.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	Put that odor into it so that through the nasal canals, it reaches its ganglion and settles in the affected joint, causing these children to appear at schools; this is what causes them herein (to suffer from gout).
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	When infection is at its peak during fever days within which it shall heal, pause the nose with a lead pipe for several days.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May it be for healing that you apply this remedy.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is how the tool for blood-letting (phlebotomy) works, wherein various remedies and medicines are prepared therein.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	E from silver or lead (which is like a small torchbearer), with its likeness to a tiny candle holder and body-shape, comes the metal that we use for treatment.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make use of a closed clamp with the instrument maker and its flat surface revealed; place it on your hand where these tubes are located when draining fluids or causes related to their secretion from here within yourself.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here are the line-by-line translations:
Capitol .xxv.	Certainly! Here is an attempt at translating each line from the medieval
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	The provided text appears to be in a non-standard form of language, which might include archaic or regionally specific dialects mixing elements from
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The sentence in English roughly translates to: "When the nose has been covered for long periods inside out due to weather conditions within which observation is mandated." Here's a translation line by line, with an attempt at capturing both literal meaning and context where possible:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Through which vessel you introduced it into his abdomen for examination and extracted everything from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Return your hand or applied medicine that is burning at this place over it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If it is late for your insight to enter, then consider whether it has been hardened, dark in color and with little feeling; do not touch that iron which bites the skull, as those who are frequently affected by this condition gravitate towards you out of great malice concerning what they have.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is of yellow touch and not of cold color, then when it seems possible to invade all over that area, evacuate the pus and incise with care due respect for old age'dictates fears; treat therewith what exits out, constraining its return inside whereby healing can occur.
Capitol .xxvi.	CXXVI. (The Roman numeral "CXXVI" represents the
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	From the nostril and lip, to the jaw when continuity is lost due to dirt or pretend reasons:
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	When you understand that a break in continuity has occurred within one of these joints, give little attention to this operation unless performed by skilled hands.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So when any cause comes to alleviate those issues, considering if it is fresh dirt (soil), and you adjust the mouth of the creature with its lips set into stitching, taking care that what'se inside becomes healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of continuity (mouth) are already separated and any pain is healthy in them, then cover each divided portion of his tongue until he draws saliva from inside it so that no more moisture escapes than necessary.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the thread of the suture be that you add the continuity needle or thimbles as recommended in stitching the abdomen, or attach the continuity needle with your own and know how to use it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.: This line appears to be referencing Roman numerals or
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From that extraction, these causes come into the mouths during duels (or fights). Here's a possible translation:
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Movements frequently directed towards the hard stones placed in their oral parts by acute appliances resemble cheese and some of them become minor pains while others are major ones.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when you convert each of those hard corners in all parts and apply pressure with your fingers where the wound is sealed within it, also wash and care for that area as needed while the suture remains secured inside until healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	The provided line appears to be referencing an edition or section of some text (possibly a
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the understanding of flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great pain comes upon the tightly clenched gums which we formerly touched with our apples or fingers in their mouth and under pressure (we apply), causing them to feel a sharp sensation inside, leading them into illness either gradually or suddenly; thus you must suspend that touch now or remove it from there where they are pressed down.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Return pause (rest) over the place where it has been rubbed or treated with powders/ablative substances, here is what each line could mean after translation:
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, then you must inspect it immediately and cauterize it thereafter; for the lancet will not return to where it was applied.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. (This line appears to be an annotation or
De razo de dentz am ferr.	The phrase "de razo de dentz am ferr" seems like it could potentially originate from a
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the sharp edges of teeth cuts and gums, traces red or green marks are drawn inside where decay enters through these areas—these markings on your teeth caused by cavities (decay). Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so that you separate the patient's mas and pause their head at the neck joint, and rub your teeth on those places where these sharp edges appear, caused by blackness and sulfur (impurities) within which none of them can cause harm or injury anymore due to being purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if you have not yet had what is in the common dining, then eat it; otherwise, iterate the reason over those portions until tomorrow and the next day as long as necessary until it clears from your bowels when you decide to go.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You understand that teeth have required various types of restorations and forms according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For this the cutting instrument is where the tooth resides as part of another cutter' extrinsic forms; these external cutting instruments must be prepared which you will need now.
Capitol .xxx.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical context discussing sympt
D’eradicacio de dentz.	It seems that you're attempting or wanting a translation of Italian into English, but the sentence "D’
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	The translation of the provided Italian text into English is as follows:
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May cover when the thigh is tightened to eliminate that which must be proven as the painful one; whereby prolonged movement of the discomfort will occur within the healthy leg, and once this has been done, we have already seen such results through barber operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So that you can confirm which is the painful tooth and understand how it feels so deeply within its socket in the jaw where some movement occurs, immerse it entirely into the mouth cavity until any remaining part of the tooth root dissolves completely, then apply cold pressure with a cloth or gentle friction under close supervision as little by little when that area comes together.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	So if there is no opening (for treatment), take one of those instruments immediately and place it quickly in all parts where ease and removal are sought for the patient'dict relief.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be that if the tooth is dislocated or decayed, then cover it with cloth and compress it tightly at its tip below your touch so that it does not shift during the time of your compression on that part.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	When you work with great care so as not to weaken your strength and prevent that portion from being torn apart or broken off again due to its own cunning, return over the thighs for it is greater than the first pain of yours.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Return (or restore) its cleansing at your discretion with water or vinegar, and wash the mouth of it therewith.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a flow of phlegm and pus at this time, take care to let it come gradually when desired; if you fail to do so, then apply cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and tweezers are those that make the tooth not sharp at the edge when working outside or on short/thick nerves, so they don'thy bend when manipulating them therein.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	When they are times of large movements within that when you first insert them, they should not be doubled or stretched out excessively.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
Capitol .xxxi.	Given that "Capitol" is not an actual text but rather seems
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The provided line appears to be in a language influenced by medieval Latin, possibly with some elements of other Romance languages like Italian or French. The text discusses the extraction (eradication) and removal ("d'estraccio") of teeth and bone fragments from
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the extraction of any such cracked tooth is necessary due to no particular reason (presumably suggesting a situation where an injury or misalignment requires action), you must pause at the spot until it heals; and meanwhile apply some form of analgesic, holding aside pieces from which teeth are assembled like those in the beak of a crow or woodpecker's tongue. This refers to using forceps for extraction:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Those outside of them are pains stitched with a knife or awl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey me in this treatment with these forceps or tenalas (which are small pincers), then I will bite on the skin and remove all flesh using the instrument called "haft," which has a similar shape to its handle. Here, 'haft' refers to one of the surgical instruments used by medieval physicians for minor procedures such as this described in your treatise.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	E for a small limb appendage and it is not enough that it does not break apart.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if for the watering (excess of body fluids), it is; otherwise, help you with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of one such an instrument is a triangular shape outside where there may be some heaviness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it's trilaterated and has a subtle end-point.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you are helping with this tool which has two handles as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and use other instruments that we have prepared with the sharpness of teeth; it is well-made for this tool which was assembled from one hundred parts, and herein lies its form.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the twisted or shortened limb extension, which is any swelling and not because it would break:
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you understand that these tools of teeth are similar in form and appearance to the others.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisan know what operation means for them as it comes to light according to their patient'thy needs; these are diseases of which ancient doctors did not provide nor pause with proper instruments due to various forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are fractured, or if they have been displaced, then treat it on that spot where we find most suitable for our instruments and forceps used to extract teeth. Here is how this should be done:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May if there is a small fracture in the bone, break that piece and remove it along with its blackness (impurity), and heal what remains inside so as to be cured.
Capitol .xxxii.	From the given medieval medical context and language similarity with Latin, Italian, Spanish,
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	In treating other teeth than those which are prominent or notably affected, special care is necessary due to their increased vulnerability or potential for more severe issues related
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent due to their natural shape or mainly in women and revered ones, it is clear that special consideration must be given if one of these does not correspond with another; thus rooting out what cannot cut nor bind itself because they do not share a connection—unless annexed by another such tooth. In this case, you will engage the form from which this tool derives: shaped like pork and forged as sharp iron ware of India or Persia (Middle Eastern regions).
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your intellect is with the one by which you examine it there for up to several days due to the hardness of the teeth, and that nothing else should be added from among them.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is an outward expansion of blood clots, then grind that part with the steel from Indian iron which this is made of.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Return those lines from below into English like this for each individual phrase or clause within them:
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If there is one part that has been dislocated and the tongue protrudes due to tension in that area, then you should limit what enters it (to stop further movement), keep it swolthy/wet so as not for the tongue to recede back or language words to be distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" is not accompanied by text for translation here
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	From the context provided, it seems like we're dealing with a medieval or old-style phrase related to teeth restoration (which might imply some form of ancient or traditional dentistry). The text
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When your teeth are worn down by grinding and loosening (percussio or cazament), and the tooth pulp cannot be held back with what you have managed thus far – indicating that there's an active issue, such as decay reaching into the nerve of a tooth. Your current treatment may not suffice; hence why they might suffer further in those teeth which are firmly anchored by gold (argent) or silver fillings since these metals do not change over time and can be adjusted according to need each day, whereas silver does not alter its form without external intervention – implying that the filling may shift if unchecked.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Return and apply the poultice within that portion from which you commence treatment, applying your hand firmly yet skillfully to ensure it is not moistened excessively.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And if it is your scab where you need to grip and hold back, then do so at the place of that very same hardened skin.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Here the inscriptions are made into the excessive moisture above with forceps or spoons, and placed in any location related to speech, converting those and concealing them between the healthy and diseased teeth, so that no harm comes to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Return that liquid back into its course as it was before when flowed naturally with Roman style (referring possibly to body fluids being returned in harmony or balance, following the natural rh
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is loosened or broken down, hold that which remains loyal to such action throughout all times (This line suggests the importance of retaining fidelity and steadfastness in one's actions even when faced with a situation where something has become dislocated or damaged.)
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of teeth and the figure of straightness for both healthy teeth and decayed ones, as they are linked in this manner (The line emphasizes maintaining not just physical alignment but also overall dental integrity—keeping them aligned when connected to others who have similar conditions.)
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When returning any tooth or teeth into their respective cavities and having them tightened as if we have treated (or healed), they diminish in size again (This suggests that the procedure of re-cementing a lost denture back into its socket, followed by adjustments similar to post-treatment care, leads to contraction or settling down.)
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Not because that it happens naturally but due to skilled craftsmanship and knowledge (This line implies that the successful outcome of dental restoration is not
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Only in certain cases are the bones of cows appropriate for their use as teeth substitutes; they must be placed where a tooth has been lost and secured with what we have treated (or fixed), holding them firmly there, much like how one would secure actual dental prostheses. They remain attached through long periods—this underscores the enduring nature of such replacements when properly executed by skilled artisans using suitable materials as guided in this passage from an old medical text on treatments for lost teeth and related oral issues, possibly reflecting practices before modern dentistry was established.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any text for translation,
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	From the slippage of which tongue she enters and by whose interdiction talking is prevented.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament from which the tongue occasionally takes some taste or is naturally attached to it and where already there has been an injury that was solidified;
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: And in performing this operation on him (the patient), his head is present at the neck; lift your tongue, and insert it into that part of the nervous cord within which its tongue will be swallowed during prayer.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	May there be some hardness or swelling in that area, and it is due to consolidation of pus within the wound you have incised; thus cut away part of this congestion with your knife as far as the boundary line where you've previously separated the ligaments and dissolved the nodule.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	When you ensure that there is not a crack in the skin of flesh and break apart ashes and water flows, here it goes:
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If you drain the flux of phlegm that has been thickened in the glass vessel; if it is blood from the patient'dictor (presumably a wound or opening), then do so over the location, and use cautery on this spot to stop bleeding. This effectively means: "Should there be pus-filled swelling inside an amphorae type container that has been left uncleaned; if it is blood originating from within (possibly a wound), then apply treatment directly at the site, using cautery on this spot to stop any
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And treat that cause which is elsewhere needed for healing. This suggests: "Treat not only but also the underlying causes necessary for restoration of health." Here, it emphasizes addressing
Capitol .xxxv.	It seems there might be a misunderstanding or an incorrect input here as ".xxx
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The sentence "Extraction of the ranula after tongue retraction" likely refers to a medical procedure wherein healthcare providers remove a
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Several decades ago, they applied restraints to the tongue with wax impressions made in its mold so that it could not move freely during surgery; and thus magnified within the mouth cavity. This translates as: "In several past times, various constraints were placed on the tongue using wax models created from its shape, preventing natural movement during operations, thereby enlarging or emphasizing its position inside the mouth." Here it describes an old medical practice where physical restraints might have been
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in this context is that the patient's mouth will be opened widely, ahead of sunrthy time (perhaps implying before daylight or as partaking a morning procedure), and taking into account wax impressions for purposes not specified herein but likely related to surgery. The translation can thus
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see him with a dark or black complexion and he does not lack feeling in that part of the limb affected by phlegm (the humoral cause), do not touch it; for if touched, it could worsen his condition ('quarz es cranc').
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it declines into whiteness, wherein the moisture lies, then insert your sponge subtly there and infiltrate that whole part; if wind comes during your operation, then pause momentarily saying three times 'vinegar', so as to restrict the excess.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return to your work within which you have treated him until he has been cleansed and his salt levels are balanced, taking care of this while providing the other necessary treatment for him as well:
Capitol .xxxvi.	The provided text is an attempt at translating what seems like a medieval medical document
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the extraction of nail avulsions and that which is nothing in the sole, as well as from other such abscesses (implying removal or treatment). The sentence suggests a medical context where there might be necessary procedures to remove infected tissue—nails being removed due to severe issues like gangrene, when they are de
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is infection or inflammation of the sole (golair), these are the glands that have been assembled and which darken after healing—these nail avulsions, when treated with what we've applied during division and do not heal properly, consider if it’n a durable abscess. If so, in case of black coloration or little sensitivity without fearing to touch the affected area lightly (avoid using forceful methods which might worsen pain). The passage is advising caution when handling an unresolved and possibly infected nail avulsion—especially if it has not healed properly, showing signs of infection such as dark discoloration or reduced sensitivity. It suggests gentle intervention rather than aggressive treatment for this kind of foot abscess.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is a request for color and the abscess has become thickened or larger, do not touch that area with force; leave it there as long as possible to allow natural healing (do no more intervention). If necessary at this point you must drain fluid from within—either by making an incision yourself if safe enough doing so. Here the directive is against further invasive measures and instead recommends allowing time for self-healing while suggesting a last resort of physical release through draining, which implies careful incisions to relieve pressure or remove pus should be performed very cautiously by someone with medical skill—if not better left untouched entirely.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white or bluish hue and its nature is subtle, then that one must recognize being inscribed within itself.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And whether it is pain of silver or lead, done delicately with a cautery.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Thus when you perceive it at the tongue and show me your lesion, placing your hand over that area for an instant makes it stay in place as much as you can manage to hold on.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another substance that you pull from the tunics (fabrics), and upon it apply this very same tool with which it is formed.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and they are gathered with forceps; however, the external parts of them become twisted, sharp like any other object inside it, which is made of iron and begins to pierce at once.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	Might you not have this tool with you? Then incise the piece of bone from which it belongs: and whether cut off at one end or another, that is your instrument.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And when you have made an incision, follow this method according to the manner of incising described herein, and remove the purulent exudate with water wash.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it happen if there is flow of bile, boil the water with honey or millet and mint juice for that which causes the blockage in the flow of bile, taking care to ensure what flows back into its proper place once cured.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Here come some precautions in the groin area or other warts elsewhere on those bodies, and cut them out where they touch each other inside the genitalia.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	E she too was a healer from apostasy who was born in the grave of him/her (the patient), whose apoplexy tended to be dark-colored, with little feeling therein; also had her womb locked within that very same place where she died, and breathed straight through meat, forbidden both food and drink water consumption. Moreover, arriving at death was possible if the ague persisted for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the ulcer had grown so much that there were three intervals between steps where one could pass through two obstacles (les deux traverses).
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you fed him with his mouthful by mouth and let him rest in one of their seats; then dragged that out for me to see, taking the large piece from what I understood about the other's wound. Then sealed my mouth therein, cleaned his tongue thoroughly, and secured himself back into the lumbago position where he was injured.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity; it only escapes by little and small parts of itself.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore it is the gout of that woman, and immediately begin to drink water, then provide food so that she will not cease suffering from those humors for a long time, until the humor enters where it has been accumulated, at which point healing can commence.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So then you will drain and cauterize the gallbladder of him/her, thus removing its excessive functioning; moreover, walk around it without fear that I may interfere with your actions concerning this matter.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The text provided appears to be from an ancient medical treatise discussing remedies for
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When the humidity of a room is observed as it decreases, thus allowing air circulation and potentially alleviating discomfort that might be associated
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the humidity in a room decreases and it becomes cooler or longer (possibly referring to increased air circulation), then there is no need for specific action; but if this occurs on a large, heavyset part of the body, such as an abdomen referred to here colloquially with "buba," appropriate measures should be taken.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When healed with the fluid that we have discussed in division, do not hinder your treatment, and continue to apply heat; if it extends long or is red/black in color (sanguine), which you fear for its location under the patient's abdomen, therein lies your concern. 
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you time that second movement which the patient has dictated about their whiteness and length, perform these actions: separate the abdomen (maloat) with your hands as if doing so for saliva collection purposes using an instrument they provide through this process; place one cushion under them while another touches their legs or chest depending on which of two instruments is being used to make incisions, and hold their hands.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When what is not inserted therein but rather adjusted to the patient' extrinsic parts as dictated by nature, if you insert it at all may be done so gently that your speech remains unaffected.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Return (to) the inflammation, using that which we have applied within its cavity of two thighs, and take care of it where it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient's abdomen is frightened by his ignorance during cauterization and their fear of the instrument used for cauterization is merely water-like, then you should pause at the top of the abdomen where your hand can rest comfortably on it. Place your tongue against the tool that we have mentioned so far in this text (the instruments), take hold of the same amount/temperature of water as used for cauterization herein described and use them with care, completing their natural cavity shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Such is the cavity of conquest in which medicine rests alongside a woman'se needle, and stops there with that instrument as part of healing, so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of such person does not come down into the cleft (i.e., joint) where it may cause any harm to him/her; thus protecting them from whatever damage might arise because of this fluid's entry therein.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Here you place your hand on the medicine to express it over the uvula through the spaces of an hour until that thing is blackened and numb from the bite of medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, prick the cord and wrap it over the extremity of the ray (probably referring to an umbilical or other similar body part), immerse the cord in medicine, place the ray against the cord within a tube so that the cord adheres therein, infuse as much fluid into this arrangement until you have consumed what is needed for cauterization of the wound, and then apply pressure to it; allowing three days or four should suffice.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you have indigestion and are following the medicine's course, repeat that treatment, applying cauterization within the wine cup at its beginning in bed, cleaning off any fluid from this circuit of healing, washing it with water as needed, curing completely inside an embrace, until recovery is achieved.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This healing substance was put in place and kept for a very fearful amount of time due to concern or dread.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	E once the limb is inserted into the mouth of the malady until the steam reaches the palate and the uvula becomes dimmed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over it so that the intestine does not protrude again; do this carefully lest you interfere with the healing of an inguinal (groin) hernia, which would otherwise become worse.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be that you do not have this instrument with you? Then take a can and make in the external cavity of yourself an enclosure of smoke, so that the mouth of the malady is warmed, for the smoke from within the hollow prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of language with influences
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the removal of thorns and water stuck to the foot, along with other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Movements stick around in the groin or back of the thighs, and/or other causes.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And when you extract what is evidently present above it that you see with your tongue in the sunlight, place your wet tongue on this tool immediately to declare whether it' extraneous and within the goiter (glandular swelling).
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When something has not appeared and is hidden within the stomach, which you make vomit by making it digestive food in your belly when that patient's malady appears; or if they have a portion of meat from their neck or legs made into porridge or bread crust for consumption – strong causes will lead to this emesis causing further release within the stomach. Then take hold tight, and transport it through the palatine structures where spit is expelled, thus removing what has been forced out there; once you have removed from that location whatever comes up when one vomits, then ensure their throat remains firmly held to prevent re-expulsion of this material into your mouth.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	May one take a snake and bind it with fleshly ties, or may they place a pad on the table and extract tools from there; alternatively, use a pot (likely referring to medical equipment) and suction pads for extraction.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you have not yet determined these causes that we mentioned, then use a chisel of lead as described herein.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if a large piece enters outside its cavity, it is the part you insert into the patient'thy gout to ease discomfort easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head up on theirs, and ensure that the touch of your hands is over the throat or backbone area, so he can breatRelease to this place where they keep the breath inside them (or spinal cord). In other words:
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Even if the groin has entered there because of its knowledge of where the cause is located and it takes hold in those places, taking out his tool as prepared according to how much he had intended within that entry point.
Capitol .xxxix.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic or pseudo-Latin
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Translating this line from a medieval medical context, assuming it pertains to surgical procedures (based on the keywords "extraction" and possibly relating to appendicitis given your mention
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When medicine is applied to the blood that we have at work in medical treatment and does not cause discomfort, consider then taking out (or removing) the appendix of inflammation from below the navel, provided you own an instrument for which it has been recommended by us.  
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you find a small or subtle injury in it, extract that portion carefully and delicately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the hollow of the bladder, placing your finger in the concavity of the cannula with a lit iron, applying as much heat (making sure that the urine becomes dead and remains within the bladder) to prevent it from leaking throughout the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Here comes the translation of each line:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	May it not be that the ailment we have recommended is effective water or asphalt applied through an inserted tool used in steam treatment for the throat, then moisten and dampen (the haze) the area of inflammation with this substance to alleviate discomfort.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When it is necessary (it), make points over the surface of the foot with a pointed instrument (cautery).
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another manifestation of the operation in steam application is that you grasp an ignited mass within which there's coal and it has a cover (potentially referring to vapor or smoke), encapsulated by such covers, wherein also lies a tool; position your hand above this sub-fumigation. Keeping mouth at the extremity of the canula allows for steam inhalation while ensuring that you are aware when sublimination has reached the chest cavity (thorax). Once achieved here it may begin to expel forcefully ('cry').
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If not already done so, then repeatedly perform the subfumigation movements, and prevent the malady from drinking, eat salty and alcoholic foods, and do not drink water, as it is necessary that this regimen be followed strictly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the tool with which one extracts gallstone when seen; it resembles pincers but has no curvature herein.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The translated text line by line is:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is gathered into speech fragments and in parts of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The pegs are moved with specialties and needles as they remember their use in this free space of any one among them here mentioned.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	Here various in piercing and cutting through their bodies by hands, of which one is due to the nature of appendages they insert themselves with; because as for extracting moisture from them.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second manifestation is in the places where pains occur, for when an abscess appears on the head it is different from the abscess that occurs at joints – and each of them requires operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	When some of these that are not pierced but represent the progression of disease in those places, come up as asthma symptoms at their joints or related areas.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other apasts that are dislocated when crossed and aren't mature according to their complement, like those proper for joints, which become prolonged within these parts where the fluid circulates in it, corrupting its ligaments or nerves at this joint; if you delay penetration into such a body part until it is ripe inside another member – be it major or minor – then pierce that not yet matured one, but do not damage what lies within. If the incision made while crossing does not complete digestion, only those near the anus will suffer incomplete evacuation and elongate to parts of the intestine therein; otherwise, it becomes a fistula or inflammation that is present in its location but isn't healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of the puncture for the abscess, and so it is when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	E understand that it matures when the pain subsides and fever ends, reduce the decrease of speech and heartbeat, sharpening the headache'dictum: And other symptoms as well.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	Whenever you know that an abscess has formed in the place of discharge and purulent matter from treatment for elevation,
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in the flesh, then we must perform its incision only when confirmation of digestion has been obtained; but if you pierce it at this time, the patient's limb will be prolonged and their lips hardened, as well as increasing the depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May an incision be made according to the direction of the flesh or bone as required, or according to what part of the body demands it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When administering a small incision, and large punctures or wide incisions according to the size of the apasts,
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other interventions are needed where the coda (anus) is opened and narrowed due to pus formation; similarly when bread or similar foods cause pain, apply what you use for treating these same conditions in blistering episodes of feverishness with blood boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	From those who have three joints seated (in their body), and in which they are arranged like the feathers of a quill or the pins of an angle:
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	From those where it is administered—round and crescent-shaped doses—they seem similar.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May it be that he who cannot bear with the surface lions' pains also endures only a shallow puncture above; if so far they have not yet been pierced by such means of relief, let them now suffer under your cautery sharp enough to perforate superfthy.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, do not attempt to extract all of it at once; remove some from that place today, restore what was removed tomorrow, take out a larger part on another day, following progress according to degree until fully extracted (drained).
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Mostly if the malady is caused by phlegm or female prenancy, or in a small child or elderly person whose spirit moves to exit disease and thus dies from it; then you perform operations on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	1. Take great care in this matter, and place your incision where you pierce these thorns, so as to avoid contracting diseases; consider whether the disease of the thorn is small or flat, then administer those remedies suitable for it or contemporary antidotes; if the thorn is large, and there are fissures in the incision site, cover each with a cloth pad where we shall meet.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess it has detached a part of the colon or if that area is concave within the circuit, then cover it with fine cloth or linen as you carry out pans and razors; apply moisture to this place immediately afterward; compress it tightly until evening time. Treatment for such abscesses should follow prompt care once they are attended to in these ways.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	May you introduce a flow of sanct (sanctioned fluid) during your operation, and apply poultices impregnated with these herbs on the bandages applied to it; pause above where the movement of the body'dictions thirsty fluids are directed.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, then when you attend and care for it with these recommended powders in places specified by our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter time and the site of ulceration is a place where nerves are vulnerable, then cover them with powder made from vinegar and oil, placing these over those areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are carnivorous, then when you rest pulpils at the beginning in water and oil as we have said before today, so that all this enters into your body until the fresh day has come according to our saying, now also cover up the oozing ulcer and cleanse it away from there for its healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	So it is necessary that the knowledge of curing spurts be acquired universally, maybe according to how I have distinguished each type here for individual treatment purposes.
Capitol .xli.	The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	When arthritis comes into the chest area, it means that inflammation characteristic of rheumato0rism is affecting not just joints but also involves areas
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	When arthritis affects the chest area (specifically referring to joint inflammation), it contains glands that hold their capsules; and these are its causes. Here, "petitz apostemas" likely refers to small swellings or nodules associated with rheumatoid conditions at sites like undernethyar's armpit region ("codena del cap"), which may indicate affected lymph nodes. The text suggests
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are full of fluid (likely referring to the swolthy glands), and those that contain moisture similar to lemon juice ("humiditat semblant a lima"). This suggests some kind of effusion or exudation occurring within these
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And they contain fluid similar to blood (hemoglobinous content), and those that are stone-like in nature ("lapides"), hardened or calcified substances within the glands could be indicative of certain inflammatory conditions where sclerotic changes occur, often associated with chronic processes. Here it is referring perhaps to enthesitis (inflammation at tendon insertion sites) which might present similarly in rhe
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the entirety of this section and when extracting those ones (likely referring to affected glands or areas), there is no fear; rather it concerns executing them carefully without causing damage akin to an arrow ("arceria"). The text implies that removal, possibly in preparation for further treatment such as cauterization—which must be done delicately and with precision. Here the use of "extec
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And it is this operation of those that you fear for their instruments' form with which they approach within wherein they believe contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If you find that it contains moisture (suggesting excess fluid or dampness in the body), then divide each section by length, following this manner thus far.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E begins in the section of .B., and proceeds to the section of .G. Thus, when moisture is evacuated, you scrape away that layer containing the moisture, without leaving any trace of its cause; as long as these remnants are present, they return if provoked by their own causes.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	When poultices made of Egyptian wax are used if present, and otherwise water and salt; fill these with mud or ashes to apply it under the patient' extrication over time until they dissolve completely from that layer which serves them.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If there is a swelling of fatty nodes, then you should incis it according to this form.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	am segment has a shape of a cross, and you cut between the lips of this section and carry it out entirely from that garment which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May if your cautery causes disruption, then you must tell me immediately what happened first time around.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: It seems in the lameness and healing stage that you have mentioned before us; upon such a condition we place lesser weight, for it is of little significance and contains only scant moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	May occur in other openings at the head as well; these are similar to what occurs when nails grow on children' extruded roots and toenail clippings may be their entire external layer, surface-level skin stratum.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And apply pressure on those parts that were put down below them, so as to draw the sickness out of these lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Return those needing care with water that is brought for healing purposes back there to aid in recovery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xliii. (Assuming there was an error in the Roman
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	In this line, it appears that someone is describing a type of scrofulous tubercle which they have acidified or treated with vinegar (implied by "acid
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	This line describes a persistent or habitual condition of scrofulous aphthecias (presumably referring to skin ulcers associated with tuberculosis, often linked in historical medical literature) that occur recurrently on the colon and rectum ('colh' is likely an old spelling variation for 'colon'), around the buttocks ('aysselhas')—a region near or involving these areas of body fat padding. The term "angel" here could refer to a specific spot
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here it is suggested that those who acidify (presumably using an irritant substance like vinegar) the scrofulous ulcers in these areas will experience exac01:e side effects or secondary issues caused by this treatment, such as additional health problems arising from their actions. The line indicates a belief at that time about self-inflicted medical conditions being linked to recurrent diseases affecting specific body parts like the colon ('colh') and buttocks (presumably referring to 'aysselhas' which could be an outdated term for areas around these regions). Additionally, all of such ulcers cause their own form or "tunic," suggesting a self-perpetuating cycle where
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	In this line it is stated that the scrofulous ulcers have different kinds (speices). Some are like stones and contain moisture ('humiditate'), while others are particularly harmful ones which did not respond to treatment or cures applied by physicians at the time. Here, 'lapideas' refers possibly to a crusty formation overlying an ulcerated area—often seen in tuberculous skin lesions — and could indicate varying degrees of severity among these scrofulosis cases wherein some were resistant ('obeseysso') even after medical
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in the position where you're working with good disposition during treatment, the color of this fluid is similar to that of the navel and it affects the entire body; it does not enter into the nerves of the belly, nor into veins or arteries, and there are no bubbles present as if something has been inserted above the line of .G. up to the line of .B., watch that throughout the whole parting, and extract small amounts from between the navel's lips (or mouth), which you may need for those purposes in our apostles below the chest.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	Es possible that a vein or nerve has not been pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "If the sprain does not aggraUB, do not tighten your hand on it inside, or disturb the womb; if it is not necessary to insert anything further, then stop in a dirty glass of wine shards or other powders that flow from saints' relics and cleanse them. After this pause allow for restoration of inflammation and cushioning of these materials so they can be used again.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sanction has detached.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation within which you have completed it all.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Return and investigate if there is any cause of the other small skins issues mentioned herein; inspect those things out and clean them thoroughly.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the state of great scrofulosis (a form of tuberculosis or consumption), then do not insert that scrofulosis into its place within you.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Because that lie there a faithful friend so strong, and let it go down into itself as harm comes to him by its own doing.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Return and fill with Egyptian wax the small creature you have already immersed in it, taking care of that as well.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that scale completely, then adjust your lips and cheeks on the patient so as not to use any excess force.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May you find yourself in need of removing excess swelling due to the greatness of the scrofulus (a type of skin growth), understand its root cause, and perform stitching as instructed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And apply medicine for puncturing, warm oil and substitutes to these things, in order that the body' extruding material may dissolve from decay of matter.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you are about to wash off the dirt and grime of raw meat inside her (the patient), then tend that which is within therein with fresh lint or linen cloth, so it may be cleansed/healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (The text provided does not contain enough context for
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Translating this line from a medieval medical treatise that mixes languages can be challenging due to the archaic vocabuls and possible language blend, but I'll do
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Translation: "Discuss this section in the excrescence and none of our people here have experienced it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the writing of that speech concerning these matters.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May there be an obstruction in the homes that prevents the extraction of pus without causing pain throughout all their veins and major arteries within, when asked by doctors under no circumstances should this happen.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	May happen in those who have had caustic substances inserted into the mouth or with two tweezers when the illness is not in the throat, causing pain that occurs due to congestion and which needs removal by a part of the tongue' extrusion mechanism.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we wish to take in water, which I shall place the sponge of urine at intervals three circles within each circle (of that portion between two circles for quantity), so that the piece is in ichor and not cartilage; this location is suitable as it lacks flesh and veins belonging to its subject.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is afraid, then extend one end of the gout key for only an instant and open the stone within until it reaches the channel; this may prevent fevers if they arise from that very cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E properly inserts it as prescribed; this signifies concerning the section of the channel for bile, which is produced by that same and carried away through the gallbladder's cavity whereby it has been extracted from him.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Lay down the patient for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is full in which you pierce the gallbladdon of the beast (implying a medical procedure on an animal), add honey from your lips to that solely touches the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Return with medicine that causes flesh inside it where it has been healed not to be sickened again.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the medieval medical text to translate:
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Through the command of water laid out to consume (ingest) the ill-humor trapped within it, and as such misfortune persists for three days; therefore, we direct this water herein, with the aim that which is consumed heals during its intake.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	Here comes the translation of each line:
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So he admitted that she had not inserted a vein or channel, and the wind was rising from the crowd, and treated her until the focus became healthy again.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	Not until you have washed away the heat from within and returned to moderate days of restoration for their dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now say that there is no fear in the section of the epidermis (epidermis refers here as skin). The translation line by line would be:
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv. (The given text does not provide enough context
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	In this section about the ulcer where he suffers in the backyard and it is called a hernia of the backyard:
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This acute hernia of the groin is an obvious swelling according to the color of the body and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It is said that there are two kinds of causes; one or it may be an inherent incident.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In nature there is not an engine of healing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: The accidental is second among two types of which one resembles warts and the other appears as an abscess caused by blood vessel obstruction, causing fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And only when it is assumed with iron that they are small in size should one consider such intervention.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv. (This line appears to be referencing a specific
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	La frase "De seccio de les especies de nos nòdes" se traduce al inglés
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Desde los nodos, florecen especias y allí describen todas sus especies dentro del apartado o sección.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	When you recommend this way of distinguishing between a nodule and effusion that is doubtful.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you declare that heat and fever cause intense pains within where the boiling overflow ceases—and thus decay completes when the fever subsides along with pain and warmth.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May not be warmth or fever nor pain; count that which is in its own chest itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So when you arrive at the healing stage of this node that pushes it outward and examines its strength for which they will insert internally as needed, according to what comes forth in the area where it appears.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Here the final is applied according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and it is pressed outward into the spaces between them while considering what has come forth in its traces on him/her.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If there is an outflow of liquid (humidity), regardless of its color, then you will make incisions on the surface just as I have described elsewhere.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If you do not remove moisture from its tracks, then it is fatty (indicating that the accumulation of fat or 'tallow' at these sites contributes to health issues).
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it is dry over there has a shape like a sickle according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, and thereupon apply that cut on the entirety of its surface for ease in healing, and if possible, protect the perineum or sac; as soon as you can remove from it that sickness present at the navel.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If during the operation it is broken (probably meaning an injury or complication), then that healthy part cannot be removed anymore, and careful measures are taken to prevent further damage until such time as there's nothing left outside of its place without cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If there is any cause or too much in it from Rome, then return according to its means.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If at any time you find a small part of the patient'dicts Roman body infected with sharply corrosive and acute dust particles, then stop where it bleeds (apostema caut), treat that wound immediately to heal this other injury within while treatment is being applied.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is large, then use your lips to apply pressure and heal that much fluid which embodies the body'dict:
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May it pulsate there, or not-pulsating, then your cough and humble location where phlegm has settled that is vinegar and the rush of blood for two days or three within which flies dissolve this phlegm and bring back the boiling action of the sanguine; afterward return to separate what was broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	The provided text is not clearly presenting coherent sentences that combine elements of
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	It appears there's a mix-up or typographical error in the phrase you have given, making it difficult to understand directly translated into English. The text seems like an attempt at Latin (possibly with
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The provided text seems to be in a Medieval Latin context and it's attempting to describe some forms of intervention or insertion necessary for an incision (sezione) involving three types: one significant enough that requires great effort ("alcu gran"), another set where they move from these sites, perhaps referring to their migration within the body after such procedures.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of introduction is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of insertion is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of insertion is thus:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are iron pins from the forge, of limbs' fallen parts restored incisively, to ensure nourishment enters through the apoplasts.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are forms of experience and they bear names; one among them is called Beris.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So with three spices, of which some are great for digestion (medicinal) and others in small amounts.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience is like this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experience required is like this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of experience is little or in fact nonexistent; it's all about perception (or perhaps a more literal translation could
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	When convened, these abscesses and ulcers present themselves between the joints (and in other places) due to fluids or foreign bodies within those spaces involving both bones and various causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Here it is painful and heavy (the limbs), when they are sewn together with large needles made of ivory or bone, or iron/silver; these pains affect the hands as well (also in the hands).
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	These are the black experts' opinions that through these cavities where there have been distended openings (fistulas), they return to their position above those same reflections in elevation.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	So with three kinds of treatment—some derived from their lengths and others from the quantity as well as the amount of fluid in the fistula or stricture, according to its extent.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of grand experience stone:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of experiencing metal excretion:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small wooden tool:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ointments are derived from special substances, which come either directly or after simple compounds, and consist only of three kinds: large stones (grands), small pebbles (paucs), and mirages (migiers).
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	From those of you who apply pressure, and from three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From those points has come a curve, and from three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	From what they have (the patient), there are three curves, and from these three species derive three kinds of medicines.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Everything that is necessary in that place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single joint or bone like this: (The translation here is somewhat interpretive due to unclear context and potential typ
Forma de unci simple migier:	 Shape of a simple joint resembles/like so: (In English, the sentence implies that there
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 Shape of a simple joint is like this: (The translation here suggests an observation about the shape and appearance similarity between a basic or single joint structure
Forma de unci orp gran:	 Shape of large bone/joint is so-like: This phrase likely describes that there's something
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 The shape of a big joint/bone is like this. (Here the term "forma" refers to 'shape,' and it indicates an observation about how
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 Shape of large bone/joint is similar/like so. This translation suggests that there'UBROSIS OF BIOLOGICAL SYST
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 The shape of a big joint has two curves: Here the term "forma" refers to 'shape,' and this indicates an observation about how there
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 Shape of bone/joint with two curvatures is like so. This description likely characterizes a particular joint or skeletal structure that possesses these
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 The shape of the simple bone has not gotten any curves, indicating perhaps an absence of natural contours typically found in living organisms. This could imply
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 Shape of a large joint/bone with three curved parts is like so; this might describe the complex structure typical to certain types or functions within
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 The shape of bone/joint without these curves can be described as follows. Here, "forma" suggests a structural characteristic being discussed; this could
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 Shape of the simple joint lacks three curved parts and is likely straightforward or minimalist in its structure – typical for less complex anatomical elements.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the knives used for cutting and removing lumps and attachments, and they come in three types: one made from iron (gran), another made from mercury (migio), and a third type which I do not specify here.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of scalpel for use:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of scalpel few:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The external parts of these are where the acute sections occur and others not sharp nor stopped in such manner, but it hurts during lymph node scraping out of fear for vein or nerve injury; therefore heals thrombus and softens anxiety a little through dryness which causes abscess removal.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are forms of poultices, and they come in three kinds: grain, meal (or fine flour), and brances (branches or small twigs).
La forma de magda gran:	La forme grande d'esmeralda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of maid migration:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of maid (or woman): scanty in form or shape
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Such pains from bone and humors of blood on which they act, this is where folk cauterize with sulfur.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When there is an opening in the exterior layer and on that corridor at the divisions of parts inside and outside, when you go with your hands, it may happen like this:
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of cauterization, which are not penetrated by the aplications of instruments and do not reveal diseases to me, and there are three kinds: large, fine (or small), and coarse.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are those forms/shapes of it.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of gout are those by which the flow of bile is absent, and they consist of three species: large, small, and little. The forms of liver (represented here as "lu"):
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are lemon-shaped and of varying small sizes.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these herbs for potions must be large and small pieces, to ensure that the fluid of sanction flows quickly when needed, especially if at first aid has not been provided.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for separation throughout the entire body; only in meat-like regions such as the groins and hips (of undergarments), thighs and breasts, nipples, abdomen, and navel areas—these are likened to their fleshly parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some of these tools are small-sized and resemble bones from the limbs as shown here; through which when used for cauterization or due to a needle puncture in veins or arteries, one abandons them.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some pains are circular in form according to this shape.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii. (The given text does not provide enough context for
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	From the care of male breasts composed of women's bodies, translating this line into English while understanding its historical and possibly anatomical connotations could be challenging due to potential archaic or medical
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veiled are the breasts of male homosexuals when they sleep like women do and therefore their breasts become swolthy-enlarged; thus formed by female bodies these vulvas appear close together (in proximity).
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To the one who drinks it, cover that which is secreted in its seminal line according to this manner, from .B. down to .G., and cleanse the growth entirely with corporeal medicament, placing it on both sides of clothing, and adjusting the lips' beds; healing those within who are restored.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it happen if the breastbone flexes at joints and becomes softened with its own lubrication, as occurs in women'thy bodies; thus two lancets are inserted into each wound, resembling twin crescent moons from which one contains another. Holding their hands tightly inside where both lines meet (the line marked B and the line marked G), excoriate this area between the lower lip of a creature and its tongue, remove any pus therewith contained within each other; apply what has been discussed about sutures and powders as necessary for healing while being cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the inspection of the fluid that is coming out due to malaute'dict unrest and flow of blood, then pour down corrosive oil into it and submerge what has come up there; moreover, take care of this which was harmed so as to heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When the pinworms come crawling in, causing irritation or itchiness as they burrow through one's skin (likely referring to enterobiasis). Here
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When the pinworms come crawling in, they are associated with symptoms of squeezing or itchiness from skin lesions caused by skrophilias (likely referring to a type of scabies infestation). Here: "Skrophilia" seems to be an incorrect term; perhaps what was intended here is something like 'scabies
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	From those that contain moisture; and from those with embedded droplets as indicated by this figure: line G to line B of the chart herein described ('chart' could refer possibly to a diagram or table used in medieval medical texts). Here, after cleansing what is present due to illness (possibly an infestation), one should remove and then insert woolen socks today.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Return its covering or care with suitable oil until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the ulceration of the gums and sclerae is present, then divide it over there as we have mentioned in the section about sclerosis (eyes).
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the patient is extended so much that they burn up (are overheated), then apply treatments according to what we have in this text at present time.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	From section where they have been pricked or pierced by a needle or vein;
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the catheter is broken, and the chest wall becomes solidified over it, where inflammation or abscess has been associated with the artery or vein: when an abscess in the catheter enters into the thoracic cavity; and when you relieve the abscess at its neck (the narrow part), feel a stridor there.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And he who is affected by a venous issue will come forth from the body part.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	When it comes to someone suffering from the inflammation of their joints due to rheumatodict (arthritis), you should divide the affected section along the shank; and cut out the swollen part, removing its outer covering so that it is revealed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Return and apply pressure to the place where two ligaments have an intervertebral disc between them in which everything is already ignited, then break up the adhesion (arthrofibrosis).
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess by the vein, then take what liquid you can from where your hand has touched for the purpose of draining the abscess at the navel site; insert the needle carefully into that spot which your hand has already contacted beforehand, and make this puncture penetrate. Insert a double-thread here to remove whatever is inside it (the other one), holding tightly with your fingers as you have been instructed in our thread made of grape vines from the extremities at both ends of the vein.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May you fear that we extract the thread, then insert it into the small hole made today for the first needle' extrusion, and tighten the tendons in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply dry gangrene at its location within you when it enters into you, then incise the excess of the skin around it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Return the pillow on which you have immersed him in vinegar and oil, and apply the treatment that he is said to be cured by (calce and ungere).
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital of inflammation caused by twisting of nerves - Here begins our treatise on this ailment.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	When you have an abscess in the armpit and vein, it seems like an abscess in their nerves when pressed or from excessive touching, apparently.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is necessary for pain to be felt in the parts of helpers or the heel, or anywhere where joint pains are prominent.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E es apostema greu," which means "And it is a serious swelling", and further continues as "-e es asemblat a la color del altre cors" translating into English as "and appears like the other limb' extrinsic in colour." The phrase finally reads, "... e quando strettamente am vehemencia, si sente il male nell'altro corpo," which can be translated to mean "... and when tightly stricken by violence, one feels pain in the other body
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	The sentence "E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors," translates to "And it is not an additional swelling on the limb." Continuing with this, "-e per so es dejos la codena" means "... and immediately touches upon the tendons." The final part of the sentence can be translated as "and throughout its entirety cannot go downwards towards the foot or behind it," indicating that whatever is described (possibly a swelling
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	The sentence "Doncqu'aquos qui ésencs dans les junktuns non couvé chẽi ni ensifler amb fer," translates to "And those present in the joints do not get caught or entwined with iron." The continuation "- quare fort leu endevèngera contracio" suggests a concern that
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The sentence "Mayst quel esten dans el cabr ou fins i els còndis d'espla, tan fan servir amb espuma," translates to "Those that are in the head or
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	The sentence is translated as follows: "Mayhaps if there's a swelling of little size (pau), then take it off at the joint and remove that from its roots." Here, the text appears to be offering medical advice on how to deal with small-scale afflictions possibly related to limbs or tend
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then suspend it with one thread and rub that area, apply the same to what has been cut off for repairing, treat this place until healed within.
Capitol .li.	In this line of medieval medical text translation into English word by word or
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The section (or "capitolo" in Italian, which could be a term for chapter or part within the larger context of a medical treatise) that describes how lip pain can cause abdominal discomfort ("ac
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In this section (or "capitolo"), it is explained that those individuals with excessive mucus in their bodies have constant throat discomfort ("acidede las llagues del chil al ventre") and similar complaints occurring elsewhere on the body where there are substances likened to fungi, which represent a fine or subtle base atop of it; moreover, those very lips (of such individuals) have been discussed earlier in this text. The term "motas" refers generically to mucus accumulations within bodily cavities that can cause discomfort and are associated with other body parts similar to fungi as described by the physician's observations or theories outlined previously, perhaps pointing towards an imbalance of humors leading to such conditions. This aligns somewhat loosely with medieval understandings where mucus was considered a pathogenic substance that could disrupt bodily harmony and lead to various symptoms as described by the author'sex
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Herein is mentioned that within them (referring to patients) there were two types of substances in their bellies which looked like fungi; and these did not differ from each other because they had a simple or rudimentary nature ("menuda raitza"). This suggests an observation where the internal state, possibly related to digestive issues or imbalance as per medieval medical theories (humoralism), was characterized by two distinct forms of mucus-like matter inside that did not show significant
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	Herein the lips (of those patients) were turned outwards and they would spread apart; moisture was always flowing from them during this time ("tottemps"). This description could indicate a condition where there is excessive saliva or mucus production, leading to constant wetness around the mouth
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So then I incised them one by eighteen units and another fifteen units in the body part where they are located, respectively.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you witness the patient's fear and anxiety, guard your mind with iron willpower; perhaps a recently forged nail is needed as well, that very thing we have described herein; let it stay within them for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Here comes another sentence to translate: Adjust within the narrowness of the iron pipe; thus, do not cease hammering it into a section until it is dissolved and separated by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	May it be that his limb is of great size, therein may some cause fear and sorrow, mostly in the one within him (the abdomen).
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	May it be possible that you separate the mass of them (the patient), and properly apply caution so as not to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Return there with care that which is healed within may be preserved for health restoration.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And watch that you do not assume a wart of dark color, with little feeling in it or weak limbs; for this is cancerous growth.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When recalling when it is necessary for the head to come upwards (referring perhaps to certain medical positions or procedures), here we go.
Capitol .lii.	The given medieval medical text is in Latin with traces of Romance languages such as
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of care for the hump (umbilicus)". In this context, it likely refers to attending to or tre
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hump (umbilicus) is painful due to movements or cracks in the diaphragm above which it lies; and when cloth or a cushion follows these ruptures as they come into being, or because of constriction at this place where blood vessels flow according to what has been said herein before (referring possibly back to earlier statements about pressure on veins), pain is felt.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If there is a crack in the cistern and leakage from the fabric (possibly referring to some form of wound or skin condition), then the appearance of the ulceration resembles that of the body; it hurts like a lion, which can appear in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the extrusion of the hernia, then at that moment you have recorded what we had noted previously about its fluid content and varying degrees of violence; now take heed (be attentive) as this situation may change rapidly, and return here with urgency. Moreover, enhance your intervention by vigorous bathing and exertion.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then I will be the lion and won't disappear when you place your hand on me; nor shall I contract or grow in size.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanction, then now appear your fingers on these blackened sites where inflammation descends as punishment.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is for meat nothingness (perhaps indicating lack of nourishment or substance), then there may be a severe and hard swelling present, which remains according to its amount/size.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be due to movement or airflow, then applying touch is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And when performing the operation on it is considered whether the navel'supremacy (umbilicus) is due to a stone or cure, prohibited by its treatment; if so, in that case there is fear and concern as taught in the Capitol where I have previously mentioned instruments for chiseling away at stones and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominency of the navel is due to the intestine or tent, then order that which controls it should take hold and be extended; also set your watch on all around the navel as you have indicated upon its site where there are hands above—and position those within between their own bodies over it. Also command who stands opposite of them (implying a midwife), to encircle with spine or ligature along the pathway surrounding the umbilical cord at this location; and expand the bandage around these parts, as well as where there is strength from falcet/hook for tightening.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have torn the skin, then take that one out now; and incise those excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your arrow or vein, surround that area and return to your work; take two needles and insert them into those fields strong enough so they can pierce through the area where you have opened an abscess in the knee joints, causing penetration—and press firmly on the abscess divided into four parts over these points.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, place the needles and insert them where pain spreads in the flesh and seeps out; when it is subtle and inserted therein, take care that which comes from within these linens as they heal.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel prominence is of fleshlessness or due to moisture in him/her, then you must address and remove decay (abscess) and dampness present therein; this atrophy within them which you cleanse with water intake and purgation. Here' extricated are the impurities from inside his body through cleansing practices involving fluid consumption and expulsion of waste products, treating what is termed 'atrophies'.
Capitol .liii.	In translating this text from what appears to be medieval medical Latin (with influ
De curacio de cranc.	The phrase "de curacio de cranc" can possibly mean the care or treatment
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	The translated text in English reads: "We have discussed, within the division of skull and its medical care, how it is directed by doctors to prevent ulcers; we also know that headaches are born from neglect or lack of proper treatment." This translation attempts to convey concepts related to neurology as understood during medieval times. It suggests a belief in direct cause-and-effect relationships between the level of medical care for cranial conditions (such as skull injuries) and outcomes like headaches, emphasizing preventative measures against complications such as ulcers due to neglect or insufficient treatment ("ferr"). The text reflects medieval medicine's attempt at understanding neurological symptoms within the context of humoral theory.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The translation to English: "Regarding ancient headaches that may occur in such places as the breasts or abdomen and their resembling limbs when they begin with children." Here we are delving into medieval beliefs about where certain types of pain might originate from, especially those associated with conditions affecting what today would be understood as breast tissue (mamillas) in females. This implies a humoral understanding—headaches were not merely brain-related issues but could also involve the body's internal 'humors,' which must be balanced for health to prevail. The reference might suggest that these headache types are common when children start exhibiting symptoms, reflecting medieval practitioners’ concerns with pediatric conditions and their relationship (or supposed lack thereof) to adult ones within the framework
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	The translation to English: "When ancient and grave headaches occur without the properties of that particular medicine for it not cures such ailments in them nor have I seen another come." This statement speaks volumes about medieval medical practice's understanding (or misunderstanding) regarding treatment efficacy. Here, there seems to be an admission by the practitioner—that despite possibly having knowledge or theories of what should work against headaches that are severe and old ("antiquat e gra"), they have found no rem
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is carried out as we have described here, you first allocate water for dipping (likely referring to some form of bathing or hydrotherapy), and purge black fever symptoms occasionally; when there's a noticeable swelling repletion, then that too must be addressed.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English:
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May you face opposition from the thickness of veins or arteries, then do soothing treatment within which blood flow ceases, and take care that this also serves as healing for another condition until it is cured.
Capitol .liv.	Capital - This line is likely an introductin or title in
De curacio de ydropici.	The phrase "de ydropici" seems like a nonsensical string of characters
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Translation: "We already have recommendations for the spices from underwater in water division, and we know how each herb is prepared to heal it."  
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this herbal tympanic stone medicine and it does not cause discomfort in your treatment, consider that if relief has been achieved at the joint or abdomen/stomach of those things (presumably referring to body parts), then be mindful that fear arises when treating them with iron.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	May if you again inflate the patient's abdomen excessively, and it is not another illness but simply water accumulation, neither child nor woman has this condition; your task in performing such operation involves lifting up the belly between your thighs, placing a servant to express the bladder inside as far as possible from the pubic bone beforehand, then applying pressure with spine-spiked catheters following these steps:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	If it is two sharp parts present at once, like the tips of a splinter in one's extremity; however, there may also be some small points that come and go little by little during the operation, so as not to enter into the cavity (of the intestine) and prevent from cutting them.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	May it be that if the generation of humors is due to a disorder in the foot, then your team shall approach from the left side of the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of it is due to melancholy (which often relates to black bile in humoral theory), then your section should be straightened out here.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And when your servant is on the ribcage where you want to speak about arthritis, so that excess fluids do not rush there quickly.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Here the patient will be perforated entirely by the instrument along the neckbone, and inserted into that section thereof, lifting your hand on the space between the neckbone and sphincter, where it is rubbed; if its quantity resembles a drop of blood.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Through which I will pierce the cyst within so that the stone may reach its destination in the womb of water (the bladder).
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Return that part outwardly and insert an instrument of which this is its form.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it seems like a silver thin cane; made of either silver or ivory (or leather), to which at the bottom part placed is a small bump, and on its sides there are three such protrusions – two from one piece and one from another piece; and this extremity sharp according to the feather quill's manner, as it were doing so many times.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	When placed outside the body with instruments submerged in water, as soon as that instrument touches it, then evacuates some of the water at once; but if you do not completely remove all the moisture within a certain time frame, its excess causes harm to one' extramaterial spirit animal or leads directly to death due to five external diseases.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May it be expelled according to the quantity of what is inside him and as you understand his position in the uterus' contentment of the pulse from head to foot, and its benevolence or maleficent nature.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Here comes the text to translate line by line into English:
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear about the bladder, and pour a large quantity of water upon it, so that it is buried in sand at the base, tighten with pressure washing, and wait for long time under sunlight; this cures that which needs medicinal drying treatments when healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	When it comes to the abdomen, apply cautery and use forceps for water extraction, as previously reported in this body of knowledge.
Capitol .lv.	From what is provided in your text, it seems you are attempting an
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Based on the phrases and words given from a medieval medical context that somewhat resemble Latin ("quan", "dolor", "humors fregas"), Italian, Spanish, and French (like in your second sentence), here is an attempt
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	The provided text in a mixture of languages appears to describe medical observations and procedures from the medieval period related to childbirth. Here is an attempt at translating each line into modern English, interpreting them within that context:
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So when a small needle is carefully inserted under the skin at this subtle point, it becomes as follows:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place a subtle hammer undernethy and bind that with rope for three days or four-and-three parts thereof.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he wishes to urinate or defecate; return that as well.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not pause bleeding (bleeding), it is possible that urine will flow over the place, which would fail to clean this area properly.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May that from which the tumor has burst be treated with iron as we have said, for up to several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When things are out of place in their location, which causes these issues, the cause is natural and originates from the head due to blockage at its top where urine cannot flow properly within the body parts below; it's not a birth defect but rather illness resulting in serious discomgy.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When performing your operation of fluid flow in bloodletting, you may encounter pain here; pause at this point where you draw out the blood and cure within while it is healing.
Capitol .lvi.	Given that "Capitol .lvi." appears as an ancient Roman
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	This line, written in a mix of archaic language that seems to draw upon Latin roots and medieval medical terminology (potentially influenced by Italian or French), describes certain conditions affecting the penis' foreskin:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Constantly grinding in this bed causes discomfort and protruding of fatty flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	From that one is harmful, and from the other not harmful.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No harmfulness, cover that suspends under the delicate and removes what is within it therein; apply pressure over that spot with Egyptian wax submerged in oil herewith, and this too for healing inside whereby said entity may be cured.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the gallbladder is dark in color and enlarged, then you must apply caustic substances to its interior and exterior.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May it be that the foreskin of the head of the penis is not circumcised, and one part removed (circumcision), while another remains intact; where you have cut off this remaining portion so thoroughly during communion to ensure its removal completely, until after healing. And when your care addresses this operation on the foreskin again, it cannot be ensured that it will not tear.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And examine your genitals and prepuce blackness and corruption; hence when you find that which has already been darkened and is about to decay or rot, place lines on it with honey mixed with crushed white flour of millet and herbs chopped into pieces.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Return it for its own sake is there an alternative cure within that will be healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May it be that a flow of sanctus (sanctioned or divine) is necessary and in this way administers the luna'dictory (moon-gazing therapy):
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Quarly two devices assist in healing, one is the flow of blood and another is pus when it becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the gallbladdig is corroded and destroyed at once, then it's necessary to insert a bronze tube into the flesh of the foreskin immediately, allowing the bile to flow through that pipe.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuce at the base of the foreskin (and this adherence is not excised from where it clings, nor circumcision exerted upon it; when attached due to dirt or scab) comes corruption that you must scrape out inside which dissolves the ligament and clears off completely the head of the foreskin.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to reach those exquisitely, then have someone prick the small of the back or penis, and so gently do you pierce through their subtlety with a sharp instrument.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And separate between the foreskin and head of hair down to where it is moistened by humidity so that nothing else sticky does not attach there.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Return its treatment within which it has been firmly established.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol .lvii.: This line appears incomplete or incorrectly formatted as it doesn
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The translation of this Latin-influenced sentence into English would be:
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity with other plagues: however, when it comes from our operation and intention, especially in children, we must assign them the simpler path to salvation through gentle release of urine.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So it is said that ancient ones did not perform circumcision around the time of freedom, nor do they use for their laws, and only when they have acquired through experience this causes them to abandon a large part of artisans and barbarians; using sinew from a hind leg and scalp hair.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E you have already tried all these methods and cannot do any better with tools or glue that in unguent (medicated ointment), where motes flee from under the waistband, beneath the testicles within two tunics, and rush upward through porous bodily humors, leaving you helpless for other insights and safe pain relief.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In surgery with an umbilical cord (or navel), if you are bold and disrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The code of the child is short by nature, and with regular movements they do not need to be cleaned out, which has been observed already.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the molding that is made with forge and chain as fasteners be of good quality; I have tested them myself, whereby when they are proportionate in thickness (just like those used), then you provide me with two such acutenesses, cutting accordingly by a fair trade within time. The compression of the heel shaped into form contains all parts of the footbed, and thus there is no error at all for it to contain.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first thing about performing an operation is to make sure that if you understand a small child (who may be more vulnerable), do not operate on them unless it'dict necessary and leave such cases for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	When that joy is what you can achieve with whatever knowledge you receive, here it comes as your potential possibility:
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Here comes the next sentence to translate: Ensure that it is there among your preparations without being noticed; hide the tools in your hand or on top of your chest so that the child does not see them and any other person present with those devices.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Return your hand inside the patient's waist and under their neck; pull that area in where pain is present on the head of the hump (protuberance), and massage what accumulates there, which consists mainly of phlegm due to cold dampness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Return the marked spot on the foot' extrinsic muscle (feet), and place your hand there for stability with this second tendon that has been attached to a small base of said first ligament, holding both hands in between these two ligaments:
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of these instruments is thus:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	These are bones outside the joint and others that aren'thy not part of the knee joint itself, stretching as far out as two handles grasped with hands.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	May errors in clarification be far from here and escape through the internal core; or if it is a portion of yourself that you need insight into, understand deeply within.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So that you stretch it out on your finger, as for the swelling at this moment, and insert another one in proportion to its size.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract that one and incise it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and the applied poultice hardens on the wart (aposteme), then apply more of this substance until the wart softens and exfoliates that which is easily removed, as you have prepared for it.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Guard your head at the top of the wound, lest water come there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	So take care of that water which the patient has absorbed from the dust particles, which we have recommended in the matter concerning these dust particles.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it has entered through the anus in measure and follows below, you will not notice it there.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	May he heal that which we have brought inside so it may be cured.
Capitol .lviii.	The text provided appears to be instructional in nature from an ancient medical perspective with terminology
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	In the treatment of retained urine within the bladder, it can refer to various clinical situations where a patient is unable to empty their bladder naturally due
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is considered a fault caused by excess warm humors within the body—which could stem from sources such as meat, fats (lard or rendered fat), pork products, and sometimes even due to consuming cold items like ice. It seems that this medical belief held during medieval times aligns with what was traditionally thought of malady being linked to imbalances in the body's fluids—similarly reflected by various humoral theories existing at different periods (Latin: 'humores').
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and remains for some time in the place where it already is at the base of the bladder, then the urethra becomes inflamed on your genitals (testicles/womb).
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place their feet on top of their own and extend their abdomen as far upwards from under their hips, stretching the belly tightly until it is as much as possible within reach.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore when the bladder neck contracts and expels fluids from behind into the parts below, thus allowing for complete emptying of the urine.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If it is not dissolved by the water we have mentioned, then intense pain will occur in the groin area due to what you are drawing out with a syringe that takes on this form: It may be made of silver and subtle lion capture, similar to an elongated slender stick (like a pen needle), which is fine enough for use at the top of one'thy head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	E the urine examination by that which clings tightly and lies outside of it wool or cloth for good measure; you insert the outer parts of the thread into the section below the catheter, and if there is any excess cause from the wool/cloth, then also place in the cannula with force.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place a cushion on the thighs of it (the patient), and bind up its bladder and veins with oil and lambskin.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Expose the iron gradually, as long as it's being washed by woolen soap; similarly, when urine comes in contact with this small amount of wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Apply ygky for the purpose of draining urine and use a catheter until the bladder and swolthy stones are alleviated.
Capitol .lix.	Given that this text is written in an archaic form of language with
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Here, the Latin-influenced text seems to describe a medical procedure involving enemas and specific instruments that are in accordance with it:
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses are present in the bladder (vesica), or when it becomes congested and compressed by a stone, you must draw out waters and medicines from there; this is how it happens – with the instrument that you call for clamping.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	sino que in the exterior of it is mute, so it'dict silenced.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way, three troubles arise from one another twice.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the communion is calmness where it is summoned to and its second amount that rises from there, when any cause draws this upwards due to humidity, then dragged back upon itself; as well as when expelled long distances afterward, so too flows naphtha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of clogs into the moisture, and draw it away from the cavities below, where that moisture is drawn upwards towards the hollow of the clog.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return (or place back) into its cavity the exterior of the clapstones as recommended in the syphilitic; and lift up with water that you are lifting it, which moisture goes directly down to the bladder, and thus drives out the malady.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the bladder under which it is formed is that very form itself, and this is its shape.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is caused by silver or left (remaining), and the head has placed either its appearance as small feather or immediately inserted wax into them;
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Return (or fix) the extremity of the corset into the belt.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Here is the line by line translation:
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If there is no bladder present, then take a pad of parchment and make from that circle; pierce through the entirety of its thickness; firmly insert faithfully into those disruзуctions, as you will be rolling it up; place pauses wherein you wish to release urine or water (if necessary), ensuring proper function.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Here comes the translation of this sentence: And take that in your hands and apply it to his or her abdomen as you have applied on the bladder, expressing how moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing various conditions
De extraccio de peyra.	From stone extraction/removal – this phrase likely refers to a procedure related to the removal of
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	From stone extraction/removal – we have it in the division of species for medicine care and understanding the difference between stones originating from urethral discharge (urea) versus those formed within the bladder (uric acid), as well as their signs or symptoms.  
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And here it has been said that surgery was performed within this stone and a portion of it remains intact today.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	When produced in the bladder specifically is that which lies within the bladder itself.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	As I recount that which has been exposed and abbreviated by him.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that stone formation mainly occurs in the bladder during childhood; and from its kidnethy (kidney), the urine excreted by it resembles water in subtlety, appearing therein (within); and phlegmatic inflammation affects its flank/waist area. The disease brings forth painful movements of these parts into this place; hence they drag their entrails through here for the forum's drainage hole.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is when the hygiene of those children within that have reached fourteen years, and their care in the limbs becomes difficult.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May also travel through these waters among those who are between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	From that from which the stone is larger and poultice placed lighter; if it is scarce, contrary to it.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Thus, when you reach the treatment of that, cover it with a cloth from the crater where it exits through all these holes; this hole sometimes prevents dirt accumulation on its stone, which is necessary for investigation purposes.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Return that tool you have prepared among yourselves, and the things of yours are now in place; thus causing the bladder as a whole to descend gradually into its divisions.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Return that which has fallen for each one; return all of it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel pain in space (referring perhaps to abdominal or pelvic discomfort), then press your hand immediately over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you have not touched the entire body yet, then when it is indicated by your touch on the left side of the patient's abdomen if they are a pregnant woman or during their infancy phase, place that part inside the belly.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Through the vein where blood was inside that day flows now.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	When that small one is converted into something within the bladder's neck (which seems like an attempt at describing some procedure related to addressing urinary issues):
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Return your position over that area upon which you are lying down, and remove it from the parts beyond this location where your limb is resting.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	E command the servant to press on his bladder; and order another servant to extend their right arm to the parts below him, and have that other servant contract their left arm where the thighbones are, in the part of the body where the section is being performed.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And insert it into its cavity; this is how they enter:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide in it the water between the knee and thighs, not underne09_25471638|Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	E perceives that from stone there is some where joints and angles are located, making it difficult for him to be healed by this water.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	From that fluid is like a lion grazing and it's round, made of the liver essence for healing.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that which protrudes from or sticks out at an angle and margin, adjust in the crack/fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is not an opening made through the gout (for here), then you will have to create one over that area, or where it hurts intensely and with a knife may make interventions; do so on the skin without evading from doing so – immediately insert carefully crafted small curved instruments.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot cover it there, then slightly increase the disruption and if you see a flow of pus, separate them with strong vinegar that has been triple distilled.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is inside one of them (the bladder or vagina), then you will lead it to the mouth of the urinary bladder, and place your finger over this area; also carry a small catheter herein; apparently they are pains from pleasure.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If it is stone great in size, ignorance leads you to insert that large piece into the bladder; for then one of two causes occurs: either because it remains there or due to continuous urine distillation from within, thus not fully sealing the location.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	When administering the removal of it from within that has been expelled or is present in a broken bone fragment inside where extraction takes place, ensure this occurs under guidance when it's outside (presumably during surgery).
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your task, then fill the womb of our essence with the juice of aloe and of dragon'dictorax, and strengthen it thusly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And when pressure is applied over that hot cloth dipped in oil and vinegar (or wine), it helps to expel the suppuration.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Return the pillow under the patient'se back, and do not remove it into the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that air escapes, apply water and oil to the affected area, with care applying it as lubricant and soothing balm within which healing can occur.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the patient there is an abscess that has become hard and rotten (and it appears as if the sanctum [bladder] is congealed), then insert the catheter into the bladder, for through this means urine can no longer escape due to putrefaction of both the bladder and its contents.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During all of the healing time, when you hold both thighs and adjust the medicine that has been paused at this location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the bladder, where it lies, urine extraction is prohibited; as a result of this treatment, which subjects to being sent through a section due to excessive use, those who are accused of having passed (urine), now have their water extracted, and you must grasp an iron knife for insertion herein:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From beyond the body'dictum (extramata), gout is in a pipe/chalice.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Return your faith now and hold it at this jagged stone for that it will not return to the bladder again.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Return and insert the iron into the vein, piercing through it until the penetrator'se inserted point reaches that spot.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Revolve slowly with your instrument at your side in that small hole, and you will puncture it until another from the other part enters; thereupon the urine is expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return your hand over what is broken out from the bone below the pubis joint, where it has been fractured and a hole (for urethra passage) formed; therein lies blood infection within the prostate gland.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not within your means for any reason that prevents you from doing so, then apply a leech immediately to the rock (or stone in the body), and another one under it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Returning over the rock in that narrow space between his thighs
E aprop extratz aquela.	Return that outwardly (or) expel it externally.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Return those parts of the ligaments and cleanse the swolthy sancus with them, which is done in the flesh.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary for you to lift the foot from undernethy (patient's leg), raise your thumb to the parts below them or return what must be returned and take back what has been said together with these people here present.
Capitol .lxi.	From the given text snippet in medieval medical terminology (which seems like it might
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	The phrase "de extraccio de peyra de las femnas" appears to be Latin or a medically-influenced
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Translated line by line, the text now reads:  
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	May it be that there is a stone among those things; then the treatment will be difficult and forbidden by excessive manual intervention.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one of them is a woman who has strong veins.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if you do not find a woman skilled who can extract the stone from the patient when called by the doctor or extracted from women themselves, then:
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The clear one will not harm a learned woman like this, mostly in operation.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section over the breast in women' extruded part (the uterus) extends beyond its own place, so there should be an advance of the section, and at this time it causes fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to draw blood from you, then take hold of a female medical student' extricately and with little force applied.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	May you lack it, then seek a skilled barber or present a woman maid available in the marketplace for this task of yours, which is included within their division of labor today.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do this present thing and command the patient to hold all that you have directed him/her, from inquiry about the stone in the sieve until meal time; which is because if the woman has pubic hairs, then take it with your hand into his/her private parts where he desires.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you have grasped it (the condition), clamp that part down immediately and command the patient to lie on top of that area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	May it not be a sign (vertigo), then the matron commands that her servant inserts his tool into the patient'thy cavity and places one hand on top of the bladder to pause its left side, while procuring for good comprehension or understanding.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if it becomes inflamed, then the caretaker should gradually reduce that which has come from the bladder to the parts of its body until it reaches the core of the hernia so that through intervention may reach there safely.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Return them submerged in that position on which their thighs are placed and centered at that spot; they should not be moved from there by force of anyone present here, for themselves or others acting upon it nowhere near this place.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	E the section is scant at mealtime; and place your hand over that part of it according to the quantity which you know indicates how much flesh has been withdrazyme from that portion.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	E understand that the stones of pepper are movements: some small and great, lion-hard and sharp, elongated and round, they have ridges (or bumps).
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Thus you know how many spices are needed for what you want, which indicates how much is required.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see blood flow, adjust it in the glass that has been trisected and stay there for an hour until the blood is stopped, then return to your work while the patient'thy vein (has) clotted out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see the flow of phlegm and know that its expulsion is from a cold humor (arthritis), then stop rubbing on the spot and press this powder into it along with steam inhalation therapy, do not continue; let go of the stone. Quarrelingly, the illness will come to an end.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Return care for the child (or return tender loving care). Here' extralong
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the sharpness of pain is relieved over arduous days, and it returns to its place (back), then you return to your work within which there will be no more suffering from the stone's jabbering. Here we can interpret that as time passes or after a period of intense discomfort due to gouty pain is alleviated ('sharpness of pain'), one should get back to their usual activities while ensuring measures are in place so that further attacks (the 'stone') do not occur, implying the necessity for ongoing
Capitol lxii.	It appears there has been a misunderstanding or typo since "Capitol L
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	The section about hernia (inciziun). Here we can interpret this as the beginning of information related
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is simply the accumulation of moisture in white skin that quickly lies beneath the waistline where body fluids are contained within our guts; hence it's called a 'belly.' In this line, "herno" (related to or pertaining to) and its root word might suggest an issue with fluid build-up leading to protrusion of internal organs through weak spots in the abdominal wall. This medieval understanding aligns more closely with what
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Some cautions are in the pancreatic (possibly referring to an internal condition related to fluid accumulation) that nature provides within the part of our gut where another humor resides; and this is not just under white skin but rather at the navel region we mentioned, which consists chiefly of tart flesh. Here it seems they discuss how cautions or remedies (perhaps treatments for gouty arthritis) may come from internal sources like pancreatic secretions—not only external moisture as previously thought but something more integral to the body's own digestive system, suggesting an understanding that conditions can be influenced by one’s diet or bodily functions. This
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	Here comes the sentence to translate: The generation of this hernia is due to debility that causes these substances to be expelled from the kidne extricated organs, and some are discharged by direct impact on the kid's bodies.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humidity has colored masses, whether the color is turning to lemon or vinous (indicating a change in hue), black dungy earth, or clear water, and that's what it may become.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And for the joints where it is added this water here: if in the white cloth that we have mentioned beforehand, an abscess appears and recedes during a long soaking with similar shape of hooves (likely referring to horses), then appear the genitals throughout all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the fluid is in the patient's parenchyma (referring to body tissues), then there appears an exudation, and thus he considers it another cavity within his abdomen.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If moisture is between the neck of the gallbladder and white chest stone (presumably referring to a gallstone), then apply pressure on the center point gently.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you wish to gain knowledge of the color of humidity, look at the discoloration that precedes its entrance; and as soon as it enters in the area where it has entered before, observe the color of what is introduced by it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the treatment of him who is feverish and possibly requires bloodletting according to your judgment, sometimes you may also treat his chest.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When it rests on top of its two above for any cause or reason and slowly draws down the cloth (likely referring to a bandage being applied gently), then pause briefly due to movement causes.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Put them on the left side of him/her, and command the servant to follow his right side, where he extends his arm up two lengths from under the neck down to the waist area between the stomach joint (the small intestine) and lower abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Return the pillow (or sponge) under and cut through the neck of the gallbladder within its limited area inside the patient's body, using a sharp instrument such as surgical scissors or scalpel for precision cutting.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And if it is the second part (possibly referring to a specific section or chapter) distanced from the line where clothes are worn on the thighs and reaches the chest whence comes understanding by those who understand well,
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Excise that, and observe carefully so you do not re-injure it; your excision is to be done gently where possible under the hood (the cloak) using subtle observation at the site of excisions according to what can feasibly be accomplished.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Return through puncturing the bladder of water and full extraction thereof; remove all the water completely.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Return the separation between their labia and one of the cuts made in those parts below it without touching the cushion under them; extend the sponge to the areas beneath, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding hands. Here's a line-byse translation into English:
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that during the operation of removing whatever is in its track from the patient' extradural space at the time of your procedure, when you have completed this portion involving the cranial suture, return what has been removed therefrom and adjust the lips of the spinal cord within the skull cavity as with other creatures, taking care that it be healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you have crushed the humors through another illness, then take care of the vessels that hold the sedentary fluids, remove the humor from them, and apply what we previously mentioned to treat it.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	May it be that if water is added in any of the parts mentioned herein, you will understand that these are hernias; therefore investigate this portion whereby you have already examined elsewhere on the body; and if it appears to be an operation for me to perform, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate into English line by line as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And place two pressed linen pillows according to this resemblance; these will be for the extremities at which they are cut or wet with moist lint, and assembled in the waistband of the trousers, one finger-pile entering through the front part, another into the crotch area, two piles on each hip joint, and two more over both knee joints, ensuring that all parts are adjusted within the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with pointed cautery at the site of excision using a fine cauterizing needle inserted into its navel cord, and once it has been discovered that there' extrudes white cyst containing water; then you take cauterizing tools according to this method:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Return them through that hole in the belly and have it inflamed until all moisture is expelled from inside.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Return the ligament or tendon that is cut, and scrape it with small cautery wicks ignited by fire; make incisions as soon as possible on what you can reach within yourself so that you remove everything from there; be careful not to let the flame of the torch touch your hand.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You understand that this operation is saving and extending longethy life, better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May it happen that you encounter an active abscess requiring drainage at the time of cutting or cauterization, and if so, this problem is what compels your treatment herein described; thus attend to it accordingly when indicated.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	May the patient be afraid if it'supraventricular arythmia occurs and there is no hope for a second operation due to its horror; when you have administered perforation as I instructed, ensure that once certified by what we discussed about signs, this hernia is prolapsing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you make an incision in the spleen above any raised vein (which may be a varix), pierce through the scab at the lower part of it located near the spine, and stop the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	When I have opened wide for it to flow through all of the water (presumably within a wound or body cavity).
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Return your hand over the area where it covers and holds that place, thus allowing bile to flow from its passageway within the body.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then provide care for that which is inside so it may be healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	May it be that contrary water is in the womb at this time when you pierce there: and then it's not pain but white fluid coming out of the birthing pool, which causes opposition to medical treatment, preventing its extraction from within the vessels; or adjust a small object on top of the birthing pool.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	E understand that water returns, and it is reabsorbed over months or in the course of time; when it accumulates, according to medical tradition, the humidity passes through its pores within these days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol .lxiii.: This line does not contain coherent information related
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Sección sobre hernia carnosa y el tratamiento." Translation: "Section on the cushion-like fatty lump and its treatment."  
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	People fear they lose themselves in the section about this hernia, because I see my dismissal from it and am saved by that very thing." Translation: "People are afraid they will be consumed or absorbed into discussions of this particular subject; however, your guidance leads to their release (or salvation) within these conversations/discussions themselves.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	When you remember the operation that was carried out therein with its various instruments.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the swelling occurs in the joints where the muscles are attached and it appears due to excess acute inflammation or impact injury: either spreading rapidly into the muscles, or from being struck.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	According to its color as per the body'thy hue and not causing pain in it therein, this fracture is severe.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When it is loose (likely meaning "detached" or "loose"), its appearance is dark-colored and not centered on the body part mentioned herein.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Here are the translations for each line:
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	May that which is due to inflammation of the joints be understood as coming from an abscess when it breaks open, and there should not be touched by you.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	May that which is caused by venous inflammation not be scattered here for any cause, and it requires compression in the toes.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if it is that flesh has already become hardened there in those places, then you must take out the flesh and insert something into it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an adhesion within any cause of cholera or between the intestines, then you must release that entire adhesion and insert it completely through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the original location is where flesh has been placed behind (implying a previous intervention or surgery), then insert everything that belongs to it and extract it with us simultaneously.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, fill it with vinegar and oil; take care that the other medication enters while it'thy healing.
Capitol .lxiv.	The given text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This line translates into English as follows: "For the treatment of inguinal (groin) hernias." Here, we have translated
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	This line translates into English as follows: "There is an application of wrapping similar to a soft bandage that relieves the testicles and makes it difficult for exercise or walking over the hernia." Here, we have translated from Medieval Latin-influenced text which discusses treatment options involving manual therapy techniques such as gently applying pressure with a soothing wrap. The objective is likely to alleviate discomfort associated with inguinal (groin) hernias and restrain physical movement that might exac
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	This line translates into English as follows: "In the treatment of this ailment, there is concern for that which has been previously experienced." Here we are interpreting medieval medical terminology where physicians might have linked hernias not only with physical symptoms but also associated them
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	This line translates into English as follows: "However, we speak of opposition in the second that was experienced first." Here it seems to refer possibly to a sequential or recurring pattern related to hernia symptoms—perhaps comparing
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	This line translates into English as follows: "We say that when you lift the hernia over an elevated bedpan; and secure in position the testicles at their joints below (as pertaining to scrotal placement); take hold of your coda, which part is tender due to pressure tests performed on it during examination. And extend these parts with vigorous stretch." Here we interpret a detailed instruction for physical manipulation techniques that may have been employed in medieval times as an intervention for certain conditions related to the male genitalia or scrotum—likely referring to treatment and palpation of hernias, testicular positioning, examining signs through pressure tests (palpations), identifying tender areas possibly caused by underlying issues like varicoceles, securing instruments in place for further assessment/treatments, and performing stretch exercises or manipulations. The language used indicates a hands-on approach with an emphasis
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	When you insert an artery of sharp gall on the sidewalk passing through in the middle of the vessels, where they have been discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Excise of all parts where we have extracted them from the forge, now that they are taken out outside it.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Here the needle is placed in that double pin and threaded through the first of those spots where pains are felt, and another one guided at their backsides, holding their hands firmly.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Return those inside the fireplace according to their length of four sections, and extract what is added from the fresh and decomposed fumes.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May you cause pain to all the vessels, lest their testicles are extricated or removed and thus deprived of nourishment for the veins, making them brittle; that they may not be well-off in these regards.
Capitol .lxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not form part of the provided text in a
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	This appears to be an instruction or heading related to treating intestinal protrusion (herniation). A
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that has extended beyond the stomach's diaphragm (the partition between abdominal and chest cavity), leading such protrusions into partakers within these compartments, indicating rupture. A term like "capitol" here could refer either metaphorically to a head office or literally as an instrumental device used in surgical procedures—perhaps implying that it is time for treatment of the hernia due to its progression beyond usual boundaries within these body compartments, signifying rupture and subsequent risk
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either of the diaphragm or due to excitement (possibly referring to stress-induced symptoms), and these causes exacerbate them: through impacts such as strikes with objects causing concussions, excessive use like overworking oneself leading to strain ('too much labor'), loud noises provoking distress, elevation of any burdensome cause that is severe in nature, or imitation (mimicry) which can also induce symptoms. A term "capitol" here may be metaphorically referring again as a head office responsible for overseeing such causes and their management within the treatment context—or it could
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The term "capitol" in this context may refer to the cause or origin (possibly a source of stress), and when there is extension from such extenuation, it leads only gradually without immediate severe consequences ('does not immediately worsen'), but over time can result in weakening within body cavities. It further explains that as one ages with these chronic conditions ("the senhal of age"), they are prone to little and slow decline rather than sudden deterioration, possibly due to the pressure (impact) on internal structures such as organs over time caused by a protruding diaphragm. It seems here that "capit
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the patient' extricates himself through one of its sections (presumably referring to some form or process within their body), he experiences intense pain; various symptoms appear on his already injured spine, and it is due to intestinal evacuation from the hernia. Herein lies a translation into modern English:
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	When a gauze is applied to the intestine (the bowel), it is called this hernia enteral.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Here are the translations line by line:
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these spices for this illness, there is fear that they may avoid consumption in this place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If it is possible that from that quantity more can be drawn out,
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Expose that area where the white hard chafing of these parts is discovered within it now when desired to cleanse (the scrotum).
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert the tube into this liquid that contains semen in between white fleshy areas (likely referring to scrotum and possibly testicles), which is under the skin of the penis, and at between thighs regions where adhesion occurs behind the skin, here comes the first source sentence:
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	Certainly! Here's a line-by extralinguistically translated version of each provided Latinate sentence from the medieval medical treatise:
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause within yourself, then promptly insert it into its belly region (referring back inside the body).
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Here comes another restraint applied after the first ligament attached to this site (away from him for three days), and these two straps fastened around the area where the sperm cord is located according to its size; hold onto it now.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And administer wool dipped in oil; and apply salt on earth (and some white cautery has been applied there, which we have mentioned here due to fear of fluid discharge from their sanctum - flows that occur with these movements), so as for it to fall into itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the lavage of it is delayed, then water from its tail will be poured in, and placed above where it falls as soon as we have said this.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Return care for the patient with the other remedies for the diseases within which they are healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise attempting to describe certain conditions using
De hernia ventosa.	From your phrase "Capitol .lxvi.", it's not
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 It appears there was a misunderstanding or possibly an error in transcribing the original Latin text, which makes accurate translation challenging without seeing the correct sentence structure and context. However, based on your provided phrase "En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Based on the provided snippet and attempting to deduce its meaning within the context of medieval medical practice concerning hernias:
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And when it is time for healing as we have mentioned before, then take care of the patient accordingly.
Capitol .lxvii.	The provided text is written in an archaic form of Romance languages mixed with elements remin
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	When joint pain occurs in the knees (or other parts referred to as "anguons" which could be a misunderstanding or misinterpretation of 'angina' referring
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	When joint pain disrupts sleep as we have said before (indicating a previous discussion about this issue), it becomes noticeable during the nighttime or rest period when one is supposed to be at ease and free from such pains. This highlights that even if someone has been experiencing arthritis
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is not a single cause within the winds (possibly referring to 'genii' or demons as interpreted from medieval texts); if they do exist and are present in some way, their influence would be scarce—returning at all hours without exception suggests an ever-present but minimal force that operates continuously. This implies a belief system where even forces thought insignificant have unending power throughout the day and night cycles within this medieval context of
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time prolongs (alluding to an extended period of discomfort), adjustments are made within five days—return and fixate in place wherein you have placed the cautery inside; hence, pain due to extension or stretching occurs because we've used a heating method on it that is present alongside knee (or joint) pains as previously discussed. This suggests corrective measures are taken within five days which include returning and securing what has been done with the cautery inside—likely implying some form of thermal treatment aimed at easing or alleviating pain caused by its extension, possibly addressing issues such as arthritis in a way that aligns with medieval medical practices. The use of specific terms like "ciphac" and timeframe reflect the historical context where treatments might involve localized application over set periods for symptom management within this framework of belief systems about healthcare during those times, often intertwining empirical observations with spiritual or supernatural explanations
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of him is with pointed cautery as it has been foreseen or prescribed beforehand.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in some cases are cured by iron according to this method: and when the hump lies on its own two, they dry out the rupture sites of the protruding apendices along the abdomen following a quantity of three days.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Return strength to the white catheter that is inserted into the colon where it was discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Return and place that rod above the prominent area of the cystic, and press it upon the abdomen'thy portion.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	When both locations protrude above the end of the thigh bone' extrinsic joint, adjust one with that and another on it for proper alignment.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Extract the joint from its socket completely and do not insert it into or extend beyond the coccyx in total; nor for any other cause should you interrupt your treatment to find out about me, which is necessary for addressing a hernial protrusion of intestinal matter.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	The provided text appears as if it's an early form of medical Latin or Spanish-influenced language used in medieval times for describing certain treatments and conditions related to joint pain (possibly gout). Here
Capitol .lxviii.	Cautery is better applied here, where it will serve the purpose of healing/salv
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	For detumescence (softening) of the scrotum's condition or possibly for addressing an ailment in that region,
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Continuously apply the treatment to men'thy scrotum whereby those interstitial (connective) tissues are softened and it is watched over by him/her carefully for that reason as well. This suggests a nurturing, attentive approach in healing or managing conditions within this body part—emphasizing close monitoring after applying mollificatory techniques to soothe the scrotum's connective tissues.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for someone who attends to the care of that which forms urine as per his/her two, and encloses all scrotum (which has been softened) within its natural shell; also adjust one's lips around the suture. This line implies a comprehensive approach in treatment where attention is given not only for conditions involving fluid formation but specifically targeting urolithiasis or bladder stones, emphasizing enclosure and possibly catheterization of affected areas with proper care. The mention suggests that meticulous post-procedure monitoring (care) after inserting a suture may be required to ensure the wellbeing during recovery from such procedures—possibly surgical removal of urinary
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If so wished, in the course (commencement) of softening that which is encased thereof are three or four times cooked and a tight stitch applied for sealing it firmly together—this indicates an intervention where repeated application through heat treatment followed by surgical suturing may be done to achieve desired medical outcomes such as wound closure, possibly after some form of thermal
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Return your attention between the stitches, and with care for caring of other internal afflictions within so that they heal and fields decrease.
Capitol .lxix.	The provided text appears as if it were written in an archaic form of Romance
De castracio.	Based on your description and considering a blend of Latin
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	From your Latin phrasing and incorporating elements of Italian, Spanish, French:  
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	So it is said that gonorrhea occurs in two ways: either by pulling (atrissement), or through a tearing of the segment (rupture d'un segment).
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When it is caused by suffocation, the way of treatment involves making a beast-like structure in water tail inside until their spirits are calmed and they become limpid and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Return your hand inside where they are so that there will be solutions and problems do not appear suddenly during touching.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May pain occur in castration or rupture, which you touch and press on the tailbone of him to his left side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Return the belt or buckle (to itself), and inspect it over each joint within which two thighs pass through.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Return those pus that you have caused to surface;
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not apply pressure on those of the chest cavity without cause, but rather touch gently upon their breath spaces where they are located within the thorax (chest).
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This discharge of semen is better than the illness caused by inward flow (quarantine), which strongly leads to a desire for copulation in animals.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And take care that it is healed inside where it should be cured.
Capitol .lxx.	Since there is no actual text provided for translation beyond this one word "Capit
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	From the treatment of hernia." The phrase in Latin refers to seeking medical advice or intervention regarding a h
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The treatment of hydrocele in men consists of two methods: one is to apply pressure or drain the fluid from within the scrotal cavity where it accumulates, and another involves locating a small amount between testicles that resembles female genitalia with hair. This description likely comes from an older medical text discussing historical approaches to diagnosing and treating hydrocele, which is an accumulation of fluid in the scrotum causing swelling. Here's what each part means:
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some of that which flows in the urethra located at the base of the testicles come as follows:
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special kind: and it' extrinsic with two testicles of the same size as their internal ones at the puberty stage together with them.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is composed of three species: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: E es que cosi che tu inseris quelle corna adattate dentro dove sfugge l'impaccio di quella, e proprio curale queste altre malattie.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second species of humans where semen is produced in the area of the tailbone (coccyx), there is neither cure nor opposition within it.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi. (The provided text does not contain any specific
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	From slowing down the movement and affecting of flesh in women, due to reasons unknown from this single line alone without additional context or explanation it can be challenging to provide a precise translation
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Ineffectively slowed down or affected by natural causes within which it is tightened and painful; and certain measures are magnified in some women to such an extent that they resemble men during sex, being spread out like males inside the womb/uterus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Now that you hold tightly at your belly or waist and undernethy, here it is done with the excess of washing in these areas (the patient's abdomen/waist). This line suggests a medical procedure where the practitioner should apply pressure to control any overflow from cleans
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And ultimately in washing, mainly on the skin of these areas (the patient's abdomen/waist), thus preventing any flow of blood or sanctus fluid to escape. This line implies that thorough cleaning and possibly drying is done with particular care at this location as a measure against bleeding or leaking bodily
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And here, take great caution to cure the wounds within which it has been healed. This line advises careful attention and possibly further treatment or dressing of any internal injuries following initial recovery efforts at
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Makes flesh that is born hereafter can be sourced from the uterus within which it was enclosed and engendered; thus we must attend to our parts with care in their application of cleansing, and heal those areas wherein they are made clean. This line discusses postnatal hygiene and touch on potential complications such as obstetric fever (possibly referring to puerperal sepsis). It emphasizes the need for diligent care during childbirth preparation stages, highlighting attention should be given when washing ("inscidem lentinge") and healing post-delivery.
Capitol .lxxii.	The provided text seems to be from an old medical treatise with archaic language mixing
De curacio de alratica.	Given that "alratica" is not a term I am familiar with and assuming
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Assuming the context provided relates to medical terminology concerning an alar reaction—which could be referencing issues around a female's underarm (or "alra" which might mean armpit in this assumed medieval Latin-influenced dialect) area,
E es o natural o accidental.	Assuming the context is discussing an issue with or reaction to something within the alar
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Assuming that we are discussing an accident related to health problems preceding the reaction in question—the alar ("alratica") issue is caused by either improperly cooked or cured meats, which could be deemed unhealthy ('malautia'), and potentially due to small pieces of meat (crisps) that may have been overlooked during preparation. These
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	The reaction within the alar region can occur due to remnants of meat—possibly small and forgotten crisps (a byproduct from cooking or preparation) found in various locations: on top of dishes, stuck between them ('le preon de la mayre'/'the table'), underneats ('les costatz/potties'), spilled onto the floor ('en le pus sobira') and even beneath furniture like chairs (potentially 'in lows below tables'). The text suggests strong prohibitions against such remnants, emphasizing cleanliness to prevent this condition. Moreover, it forbids engaging in activities that could exacerbate the problem: opening containers ('cuoyt
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The detection of the condition in question is related to careful observation—if it's evident or noticeable ('oppilacio'), one should attend immediately (or 'propdana'); if not apparent, then search for symptoms amongst friends and family members who might share similar traits as these individuals do('les tieus ditz o am le ray'). The emphasis is on vigilance in relationships to prevent or address such health concerns. It implies that close personal connections can serve both a role of surveillance ('reguardament') for signs and symptoms, potentially leading early intervention
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If there is an obstruction beneath and it's related to the lips of desire (indicating sexual pleasure or dissatisfaction), then remove that blockage with your tool (implying a manual intervention). Here, "oppilacio" likely refers to some form of impediment in this context; "ciphac subtil" suggests something small and subtle causing discomfort
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	If there are pressure points on the lips of desire and you pause at these tender spots that indicate areas more susceptible to pleasure or discomfort ("amboas"), then apply gentle touch here, being mindful not to cause distress but rather aim for relaxation or heightened sensitivity. Herein lies an exploration into techniques used by medieval physicians (or healers
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should lie with her back and thighs extended as these positions may facilitate the rupture of that subtle blockage, at which point it is removed ("urbta"). In this approach to healing or alleviation of distress from a constriction (possibly referring to physical pain due to obstructed flow in medieval medical theory), one would position her comfortably and then carefully work on the lips' pressure points. This procedure might align with ancient therapies that combined massage, manipulation, and an understanding of body meridians indicative
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Use wool and oil to apply it there on the location, rubbing gently until well-absorbed by the day's end, ensuring that this place does not reopen or become unsealed ("inscis"). The healer would likely be recommending a form of poultice—a topical application used in traditional medicine to relieve pain and treat various conditions. Wool absorbs oil well, which was commonly seen as therapeutic;
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the sciatic nerve is thick and fatty, then it must be injected with either a lead or myrtle root.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If it is for flesh (i.e., meat), then suspend that one on a dish, and cut into it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Return (or return) an extensive iron rod for that dirt or soil does not solidify by lying down thereon.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And apply that salve for it during cold days as prescribed by him.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Return it is being cured by means of other therape extrications until it has been healed within itself.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some pains in the belly occur at birth of other bodies, and according to this methodology.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	May it be for apoplexy (stroke), the kind of which is not to happen in any particular part, namely head or brain where there'thy should have none such occurrence according to their beliefs and understanding.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The provided text seems like an attempt at translating from Aramaic or possibly a medieval
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	When translated line by line, the sentence appears to be in an archaic form of Hebrew or Aramaic and concerns hemorrhoids (emorroydas), which are swollen veins typically found around the rectum; "tayl" could refer to a type of tumefaction or inflammation related
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	When translated into English, the text appears to describe hemorrhoids as being appreciated for their continued persistence at these vascgyentric orifices within which blood flows continuously; and when old (ancient) hemorrhoids occur: These are important issues/conditions. Here's a more coherent translation into modern English, assuming the text is discussing medical conditions related to chronic inflammation of veins in rectal areas leading to potential or existing haemorrhoids ("emorroydas
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	The translation into English would be: And I have spoken about the different parts of those and their pillows; for some that receive care are healed (cured) by such interventions, while others do not experience recovery or improvement without proper medical attention ("care" in this context likely means appropriate treatment). The text seems to emphasize both a discussion on hemorrhoids' various aspects as well the importance of seeking and receiving adequate care for them.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	The translation into English would be: Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and their pillows (which are the congested veins within the rectum) when present but not visible or palpable, do not respond to care on their own; they require intervention for relief. This sentence highlights a common misunderstanding where conditions such as internal varicose veins may go unnoticed and thus remain inadequately treated without medical diagnosis – suggesting the need
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	When those are on which her mother is anointed and feel pain, they are those that have been healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	When you place the woman in moist and warm fabric or a rough cloth, and press those areas onto her joints, do so attentively to these spots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Return your feet into pillows for an hour, and return them afterwards in cool water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then make that which goes into digestion and excretion from milk thistle, saffron, goldenseal, and similars.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Return and apply flour of barley mixed with honey and vinegar, spread it over the two parts of him/her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanction is torn away (possibly referring to an internal condition or body part being detached), it bleeds profusely. Otherwise, attach it with two bellows and perform abrasion on its breasts (which could mean scraping/abrading a specific area related to menstruation).
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place wool and immerse that part of their colon or gallbladthy fluid, which has been cleansed and liquefied in wine; take care so as not to enter while it is being anointed inside for healing.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athys request what is necessary for strict observation, so that you insert the one I mentioned earlier in this letter.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In caring for that which has been healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The text provided seems like it could be from an ancient medical document written in a dialect that
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Based on the fragment of language you've given, which appears to blend elements reminiscent of Latin with other Romance languages like Italian and Spanish, I can
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	When examining the provided text for translation into English, here is a line-by-line interpretation:  
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already spoken about these illnesses and their properties, as well as the treatments for them in this division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	When you cut into this treatise of osteomyelitis and when you want to know how the operation is performed with iron,
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Now consider if the pain from a fracture in their womb is sharp and accompanied by knocking sounds and fever; sometimes when touched, it does not cause boils on that spot but rather needs something to help with healing while the severity of accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you make such cuts on the woman'suponendo della zampa (shoe sole), have her lie down on their own cushion and adjust their weight according to how much they push with each step, so that their thighs are spread out and placed breaks timidly along their breasts.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Here comes the line to translate: E applica la matrona secondo il diretto e dispone l'strument con cui è stata aperta (o) le procedure della madre, nella forma che ciò darà luogo.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you intend to administer this tool against the forehead of a woman'thy head and whatever enters from the instrument into her womb shall only be its tip and leader,
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the patient's flesh, then you must pause on the texture of the patient' extraneous matter to prevent the entirety of the apparatus from entering the patient's body.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When excitement appears and it is touched on the body'dictly (ma) and spreads like a lioness wet with water (leon en mo), then take care that you secure this painful area of the patient at their skull bone by means of a spinal splint.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the sickness is evacuated, then you stop in the muddy water or wet oil where there might be some secretion; and press on the limb section as directed by the mother of the patient.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause fore the mother and over the clean wool pillow immersed in water where they have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Return it is cured within two days with linen that keeps it inside, whereby it shall recover its health.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the child is inflamed in the swolthy womb and you are forbidden from their care as of now, have mercy on them for they lack what we discussed earlier regarding treatment.
Capitol .lxxv.	The given text appears to be in an old medical language influenced by Latin, Italian, Spanish
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Based on the given text and attempting to interpret it with an understanding of its linguistic roots, which seem reminiscent of a blend between Latin and regional languages such as Italian or Spanish (given that "matronas" refers to nurses in both cultures), here is my translation into modern English:
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary is that the matron observes and smells the fragrance of a woman'se natural figure at certain times for scenting air; thus being covered by this vapor, she must quickly prepare her childbirth essentials, knowing well that this part represents second nature's form—the placenta is suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you tighten those joints, it is necessary to compress the patient'thy belly so that the embryo will not come out while they are on their head; give them a second one (possibly referring to additional medicinal items), and cleanse away any excess with good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May another part of him not be natural and unbearable when he suffers on his feet and the head becomes heavy above his neck; similarly, it might also happen that it is between the chest or back (the lumbar region), where its weight lies upon one's shoulders, causing discomfort. Likewise, if this part naturally causes distress to oneself when in a fixed position—whether sitting on the ground with crossed legs and leaning forward onto one’s headrest atop their chest or back (the lumbar region), then turning that heavy weight over upon one's shoulder blade area; such parts are unbearable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary, it is for the midwife who needs to be wise and subtle about all these matters, so that she can avoid mistakes and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When showing all of their figure in those things, and by which means it is indicated for the physician therein, that they stand upon water (i.dict "aquos").
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the foot is in contact with its head naturally, it hurts a lot on that difficult part and sometimes becomes weakened; at those times, apply this poultice which women hold onto their heads (and use elsewhere), made of fenugreek seeds and hops from old mills.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Place a metal rod between your fingers and thighs near it that contains moisture within its unguent, or secure this object itself with another soaked in liquid from which there is excessive fluidity due to humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	When pressing the woman'dictum begins as she bears the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not done, then the woman must be anointed with honey and pearl powder to massage her skin.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the command to Lu (the patient), apply pressure on his belly where it' extruding is happening now; and with your mouth and nose you will observe this temporarily until we proceed further at once.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If more than their flesh is exposed at the joints due to cutting (incision), it becomes necessary that you gradually reduce those parts back together gently.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not obey the inside (medicine/treatment), then lift her up on a couch and remove her feet from undernethy, and place the cushion over it; thus ensuring that the woman will not fall due to fainting caused by medication.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the mass is not turned down and becomes soft like flesh, then you must inspect those areas immediately and remove it from under your cloth or cut away that portion where there's equality with the fetus body, as this indicates rupture (ruptura).
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of childbirth upon her feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the belly rises above their feet, you then push those downwards and make them small again; likewise for each individual leg bone, grasp one hand of it and squeeze gently until they become smaller bit by bit.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When he enters between the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make that protrusion conformable, provided if God wills it so.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no outflow of water that has been recommended to us, then return the small fetus gradually within where the second figure'gyte occurs naturally; and when this happens, it means an expulsion (birth).
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is forbidden that all the humors have been recollected, then take muscle from above and dissolved gum for treatment, beat them thoroughly in the mortar for good percussion, apply lines of this mixture to the woman' extraneous body fluid (presumably referring to menstrual flow or abnormal vaginal discharge), specifically within her womb.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Return that limb in water so you can achieve relief from indigestion (epitomizing distension of the stomach).
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When parts of it are softened and washed under the mistlethrush (likely referring to some kind of mild heat or steam treatment), apply that moisture over them, along with pausing for what is needed at each spot.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When subfumigation lasts an hour, then lift the flesh above a sharp knife and extend it outward from its mouth, taking some of that away, pressing firmly on the lower part of the patient's abdomen with a tight compression; thus they feel relieved.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eye examination of those humors in their vessels (or) bodies.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits in this manner, you engage your hands little by little; and have the woman braced on her backrest, with their feet planted firmly on the ground, placing those parts of yours over it to complete them.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Return gently upon the patient'dict abdomen, little by little, and apply what comes from his feet when they have been prepared in one of the parts allocated for that purpose at times.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the belly is not outward-projected (meaning that it's still inside or contracted), then lift up those feet and apply pressure on them forcefully, gradually increasing what you place over their hips until the belly comes into proper position between its parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Return their hands and gently guide the small child into its hole, commanding the woman to express herself within it.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Evening treatment is necessarily dependent upon one of its extremities (usually referring to a limb).
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	When it is in reduction of its mass (the patient), if you cannot reduce that yourself, then raise the woman and let her go to achieve that.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it is not possible to proceed further, then have the patient lie on their back and press down firmly on the hips of him/her with forceful blows; concurrently apply bandages made from linens which you previously recommended for leeches.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has come about, then they apply that which is necessary on the cesspit (likely referring to herbs or some form of medication), and study how to reduce swelling, shaping the fetus into its second natural figure, causing it to contract so as for entry through the birth canal.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Eye examination of the belly expanded its masses and the facial area is two fingers below the navel.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the matron holds her hand over the fetus and gently turns it little by little, this makes things easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When he has entered as much as he is able, and the pause rests on his chest with what we have applied oil and pulp woolen dressings to it.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Here comes the translation:
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the fetus prepared over the side (of the body or positioned)
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the uterus overflows according to this condition of menstruation, consider it and when you inspect the second one inside your finger where its fluid can be expelled so that there is no excess moisture left behind.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is suspended on the face and chest of him/her, then you insert that part of the embryo to prevent it from being retained or delayed in its movement.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here the text instructs as follows when translated line by line into English:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or fetuses (or multiple) is here mentioned as a possible medical condition that may need attention in this medieval text on
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Where twins are carried naturally and sometimes there may be three or four (cases), it can seem strange to see them moving around—it might indicate causes from nature that they cannot survive inside the womb. Alternatively, these could also stem from other reasons not related to natural birth circumstances.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	With these things, even if they are suppositories too large or secondary ones inserted by hand, separated for use with catheters, remove those intestines from the belly of each person in some occasions as a natural remedy during childbirth and at other times using recommended measures.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If it is difficult for them to bear their burdens and come upon us with descriptions of figures not natural, then take care of these children as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the maid is subtle and brings fluid that makes things easier and more delicate, as well as timely intervention according to how she has prepared for healing at this time, then her role contributes significantly to recovery. (Translation of each line)
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what formed within the womb and was miscarried/aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some pregnancies occur in the month of May one or two times (and up to four), and I must verify if a woman who has had five abortions experiences pain, which is caused by measurements taken by skilled individuals.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .lxxvi.	Given that this text appears as if it's mixing Latin with vernacdict from
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When a fetus dies in the womb, translate into English: "Quan el feto morc
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the deceased fetus that we've discussed in medical division and it is not outside, thus preventing external intervention; use a blanket to cover her because if she was healthy without any accidents or incidents causing potential loss of life on top. Translation: When caring for a dead fetus inside the womb (not yet born), avoid unnecessary medical procedures that might involve an operation, particularly when the female patient is in good health and hasn't experienced traumatic events leading to possible complications affecting her condition or recovery prospects.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Cover the woman lying there so that her back and legs are raised; incline the head of the bed to lift these parts gently off the ground. Translation: Raise the position of a pregnant or laboring woman, ensuring both the upper body (head) and lower limbs (legs/hips), which may be affected by painful contractions during childbirth, are elevated slightly above her base level to ease discomfort or facilitate delivery.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister (a doctor) should grasp the woman's hand or tie it to a support in place that ensures her body does not extend beyond what is necessary for fetal extraction; essentially, maintain proper posture and positioning during childbirth to facilitate safe delivery. Translation: Ensure that either by holding on to someone’s hands who can help with physical assistance or securing them as needed in the
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Apply moisture to the mother's mouth with water and honey, plus medicinal substances like aloe vera (aloe) and fennel extract, as well as sesame seeds; this may soothe her throat if it is dry or irritated. Translation: Offer relief by moistening the mother's lips with water mixed with honey for hydration
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: At suitable locations in water (which means here as a reference point for treatment): therefore consider whether the fetus is prepared that it may be placed on its head, or hold onto their hips, mouth, chest, jawline, neck, scapulae of back, or wherever else there are tender spots.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	May it be on his feet, then in the groin or between the back and shoulder blades;
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place another pillow or the third if necessary to keep it attached to the tongue and not extended beyond its limited stretch for a while only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	When gout affects the entire body, it is for that purpose (so) they will remove its symptoms as quickly as possible from their mouth/tooth area.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Where water is between them that their extension be soothed; and if any part of it remains retained, then the matron applies warm oil to their fingers and introduces these experts into this contained water thereupon revolving said water which has been retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the patient' extrusion has occurred, then they should be gently reinserted into the place where it was pushed out, and thus the entire body is returned to its proper position.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the other is dipping downward as an abscess and cannot be reduced by pressing on that area due to a cloth wrapping over it; then extract this using force until everything comes out, and incises where necessary either at the place of the mass or between the thighs.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And where you place something in both feet and the other part (which context is not fully clear due to potential language ambiguity), it can be translated as follows, assuming 'the other part' refers back to some previously mentioned body
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And where the head of the fet is large or in pain it can be adjusted with an inflated cap, which you insert between the erectile spines and penetrating into the skull to extract water; this tool takes on the forms of other instruments used herein for such purpose.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	It appears that the text is in Old Spanish with some Latin influence due to medical terminology and syntax reminiscing medieval times when multiple languages were often used interchangeably, especially within learned professions like medicine which was heavily influenced by Greek and Arabic knowledge as well:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is sick and compressed by the shoulder blade, then it has been opened inside wherein the moisture that resides in the chest has become outpoured.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and you do not fear treatment, then cut the head as far as possible according to what you can manage for yourself.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If there are bubbles in the abdomen or it is wet downwardly, then you must penetrate that which contains the moisture inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If it is about your feet, then the touch of yours (the healer) will be gentle and directed towards the mouth of the patient will also be gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the belly and chest are pressed upon you, then take out that dress which covers your body, cut it open where necessary to let water flow in those places.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May it so be that if the other members are bent and return to their head (which likely means returning them towards normal position), then when the metronome enters on the right side; may she insert her mouth into its chest area, encircle his head, and thrust in there an egg or two, throwing one after another until they enter through the patient's mouth.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted by an apastema that causes pain in her tongue, do not place it there anymore; before doing so, administer the effusion of moist fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	E apply bandages; follow up with the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If it is on the patient'se chest, then if possible use a needle (syringe): and administer that which we have mentioned for in the body alive.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, then be inserted into pillows and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	When no cause from the second sickness is lacking.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your treatment, then administer what we discussed for the care of these burns that were caused by fire from the mother (firebrand or hot surface).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you have inflamed blood flow, then send it into sharp and steady waters, and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And there has already been seen in the belly of which was born another being carried away, and on that focus is also where this other living thing resides.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Unfortunate it has happened that an ulcer on his abdomen for a long time developed into gangrene (ulcer), and within this wound there arose pus formation (pus).
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if it is necessary for healing him/her, and treatment has been given to them long ago, the child is not fully cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And when you press upon it for various reasons of strong compression applied to the body and cough up an eye (possibly referring to expectoration or a similar medical practice), place your hand on this once per day, another time on his chest; he has become too astonishing as if there is no longer any presence in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so you consider that they are bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So wrap the patient in cloths and extract their bones from their hollow abdomen using a small tool for an extended period of time; this is how you correct them.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of turning around in which she is lifted up:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how they fasten themselves when bound by a restraint, in which there are two pegs on the extremities of both feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	May this virtue be so subtle as chains and either pain or fever of elbow or shoulder blade origin.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	When the length of each piece is two cubits and a span at both ends, and its height is a handbreadth plus half a foot; here in this place are made adjustments for those pieces which have already been firmly fastened, whose lengths amount to one hand breadth plus half a foot, and their widths are two cubits or three hands.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additional measures are inserted into the mother'thy mouth so that they can be used when you turn over the provided remedies.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another appearance similar to that subtle and fluid puke:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Such pain is caused by wood or iron according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Even in the limb's extreme part two additional measures are added at a time, and the length of these adds up to one hand, while their breadth is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you wish for these jars to be opened by the maid, then make the woman stand on her tiptoes where the feet hang downward; there she will open them as much as is between the thighs of herself.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Return your hand over the tool you are using for incision as much as desired within what is acceptable according to the mother'zyme setting by the physician.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of turning out which are practiced by ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of push with which he presses the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship in which he knows his great head (or boss) - here refers to a type of relationship or bond where one individual has deep knowledge and understanding of another, particularly someone who holds
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	They assembled tweezers to which they grasp the extremity, using them repeatedly and applying certain movements like long pulls with these tools while holding onto it at where initially inserted/contained - this implies a careful handling or treatment of an object (possibly for medical purposes) by means of assembly and manipulation through forceps.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of healing few (or scarce):
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an arrow has a thorn:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of an arrow has points:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps by which your teeth hold where the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a splint has two ends at which the head is detached from:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two patients observed herein (or) Here are examined in this place for ailments.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are used and when they multiply the spices of it, then the craftsperson must put them on their dress (or) When preparing with various amounts/quantities of such spices for this purpose, apply to one'setup as needed while placing some at home.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not perform tasks with those instruments, for their necessity cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the second extraction (assuming "dextricus" was meant instead of "segundinus," which
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second fluid is retained by the womb and it causes discomfort to the child, then you must command the caretaker who retains this secretion; take appropriate measures for drainage, placing your hand firmly over their mouth and nipples if necessary. If that results in expulsion of the matter (which is good), be content with it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a hot wave and pierce through the covering in that place where the burning herb's mouth is heated with calamint and rue and chamomile and clove oil and cassia bark; apply it there while taking care of warmth.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water within the wave, and pause above the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Return breath (or air) with the trumpet inserted into the woman's mouth and draw it in to fill the hollow of her chest.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Return that joint swelling as it occurs now and observe how quickly her symptoms improve or worsen with time.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If you want this treatment and not to suffer from it, then command the maid that submerges her left hand in olive oil or in milk thistle extract, and insert that into his navel; as long as she has found the second one (the twin), place her there so tightly that even the first cannot remove them. If joined with the belly of the mother, then insert it accordingly to what we have recommended earlier, and when you find the second one, withdraw it little by little through your hand such that the mother does not notice they are being taken away strongly.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	When joints are painful at right and left sides easily and readily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	When it is adjusted in quantity of suction, as long as it follows and avoids attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother'thy mouth is constricted, we have already prepared the cautery and medical treatment with salt derived from water and herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	May if not all causes recommended have been addressed, and watch that you do so without aggrafalting over it in cycles of abstraction; but even when something comes from the mouth into the woman's thigh area, cover it with bandage and tetrapharmacotherapy. Then provide relief on cloudy days and after purification rituals.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you poise (presumably standing or sitting), the humoral condition of the patient is elevated at head and stomach, with a rise in phlegm; therefore when they are administered under fumed conditions appropriately.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May also from the ancients be fumigated under gas and dried grapes.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an object by which a woman is retained due to menstrual blood and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Such pain is of bone or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the subtle part is at rest under the chest and the large part above the navel, and the humidity that seeps out over the abdomen' extricated:
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And when that tongue is swallowed what has been taken from undernegy and repeated, so do with caution the next portion of treatment or intervention.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of curing the child'thy navel without perforation.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Much child does not pierce and penetrate through their bodies (their buttocks), which are already subtle and softened.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Now the maid who pierces that hole will come here; otherwise, she shall pierce it with a splinter and ensure that it does not touch the sinew.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place it over that wax and oil, and take care of what is inside so as not to come out.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May you fear that it is limp (implying the patient's body or part of it), then pause in the room with a catheter for several days, and start again when the child wants to move.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And you have already coated the pupil at the back of the patient'thy head for suppuration or apastema; thus when that consolidation is secured, apply therefor said remedy and lead water which we have mentioned as part of healing.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of healing for those ulcers that come about at times.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The abscesses that occur in the lower joints and large muscles, which come from behind or within one of the parts:
E es una fistula o motas.	This line translates into English as follows: "It is an opening or a lump." Here's
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	This line translates into English as follows: "When that ancient connection conduces moist and viscous yellow discharge, and some of these holes have permeations." Here'thy source sentences are from a medieval medical context where the author discusses symptoms related to joint pain potentially caused by humoral imbalances. The text uses language influenced by Latin (the scholarly tongue in those times), Italian ('il corpo'), Spanish ("en los pies", "fiebre"), and French terms,
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	This line translates into English as follows: "Those penetrations are troublesome for the fluid that is coming out and due to imbalance; some use cauterization of this effusion, while others suffer from these humors." Here we have a detailed description by medieval physicians about how certain conditions like joint pain or gout were understood. They recognize symptoms such as penetration (permeations), which could be caused by the imbalance and egression ('coming out') of fluids, termed 'humours.' The text indicates various remedies used to treat these ailments: cauterization using different materials or
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	This line translates into English as follows: "Some waters are directed within the spaces of these holes, and inside both the bladder's bowel (bladder) or womb; some also enter at the juncture of thigh muscles with entrails." Herein lies a complex description about fluids ('waters') related to various parts like vesica urinae ("urinary bladder") and uterus, as well their pathways according to medieval medical theories. The mentioning points towards diagnostic concerns or methods used by physicians at the time for understanding bodily functions linked with pregnancy among others based on humoral theory principles. This line further illustrates how they perceived fluid movements
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: When a penetrating and non-penetrating opening of an abscess enters into the belly, it is that you place your intestine therein through the hole, inserting either silk or iron filings gently into the fistula when no tendernthy dilation occurs.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that condition, they enter undernethy attempts of iron or horsehair within which you feel the attempt or hair on their thighs.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel that one of them at all or progress in any way due to constipation, indigestion, or respiratory issues, then indeed as we have said before, they are non-penetrating and your task is healing care for them.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the urethra, it means that this is what needs to be treated with the patient'dict urine from there so that the place of medicine becomes solidified/established.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May it enter the juncture of the thigh or into the bone and incite pain within its circuit, henceforthy his name is that he dares to attempt entry herein if not for a hollowness within the bone whereby entering thereupon; causing further agony upon departure from this part. He shall be immediately treated posthaste afterward; none of these remedies will suffice in such medical care, nor have they been secured by grease or wax.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those perforating wounds there is not a cure in sight, and the treatment provided by these physicians wears them out with their efforts on what remains firmly intact.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	May heal as hoped for if it is not invasive and new, provided you follow my recommendation; once started, expect improvement.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that person feels the malady escaping from their colon, then when you insert your finger into it there, do so gently to reinsert what has escaped.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel a thrust in the thigh and sense something between there that seems to be pushing through, then certainly it is penetrating; therefore do not attempt movement in or near that area as we have discussed.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May those who are sick in beds of cold water heal themselves.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If it enters inside and does not penetrate deep into the hole where you are in, between that tent (the opening) which is expected to hold meat or flesh, and there forms a fistula on its surface, then dry out the area of the wound caused by the fluid within the tract; once dried, do so at the site of the tunnel entrance. Here, through this action, you liberate it from inside the tent (the opening), allowing for healing to occur outside where limbs meet and end.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Return freshness to those veins that have been constricted with the use of an awl needle and for any reason, without causing them harm or damage.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May it happen that the flow of bile gets stuck between you and your body when those stones enter inside there; then with instruments used for pus leugierry or acute medicine, a cautery is applied to good habits: thus purification from these stones adjusted bodies, and evacuation of thickened bile secretions.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Return care for that which is wrapped in border or cause trussed within where they sit on their bed, and hereafter provide additional healing aid with wax-hard flesh preservation.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	So much healing and execution are in these remedies, when they have been restored and the patient is cured without fear of repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that the fistula has entered into the belly and is lengthened on the surface of the body; then insert the thread therein within the belly and investigate at this place.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if hundreds of people are involved in the attempt and between you and her it is movement or flesh that has been subject to invasion, at this time there will be neither operation nor procedure herein but only through trust and hope as a second way.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	La cause is to administer in it one of three methods: or that which cauterizes said wound as we have described; or that seals the space within so its cavity becomes complete for you, making insertion and treatment possible without risking piercing any contained contents, healing leukemia's willful illness therein. Or lengthen that linen and polish offensive pus inside it as we have described; or try another sharp instrument of acute extremity to crust those fistulas you can touch within the section through which treatment is possible; and with what remains, restore all in the body sealed by disease according to our description. And if poultice applied outside does not solidify it, then breaks out an uncured abscess below the buttocks, or pus will leak from there due to leukemia'se ill-will; and repair with a linen wound dressing as described hereinabove.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Here come some remedies according to this method are as follows: when you insert the thread into the fistula, it goes through the skin at the navel and along the edge of the belly button, pulling out a needle-like preparation used for treating wounds in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that faithful covering of fields or around them, and attempt to insert one'seven foot within the foreskin where it continues with his condition;
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May if it penetrates into the margin of the anus deeply inserted therein by your intromission, then extract and adjust each end of that foreign object; initially apply for one day or two as needed until you can insert the extracted part back into the body where those flesh parts between the ends of the instrument are located.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Return care until it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	May it be that the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, in any way you prepare, but rather for its healing so as to prevent falling illness (febrile sepsis), and thus perform therein what will restore health.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	La form of spine pricks here is what causes the fistula: its curvature makes it sharp and the other division does not make it sharp, therefore there'thy need for cautery may be occasionally required.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From the seam of hemorrhoids in which blood flows within that area.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "Suffer from diarrhea for two days, either between the buttocks as if it were bread made of fatty meats, or these are likely carbohthylic in nature.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	From those small and large ones that the sanctus cor (heart) pumps out during these times (periods), which is one in number and whose motionals are outside of the body cavity—and on their limbs' extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Whenever there is little moisture in the air and water flows out as a yellowish or light brown discharge from under the skin, according to its color, this follows within days (or during these few dry periods).
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And for the treatment of that which you have inserted into the colon, it is necessary to command the malady (illness) to settle down and come out within where it enters the bowels and abscesses appear before your eyes.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Now you bite and press with your teeth on that which covers your nails, and position those fingers over the areas of their reasons, so doing:
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May it not be tightened in those places due to their moisture and softness, then take a rough wool cloth or linen rag, and press these areas with such fabrics; sprinkle some ash dust onto the spots for caution before cauterizing them according to what precedes in the act of cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Return those for care within which they have been healed or treated already; that is where attention should be directed towards them now. (This line suggests focusing on the areas of treatment previously mentioned, indicating a continuation of car
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the navel does not obey excretion, it is considered to have ascites within which there may be slight biting (indicating pain or discomfort), and wash in that water present in the bowels when they begin their expulsion process related to this condition. This line suggests a treatment method involving cleansing with bodily fluids from where an excessive accumulation of fluid, possibly due to ascites as mentioned earlier, is observed within the navel area which may cause discomfort requiring management or removal (express).
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If their ulcers are exposed on the buttock, then it is due to humidity and heat; therefore take hold of those areas with your unguent or wax, apply them therein, insert into these places what we have said here that they should be healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	Here is the translation line by line:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When all is required, and only that specific one not touched on by it allows the excess of the sanctus (healthy) heart to flow from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	1. And place your hand over the belly, dipped in oil or cloth; and put that hand on the colon and command the humors to stop.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Return that which is within the box; and when it has been expelled, take care of those inside with oil or another form of internal medicine to heal them therein.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of treating hernias (Note: The provided text seems related more closely to conditions like joint
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Regarding the treatment of wounds, they occur due to drying out or because of a natural formation (Note: This translation assumes "accideys" means 'heal' and interprets medical conditions likewise): When healing from injuries occurs either through ev
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 When they are ancient and no longer effective in that medicine of yours, then you must make holes with spatula or apply your own grease within which the pus has come up from below (assuming 'puncta de spatum' refers to making small punctures for drainage), preventing further consolidation; and take care of those that have already solidified.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When you hold those strong rubs that entered first and made them scorched, now make sure to put those inside so they can heal up properly.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of joint pain treatment, this is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You understand that bleeding is not closed (it's open), and you may not notice the return of blood flow according to the color of the patient’se skin at the site of injury, which occurs throughout the body with a focus on the joints of the legs and feet, hence it might be necessary for an amulet.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And when the fluid that has entered is located in the joint space or within bursae and needs to be removed from its location due to inflammation of the area, take care of it accordingly.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, then burn the second one that precedes in his head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May small ulcers sharply punctured on the surface of the body come and recur frequently in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	Care for him that extends and inserts it therein or what you newly insert into the place of which box is faithful or within where one resides - hold firmly with hands loyal to them.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, then burn it as we have mentioned before, at the focus or in urgent medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now it has been removed from inside and outside with the same tool that you directed earlier.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May a small or tubular-like ant crawl on the surface of the body and when it bites that part, pain is felt throughout the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Care for him involves taking a catheter or loop of wire and inserting it firmly into the body cavity that holds it within the loop'setup; you then rotate your hand over the area to maintain position, insert another part inside as needed on his legs/chest while holding hands.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make a hole in an ear of ivy or iron according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to cauterize the insect as mentioned in the process of cauterization in the capital area, do so accordingly with the method described for atherey (likely referring to treatment related to artery or blood vessel issues).
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In form of the instruments we administer anointment (or apply ointments).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times it is joint pain from silver or lead ingots used for bathing or mallet use; and some times it comes from these small instruments that are administered to them, particularly when they serve in the care of young children – those who suffer such pains have little ones.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of corrosive grain and scarce:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the catheter below is large according to this method, and it's attached there with intervals as before.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	E the extremity of him has been lifted up, which is deaf to the lion and subtle; in one side there are two disruthy things, on the other shoulder a single trauma, and its size corresponds with the ugliness of rays and he's placed it larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is in the bag where their potions of swine'dictorium or sheep pee are paused and his hand is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	When a stone has been moved due to disordered movements, and the space between them is where its large body exists:
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If medicine forces it out (the illness), withdraw as much as possible with the tongue; and if one sleeps through it for a whole night, perhaps they will recover in health that day.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you tighten that in the abdomen and hollow of the eye, then repeat the use of cautery within until healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is bleeding or fistulas in the anus (belly bottom), then let the dripping be beneath the cloth and of those knives which are used by surgeons for cutting, use them to seal it off.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of treating diseases or illnesses (The translation is a general interpretation since "curacio
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	Of treating diseases where it is appropriate for the free choice (and you decide what treatment and remedies according to compatibility). This line suggests that in medieval times, some aspects of medical practice could be left up to personal discretion by a physician or healer, taking into account which treatments would best suit an individual's condition.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it is said that pains are diverse depending on where they occur and how they present themselves when pressed with a spatula (cazzo).
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the humors present in the body' extran locations such as on top of the head/skull (cap), chest (col), back (pietz), abdomen (ventre), waist (fitge), and appear similar to those within the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	Even when recommending treatments for some illnesses, they pause that consideration and rule over the other diseases as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	When you are dining on simple diseases of the head and remember that complex ones will come to dinner at the third capital (referring perhaps to a feast or gathering in which more serious illnesses might be discussed),
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So when there is simple pain in the head that is not a fracture, consider: if it's due to stones or phantom (implying misplaced belief about cause), then press and massage the occiput as soon as possible; and extract from above according to the amount of fluid accumulation present if there are no contraindications for aspiration, mostly when such is swelling caused by pus.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	When there is a flawbution in the contrary parts of the injured area, and you must watch out for excess bloat (bloating) from food and drinks heavy to digest.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If any cause of meticulous examination is forbidden, it becomes less urgent to consume food and not approach meat or drinks.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When applying poultice over the patient'supra (above), if you apply an abscess compress with oil or wine in which it is steadied (fixed), then:
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If it is certain that the patient has suffered from apoplectic (referring to stroke or severe headache), then pause over the ground, if recently fell and their air has not yet changed what was recommended for small wounds – hold your hand on top of them.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed and it is wet within where they are covered with wax (likely referring to a treatment involving covering or bandaging), then pause there until healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May it be if the child is large or due to insufficient space and appearance, and their lips are not properly adjusted with forceps as recommended for their stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May it be discovered that the child has parts of bone and pen exposed, but not restrained by him; thus insist on those areas with medicine to restore flesh back into its proper place within the body, and command the malady (the illness) in which they crave forbs such as heads and forms of cough herbs, ensuring it is concocted.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If decay is present in the spine and does not adhere to the bone, then you will incise all this putrefied matter and draw out the fluid with care.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases the artery or vein from which blood flows is not cut off by medicine, then you should examine that vessel; and if it has been torn but not severed completely, incise into that very same with a sponge or lia (a ligature), until such time as what we have said does not cause discomfort. If the wound needs to be provoked for treatment purposes, then cauterize within the vessel where it has been cut off.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pains are simple and small, then their cause is chilliness; therefore, take powder over those places until the air changes them thereafter.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When any one makes self-catheterization alone without being in your presence and with sanctioned lime or sulfur,
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now this operation takes place on the large swellings when it is decided that they should be stopped and stretched out, these swellings whose air has not changed since their formation.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has been altered, and especially in summer time, you may not understand its position here, but take care of those dripping substances we have mentioned earlier; cease pouring these excess oils or honey-water into them, where they leak out upon their surfaces. And make sure that all such liquids are stopped while the cure is taking place inside them.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If bone breaks are dealt with mud or clay and it is small, then extract the matter through motion (gesture).
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When directing the care of skull fractures caused by poison (envenimer), here is the translation line by line into English:
De las plaguas del col.	From diseases of the colon
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If you find pain in the chest of a child (the term "plagna" here refers to a small patient or child), it is not different in medicine and between the neck when simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May it be that the nerve of the colon or artery is inspected and if so, it's not in their body but rather to avoid its own care at home with strong stoicism, as when they feel sickness and resemblance similar to worms within them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	No causes any fear without the humors being hot and circulating throughout the body, which is placed in the head by itself; this substance constitutes all of the limbs.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If water is needed for the treatment of folk remedies, take some warm or cold water as desired, and apply poultices made from herbs/minerals according to this methodology; also use oil (rosary) when bathing with water along with other stones, applying heat during baths and using ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the child is large, administer stitches or clamp down their lips, and take care that these are applied until they heal.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	May it be that if there is depth or pain in the lower part of the body'dictory (which could mean womb), then pierce through it at this place using a metgeught (metge, which refers to an old English physician).
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the patient there is an inserted artery and blood flow has been obtained, then separate or dry out that particular one if necessary; otherwise apply cautery to it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May you have already inserted the vertebrae of the collarbone or all, and thus saved the veins in the neck; do not touch that area with your lips as sewn on the collarbone'dictum (presumably a suture), without disturbing its natural shape. Tighten it through straining so applied to figure out naturally, leaving it for days until healing occurs within which points of stitches and inflammation have been addressed; further care is provided in these areas where sewing has occurred.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May if the child already has pain in their bones, then you will strike that area; and if there are fragments of bone within them, remove all those pieces which you can from them; but if it is not possible for you to do so internally, let water enter where the child feels discomfort, causing swelling to subside and separation (of fractured parts) facilitated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the child is freshly born today and powder should be applied on that which has been recommended, then apply it there as well.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	May it be that if there is an opening in the patient (plagiar), then take care of that which will remember to come back into its own cavity, as directed by itself at its head (seat or origin).
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From pains of the chest or phantom-like when it feels between the shoulders and is felt in the space between the ribs, at the back, shoulder blade, collarbone, breastbone, or around the neck.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of lance or cottle, and sometimes the depth, then pay attention if from the mud comes windy breathing when the bladder fills up; you know that the clay (mud) is lifeless.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If there is no depth and the patient's humors are recently released in their abdomen, then stop them immediately after the first hour of morning ointment application, so that none of the humor remains deep within the body cavity and returns to the chest where it aggravathe malignancy; may you pause with oil-attracted bandages thereafter for daily care.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the unguent (ointment/salve) is not at your disposal, then rest in the bath with water drawn from where creatures live for that which comes out of moisture; and make sure that gout (the condition being treated - possibly edema or swelling associated with joint pain like arthritis) lies on the ground so as to allow fluid movement within it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May you have passed three days or more without spasm in the abdomen nor fever, tremor of a bad heart, and constipation, and if so, take the other good things available to you; then care for that which is healed within it.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is allowed to proceed and has been ongoing at all times, then you will understand that a fistula (a hole or abnormal connection between two body parts) has formed; therefore attend to this with your own knowledge as best you can.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the swelling is due to opening of a space or incision, and it's simple on the surface of the skin or back, then treat that with water previously used for stitching if large (sutures), or powder if small (stitches).
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May there be pain in the bone already, and your intestines are distended (enlarged), if they have separated from each other; then use forceps to extract those contents gently.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them be released that the vermin may escape from their lodging (extraction).
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	From other accidents affecting the rest of the body, health is restored by what we have here described as water (or humors).
De las plaguas del ventre.	From intestinal diseases/disturbances.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomgy that you experience in your belly is great, little, or wandering.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great many experiences it is that bone or nerve of theirs has been touched, so they feel a strong and subtle insertion from them, which refers to the sensation caused by direct manipulation or contact with these structures (bone/nerve). Here'dict "la gran alcunas veguadas" suggests accumulated incidents where bone or nerve was affected. The phrase further explains that such actions lead patients to feel a distinctly intense and delicate presence, which could relate both physically
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A minor disruption is felt as a result of another's carelessness; they find it hard to reduce them unless you withdraw the intervention from their place, for when our touch becomes involved, movement thereof turns difficult. Here 'disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra,' translates as a minor disruption is felt due to someone else's negligence; and it implies that correcting or resolving the issue ('reduccio de lor') becomes challenging if not for removing our involvement, which might further complicate things (as indicated by 'engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil').
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And so the best interruption would be here, as it is difficult in these areas described previously with regards to their reduction (of a hernia).
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	E understand that the abdomen' extrication is performed by four kinds of methods; if there are needle stitches needed, they can be common as for other diseases on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other stitches communicate with each other and possibly also directly within the abdominal stitch itself.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	When you recommend this one thing for examination and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So when the child is small and suffers from some cause of hernia, it's difficult to reduce that, either because of its diminutive size or due to inflation caused by cold air:
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	When water comes in, then when you cut that which is submerged beneath a wet cloth alone or squeezing into the water with squinted eyes and cyperum, pepper, and pads are placed within where inflammation can be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And when dipping in such a way that there is sufficient contact with the wound, it is better than water alone for healing inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation is resolved, then moisten the intestine in the water where it was swollen and painful; thus are we able to relieve its discomfort due to a little cause (presumably an injury or illness).
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If there is an escape of the humor from this treatment, then divide it into small pieces using a tool to which pus has been applied (emphysectomy).
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The initial sentence translates as follows in English line by line:
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of that tool, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one sharp turn of the bone, and the other not acute, and the subtlety which is neither in the thinness nor thickness of its shaft – these are both blunt ends (angles).
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	So when the patient' extruded a bulge and it comes out of its place, then reduce it to its natural shape in its own location if possible on top of that, which is better for them.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	May when the disruption is wide and in the lower abdomen area where you have made the hernia protrude on its two sides, take hold of your patient's waist with both hands; if it is below the belly region, press down their head and shoulders using cushions placed under them.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Here comes the first source sentence: If disruption is in one of the parts of the belly, then pause your understanding and consideration immediately so that whatever lives inside can be set free without delay.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And when you apply treatment for these large and painful pus formations,
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small pains, take what you have prepared for it, and make the minister between your own fingers, which holds the entire disruption in its mouth and adjusts the lips of him/herself accordingly, as well as tends to any suture that has caused this issue from other causes.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	Here's the translation line by line:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E sian las agulhas migieran entre groceza y subtileza, qué les agujas suaves mueven la carne; y las gruesas son difíciles de introducir en el codo, por lo cual es necesario que se muevan hacia la delicadez e grosura.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And where the needle is not fixed in any of the patient'thy extremities as provided, so that the flesh does not tear apart and filth does not accumulate before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not let them be extended with stitches so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Might the second stitch be considered common: and it is that you gently apply a stitch to the four extremities (hands/feet), from the navel downwards, using an awl as needle with finesse and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has entered these four extremities, reduce the needle of that portion from which you are taking it out, to ensure that the wound'dictum ascends into its divided part below and thus make suture with cloth as usual drape layer above so tightly.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When there is a pause between any stitch of the said body part' extranous size (thickness), it implies that adjustments or additional work might be needed on this area during treatment, considering its thickness
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This indicates that a specific amount has been used for the stitching of said body part and suggests attention to detail in
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	This line indicates that there was a suture made by hand where the patient had previously been grazed inside their belly, which involved blood greater than half of an adult palm in size and required intervention from various bulls (possibly referring to medical personnel or instruments) within two hands' reach. Moreover, it describes reducing what has accumulated there for a period equivalent to 24 hours under this treatment approach.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And when the child is solidified in these spaces within fourteen days or thereabouts, and healed for that wound, apply pressure with movement to prevent recurrence over time; his disposition will be corrected as a result.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E the other doctors had not healed him; and by some miracle of fire, which neither oil nor any medicine could treat that ailment in its place where it was located, perhaps they cured two visits per day with honey-infused water poured into the focus for as long as the flame remained lit.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two types of stitches according to what is narrated in Paraylok.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	When you begin with stitching of the neck, and insert the needle from the cut flesh into the cut sides.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle enters into the cleft and through that opening, it goes down entirely along all of one's body; take hold on the extreme end where you have inserted the needle; then insert the other needle from part to part in the opposite extremity of my flesh.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have felt that penetration, then make another penetration in the extreme end of this limb from where it started to here; and withdraw the extraspinal portion present therein now, and insert the needle into its other extremity back here.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When it is necessary for your instrument to enter the body, so that everything enters into the cavity at its extreme end wherein you are within which all things will go in:
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	E begins at this side of the body and takes that away from there, reaching into the other cheek's crevice, cutting with the needle in the navel which penetrates, taking it back to that same place inside the belly button, removing whatever is part of you (as indicated by "es"). Then cut what remains at this location within your body.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And make an application and another, and apply one of them within what you are doing so that it may restore as much as possible according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum total of this suture technique is that you sew the skin with a thread on which you sew the hairs, ensuring to stitch along the part of the extremity'thy (patient) leg where arises pain, leaving another stitch in place until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second species of suture that Gualia dictates and recommends through speech is for you to sew together this intermediate size wound as treated by healers here; so all parts are joined in accordance with nature, applying another limb'seam from one part attached thereto, matching it with the corresponding extremity of like attachments on other body areas. This should be done following Gualia's recommendations for optimal results:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Where you keep the needle at your appointed place on the divided part, and make that enter into the divided part therein, and turn over both ends of the catheter; then rotate the needle so that it enters the divided part through both extremities of the catheter.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Here the swolthy joints are revolved, and cold humors enter into each division between parts inside as opposed to those on the contrary sides of the body in both limbs that are observed hereinabove.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This surgical thread is better than the common ligature used herein, and it has a memory of past procedures as well.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the discourse of Guaya
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if you have made the stitches of the abdomen with two needles so that they can enter into these four places, and begin to introduce your inserted needle accordingly in accordance with those sutures by which their chests are tied together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When you understand that a disturbance occurs in the abdominal area of the womb (uterus), then its repair is more difficult than at other locations within the womb.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May the game of medicine for fools be judgment among other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is when you continue the plague recently contracted from their sickness above while returning the intestine and hernia to its cavity, stopping them appropriately over that corporeal dust they have caught on themselves, so as not to spread it further:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has altered the humidity, then rest upon that cloth where you presently are entering and make hard leather shoes for the fields; they shall become strong as remedies for other diseases within which one is healed at this time.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	May you not have the medicines present with you at this moment; place them where just now they were put for today'dictation to start, and continue their use until healed as instructed by you—so that no other medicine is needed when these plagues become simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the vermin will communicate in injury to the primary members, then when you submerge wool in oil of mellow quality or vinegar-like liquid, pause it within the spaces between the joints and around the limbs' sections where tendons are located.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, they will continually come back into the cavity you have inside yourself; and if an obstruction has reached its point within that space and causes itching with black excretions from it (which means a severe abscess), then:
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	When you know that what is in the large intestine (big bowel) heals quickly, it means that what is inside the small intestines also heals quickly.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult for the budge (hernia) that which it calls "gon" to receive healing from outside help due to:
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what comes out of the dirt is silk (silkworm cocoons), then you will obtain that new one quickly after reducing those bandages on which it rests.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If space has been passed and black or darkened substance (likely referring to blood clots) is present in the area where it'se darkened, then press down firmly on that spot with your faithful hand, so that the flow of sanctus fluid through veins and arteries can be expelled.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember when you have inflammation in the intestine (budel).
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When bleeding occurs in the intestine and is slighted, it may be restored with cold homes for so long as that which was causing pain inside its cavity – a worm residing there since percussion of the belly and wind movement (possibly indicating gas or bloating) – an ancient parasite infected by fistula.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Now apply the treatment to him and it may cease subtly that which is inside his body where health is being restored and the location becomes solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And you have already secured the location firmly; press over the malady that intrudes into it in your belly; and as long as such misfortune accident does not escape from its dispositions of food intake and drink, place between bathing and exercise activities.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And experienced practitioners who when the patient encounthy in the intestine or hernia are called to intervene: take large swabs of clean cloth; adjust the lips of the affected individual with these and pause a piece from those that protrude outside their mouth, so as you grip it tightly, separate its head without dissolving.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Return your pace or another body part as the first priority, and do not cease doing so until you have formed one more as required by the entirety of the patient'thy mass.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Reduce that and return it to its place, within the belly wherein the belly itself is healed; do not harm any aspect of the malady for good health's sake.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	Here comes the translation of this source sentence:
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This injury requires stitching as a secondary means of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	May it be that the child is large and wide, primarily if within one of the delicate intestines, then they are not ill but rather a minor condition which cannot cure itself entirely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of treatment for ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You understand that when all the young and apostomes become infirm and waxed without consolidation or healing over time in any part of the body, universally a fistula is formed; thus we call it this abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	When it is in a liquid state and drips like water, and then the fluidity decreases within several hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some moisture is moved here, and it's scant, dense, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And have shown all those causes and their symptoms are under medical treatment in the division/section.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And when you know the treatment of an opening caused by surgery, which is due through operation itself.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	E understand that fistulas occur in all body members, and those are the ones leading to major veins and arteries, or nerves, spinal column, bladder, any of the backbones' facet joints created by composition between ma (belly) and pe (chest), as well as other composite junctures; these contribute to proximity attraction towards the main limbs and their likenesses.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	So that which of these ulcers from this illness is difficult to heal and does not receive care, it takes up labor and ignorance for itself.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any depth to the fistula that does not reach these places mentioned herein and you wait and hope for its healing while desiring knowledge of it, then take an attempt with iron or silver tools, and if the fistula has been straightened out afterwards, inquire about this within yourself.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that subtle lead beneath your body'thy limb shall be lifted and straightened out due to its own elevation for correction of this curvature.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there is an obstruction causing horror in it (referring to something like a blockage or abscess), then it'dict not within your possibility that you could attempt on top of it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Now apply the poultice on his body using these ointments; through which moisture you use for catheterization, it will pass to other such medicines and from them flow outwardly.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have stood over all those causes and seen them as stitched or located in an area near the joint (or fistula), close to where bones meet, nerves are found, arteries flow, veins course, or any of these places that belong to you and which I tell you about:
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it is time as directed by its nature (the patient), dry out the fistula following those instructions; hold back what flows in that filtration area and any decayed or corrupted parts of the body'dict, which may include flesh from organs/meat pieces and similars. Treat this while it is healing within itself.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	May it be that the fistula is deep and secondarily sealed, then cover what you can within its depth as quickly as possible; purify all of their corrupt flesh with wrapped medicinal pills, administer those inside the cavity of the fistula (which you have understood), for:
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	When it is necessary at times for the medicine to act within a few days, so that all the humors which are broken down in the cavity of the fistulous ulcer can be removed by acute treatment.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Return that which is within in wax or similar substances, for they generate healthy flesh inside while it heals.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this remedy, then apply a second application of cautery on that part where we have applied previously.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	May it be that the cause of fistula is bone or must you certify this, then inquire about that and dry it according to what we have recommended; if you do not prohibit any cause related to vein or nerve or major limb ailment as we've mentioned.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	May it be that your bones have been discovered and there is some decay or blackness within, then take care of that which contains the corruption completely; attend also to this liquid (bodily humors) contained within so that it may become whole again.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and beneficial as before to take the elixir (medicine), then you understand that you have not yet reached the complete eradication of corruption; hence observe closely and meticulously perform the action on yourself, restoring what has been lost at last.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, you eat; but if not, then understand that the corruption is deep within the body and has not been resolved yet, so take action to address it there as well.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bones are decayed or can be pulled apart, then it is within your power to pull them out using delicate forceps, which I have agreed upon for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If there is a stone in the bones, you must extract all of them carefully without any cause from weakening your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May if any contrary cause of the fluids exists, and within their understanding there is no fear or mistake; here you will inspect those ligaments or bones that are present in this place, and separate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared with the bones of your hour (hips), then place it on the ground that moistens the ground whereon rests those very same bones, and ensure that this wetting does not solidify but is maintained for mending; also secure what has been set in position during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having feared them (potentially referring to the patient), pause over it submerged in so much oil above or under Egyptian linen or any of their wax wrappings when they tighten those bands and ligaments, which separate from them, and thus are drawn away by these attractions.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	May it be that the great bone (os magnum) joins with those of the knees or hips/thighs like them and if from there you have ruined your face to such an extent, then only for as long as necessary does this thing rest inside until its blackness and corruption are removed completely. And once that is done restore health (restaura plagia).
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the substance from within (perhaps indicating an infection or foreign material) has caused a great part of it to be spoiled and even reached the bone marrow, then this damage is necessary for closure; thus we must bring that which was corrupted inside out completely into its designated place where contamination occurred, so as to cure what's brought back there.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	E you recommend that they go into the patient'se thighs so as to ease and assist with your work.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of age xxx years old experiences pain in his groin, and the mucous material from the discharging parts enters into it, making its own putrefaction as severe decay (apostema), without external cause at this location.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And when the fever spreads because of errors made by doctors within it, and harmful materials are introduced into him/her, their healing focus is maintained until a fistulaous focus appears; there will be pus formations in these lesions where they previously applied poultices and moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many years of treatment by doctors and not in their blood but within the arts, he was called back to health.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And now, they put on his cushion and materials that flow through it all over him; even then, the body of this man was entirely covered and its color was lemon.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then insert the attempt into one of those instruments, and guide it downward until it reaches the mouth of the instrument.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	In preparation and examination, quickly inspect those instruments and place them with all parts of the wax for thoroughness.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And now you have cut and incised into one of the bones within which I had disarticulated it, and also corrupted that joint, already rotten and decayed; moreover, this damage has affected part of the cartilage inside where something penetrated.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Adorn you shall receive what I have discovered and prepared from bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And when it was not in the bone but that very corruption which had descended and been welded together, there already existed a fracture or breakage.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And place restraint for the patient' extrication with medicine that is meant to be binding over long periods of time; it has not been bound yet.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	In accordance with your request for translation from the medieval medical treatise style into modern English:
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	When that which appears before me of this decay has been properly performed with gentle care and restoration for it is not restored yet.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And now you discover another wound and carefully insert the bone piece by piece in particulars, proceeding with healing the rest of it until inserted entirely within an outstretched hand's span, removing that which is inside its marrow; restore this extracted part using medicine, thereby consolidating ligaments and overall health.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	Not necessary repetition in the operation of limbs and joints, but for the disposition of body fluids and tolerance reduction to pain and fear of death; for the patient is accustomed throughout all hours due to excessive evacuation during syncopal illnesses.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it heals entirely, and nothing remains in the hard bone; good is its disposition within its body, and returns to vitality; conversed among themselves without causing disruption during walking or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone protrudes in the joint and you see it swolthy (enlarged), then take that second action according to this manner: grasp with a ligament and stretch it at the extremity of that prominent bone, commanding an assistant to extend it further; use a thick wool thread from the first one used for tying. Fasten this thicker thread over the flesh where you want to cut (surgical incision), extending beyond its edge so as not to tear the flesh when sawing through.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When you press with a sword or tabletop on the face when it'se allowed not to cut off the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And if the wound has been little by little eroded at this location, and it does not appear in the state of bone decay until now; furthermore, other instruments have also served here before.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decayed and not exposed, it is one continuous division, and rot occurs in either place or at that location; if there's delay (in treatment), fix all parts of the body entirely; apply cautery with haste from where the corruption begins – this wastage. Also ensure to have a blade ready for when part two emerges as continuation, and maintain it accordingly until such time comes again that continues onward another piecewise (corrupted section).
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	When a small screw is in place at the location of the corruption, as we have said before.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and saw off where it connects to other parts of the body.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If decay is in the continuous flow of joints, it'thy not due to reason but by design (or perhaps a flaw or malformation).
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or the breastbone, it's difficult; however, if you seek out and find where the corruption appears on your body, and remove that portion according to any possible method available to you, then rectify this issue for yourself as long as it does not lead against your will (or bend a nerve).
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Here you understand the tools and instruments used for these bones are determined by their situation (location), shape, size, subtlety, magnitude, finness, hardness, and rarity; so that whatever preparation is made for all types of surgical procedures will be appropriate.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You understand that this operation concerns the specificity of the instrument with which you are familiar; when it comes to your extensive knowledge and experience in handling these instruments, as well as witnessing treatments for illnesses, then you already possess what is necessary for its use concerning medical tools. (Translation into English line by line:
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you have formed in the body of this chapter the number of tools that will be used for your procedure, which experience you will undergo on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw (Assuming "forma" refers to shape or form,
Forma de autra serra:	Shape/Type of other saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of other instrument:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of other instrument large:
Forma de ray:	From your phrasing it seems like you are presenting an excer
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The top of this beam is shaped like the star's lid (cap), and its points follow the pattern of an astrolabe'dictor or compass needle ('puntzeig'). Here, it seems that a physical object—possibly some form of instrument used for navigation or astronomy—is being described. The comparison to celestial bodies ("star"s lids) and precise
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	Instead of conventionally addressing them (possibly referring to a medical or anatomical context), it is advised that they be scraped against the joints when corrupted ("soffitten"), or their mouth being wide open ('gran bocca'). The text suggests treatment methods for specific conditions, likely relating to bodily disruptions such as gout. Here 'cor
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form of this larger instrument differs from the others; it could refer to a particular type or style within
Forma de razori menor:	Regarding its shape, contrasts with smaller instruments used here. This distinction might pertain
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of this instrument—potentially a tool for medical treatment or bodily examination as
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of this instrument is like a saw made from star metal ('lu'), with the sharpness reminiscent of iron; its member parts are designed as though for cutting or dissecting—perhaps even surgery (the 'member's knife'). Here, there may be tools being described that have specific shapes and purposes within medical practice. The use of metaphorical language ("star metal") alongside a practical application suggests an advanced understanding by the medieval practitioner(s) who utilized
Forma de lu:	Shape or form in reference here—possibly describes this particular
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of which also has a concave feature; perhaps indicating that the tool is designed for grinding, scraping, or cutting with
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of delicate scraping tool:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of other curved limb instrumentation:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small knife-like appearance for attempting restraint or treatment:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of instruments with which bones are set or fixed within:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of other instruments or devices smaller in size:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of another instrument; this resembles a blade, and the tip is cut into bone-like structures, displayed in joint spaces within the skeleton.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of thrust that corresponds with the depth at which bones are pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The limb of him is triangular and acute in nature.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is iron from India, and somewhat similar as all the causes that have been mentioned regarding razors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the joints of the limbs and bone interlockings.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are swolthy or due to internal/external causes, or if the treatment of that defect by these medicines does not alleviate it, and at times the disease goes beyond a limb without being struck by any cause; hence you must insert this limb into water so that humors can escape from there, thus avoiding its decay due to death or malice (greater harm than damage).
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "The name of that person, it is because their limb has become black inside where he was beaten by fire, or if you rubbed into him the darkness within where his punishment occurred in that member which he occupied and from which he expelled all parts; therefore, this knowledge will come to your insight.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If it is due to the disturbance of some causes, like poison from sea serpents or worms and various poisons as well, so bears similarity (meaning here refers back to joint pain caused by cold humors).
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or inflammation is in the part mentioned here, then you will incise it and not give space for corruption to enter into its cavity.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you approach the area, then cut that which lies within the fire'thy focus, and do not give space for decay inside where smoke enters through the brazier flame.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that occurs within the armpit at the joint, then insert your arm into the fold of the shoulder therein.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another passage occurs and I send the hernia again, that will be the death of the malady; to administer for this other cause is a matter of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When the appearance of pain in the leg deteriorates it, then you should investigate that within one of its joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you ascend up the leg, then cut through the entire length of the leg.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If you enter into the dance hall, then slide your cushion inside at the joint of the thigh.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If decay has already reached the sinew (denoul), it is not incurable but rather an expulsion from life, and thus remove the malady (gout) to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	When the movement of inserting or cutting the limb is that you tighten the band at the joint where it will be inserted, and another band over the place, extending the minister' extraneous bands on both sides until all the flesh between them becomes exposed; separate the meat which lies between two sinews within so they can come out completely.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When cloth is placed over all parts of the body so that it does not touch its location and allows for healing at the site of injury with applied poultice (adhesive bandage),
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	May you stop the flow of blood when working on it surgically or pause some remaining particles that restrict blood, and return to your medicine inside before it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Return its injured limb to the ligaments at the joints and take care of it so that it heals properly.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you recommend to him that which comes into his body through the foot, this medicine he has chosen himself by your recommendation, which occurs in his foot due to rust and overheating accumulated from fire use.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	When that disorder occurs within your body initially in your thighs and you need to manage it entirely on your own legs, here we go with the entire leg for care.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that home prepares for the patients to go towards their limb where they are suffering from pain and hardness of body, insert into the joint, and heal begins therein.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Once there occurred in him that physician's mistake herein indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And now it comes to me, and I am forced to reflect upon that excessive water which has been retained over the body of my medicine; restore cleanliness to his world (the patient's), so this surplus is not repercussed elsewhere in the same way.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When he is lifted from me, returns to his land and reaches back that this man has prepared everything whole for himself and becomes healthy again.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	Not only has this account not been made to aid with the things that come from this illness, but it also serves as a symbol and indication of what is meant by it, following which its treatment will be conducted accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of care for the navel and the quality of enema administration with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscess is present in the patient's carbuncles and the space of the abscess extends until it forms a collection of disease, then you break open and perforate it; treat the disease within the wound with what was previously used as dressing material (like gauze), place your hand over this area to prevent any further extrusion by intestine or hernia. You have not reached any deterioration in bone or nerves/ligaments, and there is no fistula formation; you apply pressure gently without causing harm to the skin or nervous system, as it was previously dressed with a fine cloth (drap).
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Even if spaces are extended within which the decay affects any part of the body, at that point it is called a fistula and cannot return to its original state.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the bowels will stick and that this disruption has not occurred due to any previous action, then when there is pressure on the belly, attend immediately with a cleansing enema (cleanse).
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Here comes the translation:
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Extract and return that which has come out, and let it flow for so many days until the curve is purified and the modesty restored.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Here are the translations for each line of your medieval medical treatise:
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the ulcer does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ashes of charcoal water, then cleanse that with warm water and honey mixed together three times over (and again), also using wine and honey mixed three times in like manner; for it is because of the property of honey to purify and wash away, soaking becomes adherent. And most when saturation has been overcome by moisture and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	When you have taken a few baths and find that the swelling has increased in your limbs, then perform an enema to expel what makes the body sick from within there.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And when latches of oil dissolve that which has become hard and stuck, or you administer some medicine and oils they have properties already used in their intestinal treatments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the opening of the sinus where not received the catheter for the enema, then gradually increase that small amount thereof, and pause in a wrap covered with Egyptian or beeswax-based ointment within which it is increased until fully administered.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the catheter is sufficient in size, then you should attach a mouthpiece and insert it until the amount inserted reaches within the scope of the suppository'dictated by its administration.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the patient'thy fluid in which his limbs flow is elevated above where it resides within him so that his legs can only move downward, when his limbs are compressed by the curve of the body (which gives birth to flesh), then this occurs because:
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to drain the sinus within the patient'dict skeleton according to your will, then you pierce and prepare that limb for retraction as per your arrangement; ensuring there are no causes of obstruction in this movement.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take prolonged restorative remedies that are suitable for the location where they wish to extend those affecting their clothes.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Here comes the first source sentence translated into English line by line:
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that person who is on the bedchamber (bed), which relaxes him throughout the day such that any moisture brought into his body from undernethy, being adjusted in his chest area.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	In order that you may know whether what passes from beneath your legs is moving or still and indigested (not being properly broken down), do so accordingly:
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	When you have considered the location of that swelling, whether it causes pain in the patient or not, and if there is an abscess present.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical intervention is prolonged in this manner, and the material that adheres to the orifice of the sinus sticks on, becoming attachment, then you must take off (or change) the cloth for it every day, and when changing the cloth, renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be from the sinus that allows spaces for subtle viruses to pass through; do not despair of his adherence because healing will occur in those places where delayed development of flesh occurs, and on which you have previously imposed disadvantage or opposition.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the belly swells up due to excess gas and remains for days inhaled by breathing, you understand that the belly does not adhere; if there is delayed adherence of the belly and it's prolonged cause, adjust with decoctions made from medicines, and when these remedies are moist both in substance and their action, they should be dried out along with wax drippings while being applied excessively on abdomen additions.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when it seems in that position, as not to cause distress or discomfort while inside you use; and ointment of frankincense and myrrh and wormwood grounds (which is powdered over the oil), applying them on drape and cloth wherein was inserted what has been stuffed within it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Here are the translations line by line:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, then you understand that corruption is in the bone or hard parts of the body such as limbs; already have made an examination of the bones or other tough structures; now cure it accordingly (as instructed by one'thy superior).
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment for pus formation under the nail and cuticle addition, incision of fingers made.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Pain appears in what remains of this nail from either foot or hand (and elsewhere on these), and when it extends its duration and treatment is highly valued; pain due to ingrown toenail, or corrupting that which has become rotten with bacteria inside where the smell emerges, causing discoloration at the tip of this nail.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that water which we have mentioned in the division and do not hinder your treatment, then immerse all excess from the ulcer in this water, applying cauterization to it as needed, for these measures are beneficial at once.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May the bone be safe and healthy, and its additions will cover up parts of division, whereupon you begin to pierce that with a needle and lance it out from there; keeping pressure on said area until such time as when covered by medicine which burns corrosively within so much remains healed. Then take care for the wax is inside while being cured.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May it be that if the decay is already present in the bone, then you must insert and extract from there, for none can heal when the bone has been destroyed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the heart and spleen go down in this place, then you must find that spot which is remembered by reason of its healing properties, and take care to ensure it becomes healthy again.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May itching or pressing of the tongue against the throat cause severe pain therein, and when you cut out the swolthy phlegm that has come through underneath (the transverse abdominal muscle), make sure to dry up this area with salt on the spine, so as not for the viscera or intestine below it to enter into flesh already affected by excess fluid in its location; and take care of said spot where water gives pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May adjust it, which is found in the firmest men, and strong throughout their body flesh, bones, or skin.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When lying down is numbness in the joint or it'se original birthplace within these bones,
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May not one born from dried fruits of this matter become ill and he who is born at the joints very much will be gouty.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	From those who are excessively fatty (obese), the section is leaner; and it's time you insert that into its natural position at the spine.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May those who are born at the joint have difficult care; therefore keep watch over them.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it happen to those born in this place that you insert into the patient's body meat for consumption within their mouth and use one of those knives appropriately at hand for them, taking care that what is inside becomes healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May consolidation which occurs between their movements or due to birth defects that they themselves have not experienced, or through childbirth labor and fire (which includes fever), causing them to seal this consolidation within so that these patients return to their normal shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	When it seems that consolidation occurs on the hand'dict (palm), then wipe off that consolidation as soon as it is prepared and adjusted to fit the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From weakness of joints, they become swolthy.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and their swollen, sluggish veins come from the limbs of the body; they primarily occur in the couches (beds), mainly among travelers, workers, and bearers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Now apply that which you have administered for the purge of the bowels in cholera black some measures to induce vomiting and bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Medicine may have two methods for healing them: one is that it becomes clear and attracts the black bile away, and the other method involves raising the vein and extracting it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the patient is according to this method: place a cushion under them in such a way that their thighs are secured together as much as possible with one bandage at the upper part of each hip, and dry up veins either here or there (in any case choose an extensive area), raise the black sankt by pulling it from beneath the bone's head located below this cushion down into their legs both inside and out until you take away as much venom as desired.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Return that one back (to health), and command them not to consume black humors causing harm.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Iterate the cauterization for varicous veins when they become inflamed and come up in the abdomen.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May their elevation according to this practice: you who lift the cushion of the thighs when they are tired from walking, place it in water and immerse them until swelling subsides and veins become prominent; or if exercise is done without bathing present, causing injury to the limb.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Return the colon in the middle of the vein for section or cut it out at the end or base of its location you must drain.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Return the veins of one and cut out the entire varicose vein where it appears in accordance with its deteriorating condition towards blackness; this is what you must attend to (attend or observe).
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	When you remove it from under the neck (the collarbone), take that white thread which supports your arm's sinews/tendons.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And return your tool (a cautery) that is raised and placed from the navel upwards, holding it for one-hundredth of a second as per its length.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Return another section of the same section by three fingers and scrape away the skin from below where that portion starts on the underpart of the vein as it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Here begins the translation of each line:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: E fay aquo entrare che estrarai quella dalla sezione che è posto sopra o prese da tutte le sezioni, entro dove tutta viene a essere; ed anche intaccere questa.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey in extracting and elevating it, then insert a double-ended needle made of iron into that place and remove it outwardly; or introduce the instrument gradually along its path while rotating your hand throughout to ensure full penetration within where intended.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here comes the translation line by line into English:
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the entire atmosphere has become infected and filled with water and oil mixed together or not mixed at all, pause over the location of the wet wool submerged in vinegar and oil (or just oil), and cure that which is inside it.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vit is contracted and has twisted around in parts of it, which was not previously mentioned as being so tightened up again, then cut over that part where there is contraction throughout its entirety and surrounding areas, apply pressure on what you have cut out to lift this whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Here is the line by line translation:
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the patient whom it has been weakened by:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of anointing oil:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not admitted into the body like a needle nor is it an acute extremity that threatens to harm the vein, and yet this leon has great flexibility—even if slight; they possess excessive bulk in their possession.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein in the leg (literally "The removal or taking out of the vein from the
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 From the extraction of the vein in the leg: This phrase likely refers to a medical procedure involving the removal or harvesting of blood from a vein located in the lower part of the body, possibly for medicinal purposes such as creating an elixir (as was sometimes done historically). The specifics about where this practice might originate—from Arabic lands and arid regions with little vegetation like parts of India—indicate that it could have been a regional medical tradition influenced by cultural exchanges along trade routes, possibly the Silk Road.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When it occurs in other parts of the body such as cushions (belly or abdomen), then gout can also develop therein.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The translation of the source sentence line by line into English is as follows:
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And because of the patient'se reception (intake) here is this vein that becomes inflamed severely; and return it back, place where its location has been distended; and begin with starting at the site of said swollen vein." 
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when that extremity appears, cover it with one of those wooden legs from the chair which supports the weight of another drake (dragon). Do not put this wood on top of the cushion and do not handle it carelessly.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Whenever many urges from within cause parts of the body beyond their limits, enclose them in lead and season that with spices for those places.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is prolonged, then you cut and wrap the wound; do not insert that piece into where pus has come out—if you introduce it there, it will contract inside the body and cause abscess formation and possibly boil infection at the location of the bad matter.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that which is drawn upwards and taken out gradually must be extracted from the back of it so as not to jerk or harm the foot.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein in the hands and feet, it has already entered into me who am at its length of two palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If inserted during the time of his medical treatment, then insert the needle into the hernial defect and penetrate that long tract within the body until all fluid accumulated in it is evacuated, administer putrefaction at this location for several days as part of medicine; and attend to that area specifically for worm expulsion.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so care for that ailment as we have discussed in division and about the fluid it disposes of.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From worms born under the skin is said to be an illness (or disease).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in no land we know without long motions that have been made by cattle and are rare within the space between the navel and the flesh, moving throughout the entire body and showing itself to our senses through each limb'dict as it disrupts and forces out of the navel.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of him is due to the putrefaction of some humors, worms and snakes, and roundworms in his abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When there is fear due to him/her (the patient), when he goes on foot and stands up straight, his/her liver ascends into the chest area, and it causes both internal heat within the body and destruction of the gallbladder; thus they are forced or compelled regularly.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you intend to heal and extract it, do not proceed without the use of your walking apparatus and appearance before its feeling; then hold tightly what is above it (the body part being treated), as well as that which adheres by ligament below it, and dry over it, and remove whatever must be extracted.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If struck in the flesh and not pressed upon, then pause your cautery over the location where it resides; its greater cause is decay of humors within which causes inflammation therein together with what you have said beforehand.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	When that being reaches the head of the hollow (belly), it becomes very strong over its chest and upon itself due to tightness in the upper part of the body; take out that thing quickly, for when the belly uses mercury from their own bodies as medicine evacuating putrid bad humors caused by certain foods.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From above illness worsens.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named in our land and its pain appears in the limbs; it can be transmitted from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now you have already seen that which was recommended for you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You called a sick woman to the village and discovered her arm had a small inflammation in the brachial vein, and left it for an hour; perhaps you would place a leech there when she comes running from here to there.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And now it enters into that place of pain and settles in the muscles here; apply pressure for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Return correction into the other limb while entering it hereinabove mentioned location.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Recommend that I rotate my body as directed, and if it is too much effort due to the exchange of humors within oneself and the movement speed between limbs, then so be it.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: E yeu ja havia vist denant aqua en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz las quales atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not there be a fluid in the vessels of women at this time?
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Even you do not think it is water but because the woman was of heavy womb, and in these dry parts of her body where bones are exposed (likely referring to parched or sun-dried skin areas), here comes this mixed feeling due to what'dict as wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear again in those who are delightful and have corpulent veins connected with each other during this treatment process.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you want the patient'thy healing, and they feel that pain, at no time do I seem to be there with him as we have discussed before; instead, I stand firmly on their legs and gently ease them inside where it is swelling due to constricted wind circulation, and perform cauterization in this location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	May if you do not time the purgatives well, soon as it happens then treat that which has been excreted from the body and those poisonous tablets (and similar ones for healing).
De extraccio de sagetas.	From extraction of pus (or matter).
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Say they are diverse according to species and according to the parts of the body where we apply it, which is why those that have large points, small points, concave, hollow, and hardy; as well as those with three angles, tongues, and handles.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	Here is the line-byse translation of this medieval medical treatise:
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the senchels of the servant enter into it (the body), and pierce through bone, from where mercury rises over the brain violently, causing blindness, dizziness, groaning in the lungs, inflammation and tongue spasm, confusion and vomiting like cholera's moisture resembling flesh, foul smell arising therefrom.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	So if apparition occurs on these limbs, do not intervene in the cure or extraction unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the senses of the body are affected in the chest so that they belong to the left breast and a heavy weight is fixed therein as cause without reason (no fault), and their movement resembles both the movements of the limbs, like crawling ants or black pests dragging dirt; accompanied by numbness, feverish heat, fainting spells—thereby realizing that death comes for all.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lungs are suffocated by thick breaths of swamp fumes and their corresponding vessels in the chest have been compressed, the color of the humors changes greatly, expiring a great spirit which requires air purification therapy.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the swelling is in the skin where it is on the body (presumably referring to a specific area like an arm or leg), and the pain comes from the small backsides (possibly indicating areas around joints) causing severe, pulsating pain accompanied by shortness of breath, not affecting all muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If there is bloat in the stomach, it will cause pain from an undigested food item (like chicken or meat).
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stone is in the belly and fixed therein, some holes of dirt or cloth may be found within it, whereof its parts have been broken; hope for its extraction from here is vain.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the stone is in the bladder and there'supuration of urine has occurred, some cause may have spread to the detached parts, causing pain in the lower abdomen; indeed, this can be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May also the other members be like face, neck, and shoulders (and arms), as well as spine of back, shoulder blade, hip joints, chest bone with their corresponding limb parts, are saved according to major precautions when the saw does not damage veins or arteries nor is it venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And advise him what has been seen of these remedies so that you can indicate the treatment needed.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in the patient'se eyes (in their tear duct within the nose), I extract what comes from another part of the body, using the gold leaf of his nostril, and healing occurs there without harm to the eye itself.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extracted another jewel from the patient' extralimbs in his groin area, gently palpating at intervals and found that it was hidden and could not be obtained except for a small part attached to one of their swords (likely referring to sharp surgical tools), which were characteristic sharp instruments used by Turks.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Senate is present, it does not happen in its own hall due to an unfortunate event.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Extracted from another home Crested (likely referring to the patient), which had been caught in the quarry and was an Arabic remedy; this is what I have taken with me for him/her. Upon arriving here, it too was submerged in the quarry of you [the reader], now carefully extract its essence from between your fingers (indicating handling or grinding), remove that which has been extracted therefrom, and thus heal the Crested person.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Extractions from another person who was sick in their stomach were made and considered to be the cause of death; henceforthy they allowed for three days with nothing changed about his disposition towards these causes, attended to that extraction and healed without further incidents occurring there.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	Here comes the sentence to translate: And there may be a home in which I catch a flea on its two legs and consolidate it above you, placing a fire undernethy so that the flea is fixed at the waist of your thighs.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And another man comes who has chased away the vermin from his face and strengthened it so that here there is not motion of pain, but rather resembles these people (possibly referring to those with gout or joint issues).
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extracted from the king' extradited into my mouth and had already descended seven parts downward with only its tail remaining visible; it was completely hidden throughout this process.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	Here is my translation line by line for the given medieval medical treatise text into English:
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you clamp down the child of Saturnus tightly; and at once inquire about that subtle essence therein unnoticed—may it not feel pain if touched gently with an auricular knife, after which one may discern whether this sting (the puncture) is located on the extremity of Saturnus.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And fill the place where ascetic and digestive activities appear to me, so that it appears over there for which reason I am concerned.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	No accident significant occurred where the cauterization had reached that place; and continued application of heat was maintained over it for days, consolidating what remained therein during those intervals until I felt my nose press against its surface again each day.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And so you apply a corrosive acute medicine to the wound for up to two days until it bleeds out and then attempt to drain that fluid (exudate), while simultaneously applying pressure with your hand on the extremity of the swelling, which adheres firmly to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Even doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and they restore it thusly along with feces consolidation; their ulcer heals in whole again, without recurrence for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Here comes the source sentence to translate: And skilled craftsmen compare little over matter; and where there is present what should not be, new painful operations must descend from external causes when one becomes sickened.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And thus it is said that sapphires are not taken from the parts where they are fixed but according to two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they intertwine, or by repulsion of the other divided portion.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When someone enters through that place or when they crawl in the fleshly location and are dragged out of it:
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not heed the medicine at the time when it is taken, then continue taking it for several days until the meat (the medicinal substance) reaches its environment in your body and withdrawal occurs.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If the situation seems to remain in the mouth and does not induce vomiting, then apply that day by day until you have taken away its effect, and it is already gone.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey the treatment for more than three days, then push into the circuit of the saddlebone under that place to subtly increase it within its area, and pull out that part.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the splint is fixed on the patient's skull and has proceeded into one of the chest cavities, it shows signs that correspond to these accidents; if the splint goes past its intended location in the cranial area, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the stone is not fixed on the bone and does not enter into the joint cavity, but remains only in the bone itself for a few days before it passes through without any cause from these accidents, then your skill lies both in the setting of the stone and within yourself.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is not possible to make the patient vomit or refuse extraction, then administer draugthy in the digestive tract as we have previously recommended, and take care of the location where healing occurs within.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May it be that the patient is agitated in the joint'supremacy,' and they are also distressed emotionally; then, ask them about their trouble (that which torments you), if you feel this as well within yourself, draw out that poison from its source to where it conveniently can flow.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot work on the patient due to contraction of the flesh and the length of the prone (lying down), for there are neither nerves nor veins, then operate within the body where it has been expanded and make extraction possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you find yourself with an auricular hail in the tendon where it is fixed throughout all parts of the body, then release the flesh within that part; and if you cannot oversee the evasion of the flesh from its place during a fracture of the auriculars or through those entrails which become weakened due to obesity.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of pus in any location, using your hand strength and forceps for all parts inside where it is forming that object; and subtlety so as not to break the pus and make its removal difficult according to your skillful handling and this procedure.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot press on that of your hour, then lie down for several days until the parts affected come back to their proper place in the body, and do this repeatedly as long as necessary when healed.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you have contrary flows of bile within, then provide what we mentioned for treatment here in this hall/chapel.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Guard your mindfulness of the vein or nerve, or cord, and administer medicine throughout all actions for ease and calmness and slowdown/steadiness to prevent escape from pain; apply as needed according to possibility in order not to lose sight of treatment aim.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And that you contract the swelling to make it align with its shape, for this may help heal it faster.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If it is not within your power, then use what you can for their figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the scrapings that have been removed by forces from other parts of the body or those already initiated some separation in their own removal process exacerbate inflammation beyond what is coming out above, and so you press on it; and its secondary action depends on how much pressure these forceps apply; when this happens, bleeding occurs.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If retained in the bone, then twist it according to contrary motion until the substance enters into the bone and expands therein; do so carefully for those who are constrained by their own flesh.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, let her lie for some days and repeat that action until she is ashamed (or healed).
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the hump of the saddle is in that place, then you will push it there with it (the instrument).
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May you have previously struck the iron and wish to administer injections, then insert it therein if mute, using strength to ensure that what is inserted remains within the hollow of your thigh into which I will push it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the sac is concave, then you will push that substance forcefully into it, whereupon the sac shall be discharged by that very same thing.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the stocking is inflamed, then you must gently compress all of the flesh where it truly exists if possible and with care apply that which seems appropriate for treatment.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or ribcage, and it presses against what you touch causing pain, then rub that area gently to relieve tension on that spot and observe your hand'thy position relative to veins or nerves; remove that pressure point if necessary, apply cold compress (if the patient is thirsty) directly onto that spot for healing.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of these tongs by which sutures are drawn is:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These are their limbs, like saws when they take hold of the bed for that they do not fall.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those are pains of various kinds, large, small and thin ones as well as migratory types; according to the magnitude of the humors in the spleen and liver (which determines their size) and weakness or excess thereof, along with the breadth of the phlegm and constriction within.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of thrust applied to this limb with such pain as though from within its chamber causes the interior organ in it to be pushed out. The application of that dull push:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of external agitation or movement method:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	ayssi when it is that his interior (the patient's internal part) has been pushed into the curved cavity and is being propelled by this force.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	De bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Here are the translations line by line:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that have been punctured in the breasts be dry; from those is a cephalic one, and must be cleaned with wild garlic, and this they call "the vein of all limbs," and the domestic clove's branch is where it rests when paused (still), and that’s called “citric,” which men refer to as “belly veins”; brachial veins are punctured over the fireplace, this one they call "the incision point"—it appears above the chest due to visible manifestation; scapulae (shoulders), and it is situated between these two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and calf are three veins: one of these is near the curve of the popliteal artery, which belongs to wild bears; another is saphenous, located in the calf as part of domesticated lizards; and there's also sciatic venation nearby.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The strength of veins in the hands is ancient and migrating, causing old wounds on the head to heal.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the surgical knife in your hand, that is what you are about to insert, and place it gently into the vein within where the phlebotomist withdraws blood from the body.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	When you raise your hand above the vein and artery, divide them at their respective parts below and trace along these vessels inwardly.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	If the length of the intestine is equal to two fingers adjusted or enclosed by water, then let it flow out as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Return strength to the pus with rest so that it may heal within what has been restored.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And in the process of examination before freeing them, there was an incision and subsequent cautery performed on those areas.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	From the veins and arteries of the temple, this ancient but harmful bleeding caused by excessive fluid outflow from the vessels is obtained during cauterization (flebotomy).
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And according to what you recommend, tighten their thigh so that veins appear within it as sensations become manifest and are shown by your touch; and at this time, you attempt.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And it is already followed by their memory recall and insight, which enter into the common meal together.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	So the bloodletting of the facial vein is applied to the cerebral bleeding, and migraine and foul sores in old diseases of the face that come and go.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And as for the quality of his bloodletting, you must follow this advice. So that the weakened thigh bone shows its vein within which appears a bandage; and take up the instrument from where such is their form (the lancet):
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the opening where it meets at that vein, and press upon it or another cause in their chest, as you wish, according to the extent which you desire; tightly control this incision of the hernia until healed within.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the strength of the two veins in the eyes be weakened by moisture from both humors and tears within these fluids, and facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bleeding is that it hardens at its place with a bandage, and treat those areas accordingly; you stand on top of him/her.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	When the sanctus body needs to move as much as necessary, stop on those spots, and stretch them tightly for another day, and adjust those again.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bleeder of the vein in the nose confer fever and violent thirst, as well as facial and limb maladies causing pain in the face, mostly when old age sets in.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	When the quality of the bleeding is that it tightens the patient' extrinsic parts (thighs) and places you under their nostrils with your left hand without touching therein any feeling at present, while holding onto the bloody instrument subtly for a long time in place where the jugular vein begins inside the neck secondarily formed by the sternocleidomastoid muscle; here no sensation arises nowhere and bleeding starts immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you finally finish your massage on the little finger and make it run down the second joint according to your need, then take care of that part with gentle pressure; as a result, its ligaments are strengthened.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the strength of cauterization for wounds guide contraction and treatment of leprosy and other diseases, as well as inflammation and bad sores that need to be examined immediately with a patient who has hemoptysis (coughing up blood).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Return the vein to its long vessel gradually, and extract it slowly as needed when water is drawn (usdictate), and make an appearance similar to that of another vein in length or size at such times; return carefully each drop by a controlled extraction.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	When you secure the ligaments and tighten the veins to prevent the illness from spreading further through the area, placing it within the womb wherein lies its offspring is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: The venous flebectomy softens small punctures and sores of the mouth and corruption of gums and bad wounds that are in the nose and around the body, holding them together with gentle pressure using tiny cauterizing implements.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt or are uncertain about which one it is among them, then understand that it's the most prominent of those and whose discharge (pus) has been made manifest.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears as if there are veins in her upper lip.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May it be customary for some days to insert needles into the veins located in the upper thighs.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	May the veins that are from behind your tongue be properly positioned for cranial trephination to prevent conditions in the throat (glossopharyngy), of the tonsil (tonsillitis), and mouth diseases, which may involve swelling or malady.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And as to the quality of intubating those joints that are between your thighs from this moment onwards with the larynx raised and observing it repeatedly in both the one vein and the other, noting when any color begins to decline towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And now for foot massage; be careful not to press too hard on those areas with your hands, as soon as you touch them the blood will flow through their arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in the veins of their thighs where blood customarily flows for all men, and such bleeding is done according to two methods; either inserting a small mirror or an olive drop into subtlety declining (likely referring to needles used with acupuncture), or using a sharp lancet while calling on oneself if necessary.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is why they come together and join the subtle species according to the extent of these veins, as well as their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mirrored footbath:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	If his limbs are swolthy with blood thickened within at times and open up the wide concave veins that clearly contain large amounts of such thickness therein;
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how one performs an artery puncture with olive oil:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This scalpel is of lesser leverage and delicate finesse, suitable for the microsurgery of small veins containing subtle chyle.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the strength of the basilic vein surgery (one out of three veins) extract diseases from above and below the neck/collarbone area as well as between thighs, which are its extremities: remove illnesses using this pathway that comes through these locations.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When the bleeder arrives, when that operation is performed and maintaining control over it therein, immediately after cutting artery in surgery time, if an error occurs during puncture of flebectomy (arterial bloodletting), insert that vessel back into where you cut it out so as not to let the bleeder perform this procedure with trembling hands.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear for obvious manifestation, then you should keep what was laid and change to another or secure some kind of barrier (such as a cord); if that appears where the end of your arm is, it shows; after securing this part with cauterization using our salves as directed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you wish to perform the operation on the patient's arm, wherein you press into the area of tightness in the arm until it corresponds with that of your palms; and secure the arm while applying pressure to the vein which is concave at the site for bloodletting. Be mindful not to interfere with percussion sounds through spaces around the artery location within the limb being operated on.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you bend and stretch the sinew as before, it swells in the place where you have held tightly with your hands, thus inflaming that vessel; therefore avoid doing so.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see the sanction flowing during flebectomy with mercury from a child, then be aware that it is of arterial origin; and your fingers touch upon this for long spaces; place your finger therein if the sanction has detached itself, four times reassuredly moved will have also been dislodged.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard your patient' extrinsic muscle of the body (presumably referring to a specific area), and put it over them so that nothing prevents its healing for several days ahead.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	May it not be detached; and if you do not have medicine for this condition, then examine the artery—if present in your touch—and when that extremity is contracted and becomes separated (the sanc being torn), grasp firmly with fists to address it. Then take one hand tightened around that area over where the vein has become narrow due to straining or engorgement within other limbs, which occurs during this day's restlessness.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	When the sanction has detached itself, then it is to be done so with water; and if not, tend that which was preceding its fall in order of recalling where those dust particles have separated from the sanction.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The translation of each line from Latin-influenced medieval medical text into English is as follows:
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May the incision of the dark vein be skillfully made above and below the elevated parts of the head and neck; for it is composed of bone from the base of the skull and facial bone as we have said before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then make the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of cauterizing the jugular vein' extrication is to extract the blood from the head and alleviate the humors causing diseases in the body fluids.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	Herein lies the necessity for cutting with either a scalpel made of olive or myrtle wood—for this instrument is safe from all veins and does not damage blood vessels nor nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Mayhap you must perform the procedure to guard that scalpel does not pierce your head only once, and secure it in place without drawing attention unless there is an initial percussion indicating some movement over that particular area of the incision.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Even if you strike hard on the soles of their feet without performing an incision during the initial touch, there may be no sign of that ulceration at that moment.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May be the quality of that surgery and its accidents in which you consider for correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le first of the one from which you know that cauterization is not administered but for the preservation of health and hope, with caution towards preventing illnesses; it's performed in one of the veins within the groin (celiacus), dark-colored (fuscus) and basilicus ones; done during breakfast or noon on Monday to Wednesday, fed after meals, when signs appear indicating repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if it is necessary for a flesh incision, perform such operation within three hours after the day'suponents have passed through.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May incision that is administered may occur when necessary and at any time of day or night; always ready for use in all hours.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	When the woman has not yet been anointed with oil for twelve years and men have not undergthy until seven months within their seventh year, nor should those who already had it be subject to emunctomy during these periods of time.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	When one wishes to perform a blebectomy for any reason related to cleaning the patient'thy cysts during an enema (using lemon juice), provided that there are openings where blood clots may be retained, so as not to let them flow into the bladders of the cysts, which are purulent and do not harm the main organs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E they are not suffering from fistulae of the patient or crapulence (fatty condition), nor evading sickness within which their body fluid is drained away; neither do these have melancholy rising up, and no phlegmatic discharge occurs. Fistulation may be considered appropriate for colic pain passing through them, vomiting from the stomach area or distension thereof (abdomen), issues of intestines swelling due to bloat/gaseous accumulation as well as multiplication of hernias and constipation arising from food consumption during meals or at nighttime rest; all causes dissolving their spirit, body, or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Consider in subtlety the change of humors from within if your patient is fat, and foods such as meats and drinks, or medicine that brings fluid to flow within you if it's needed.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Return it into bath if there is any cause that does not forbid or if due to some exercise for which the sanction allows, in order for it (the condition) to become subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the cautery of him in his chest is paused, it'se that hour arrives for the third part as we have spoken.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And when the patient'thy chest is guarded on that day of all ill-fated beasts, suffering from anxiety, anger, fear, and various bodily accidents, overload with excess weight and discomforts such as hernias and pains.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And in his cavity there are present causes as per which customary men use scents and fragrances, balms, and resembling substances according to their possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the lancet maker on a thigh that has been pricked or where it was meant to be pricked.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Here comes the translation of each line:
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply pressure on the stricture, which that person who was subjected to flogging has wounds among their masses inside where blood vessels are swolthy and evident in feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Here is the line by line translation of the medieval medical text:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, because it is necessary for the surgeon to be firm and solicitous in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is apatematical or the belly protrudes, let it be for a day or two without tightening the bandage, nor dragging out an inflamed sore; rather apply cold compression quickly to treat the abscess.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Return or perform lithotomy if necessary (the term "lithotomy" here refers to stone removal from stones in organs, which aligns with medieval
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if you find it small and decide to proceed surgically (perform the lithotomy), because you fear that what you wish will not suffice without intervention, then perform stone removal in its second division, adjusting precisely at the place of obstruction where a little opening is found. The location being operated upon becomes an area with very small openings when stones are present within it (typically referring to kidney or bladder stones that cause blockage and require surgical intervention).
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	May you see that already there is an apostropthy (an outward manifestation of disease or dysfunction), and it does not traverse over him/her, nor excuses any cause; pause above some part of the fissure in his/her oil (body fluid leakage from a wound or other opening).
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better here than with other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a gran abscess is formed at the site of incision, it continues to leak fluids and mainly near where there's no circulation but rather congealed fluid, or in the opening of small veins; and you feel heat with your hand over that moist sponge soaked in saltwater solution (just slightly scalded), holding onto for an hour until it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	When covering up that part of his body affected by the flow from that vein, or another vein as needed for complementation:
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is any blackness or greeness in the place for a few days, do not touch it; if you wish to pause over that some cause of inflammation and pus dissolution (which could be due to worms, gallblad trottle them out, or resemblance), then rest on that certain cause.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	E methodically remove warts and prominent points of venipuncture from the base of the pillar (possibly referring to a treatment area on or near the limb).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And rest your hand on that one, and if you must apply pressure with a soft compress, do so upon that same area; for there lies evil and bad—and be mindful of any cause mentioned herein from which the blood flows strongly through the main artery (arteria sancta).
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And when there is an application of cold in the liquid that maintains joint positioning and care for it ensures other curative measures within to heal.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	When you remove from the sanction according to the quantity of one'thy virtue and by which those parts above appear, then that portion will be removed accordingly when it appears on top of the sacrum.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanction is black, then you must insert and hold it inside that they ask for; if it appears thick, likewise introduce it gently within where sought after; similarly, when there's an inflammation (gout), ensure its warmth remains intact.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: When he is weak and in need of bloodletting on a day when vein puncture should be enlarged and also lancing, it shall occur so that his strength may increase.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In a person who sweats profusely, their opposites (cold humors) will flow and disrupt the body'dictly causing them to feel unbalanced or weakened in nature.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best treatment administered through venepuncture is not a cross section; it implies that the ideal approach when performing venepuncture (presumably for medical purposes) does not involve taking out or cutting into a large vessel but rather focuses on what specifically should be done during this procedure. Here's an English
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of venepuncture is spared the flow of blood and nerve injury; it's a safe procedure that follows established guidelines for duration and length, implying carefulness to avoid complications such as excessive bleeding or damage to nearby nerves during vein puncturing.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	At which point, during the venepuncture, you are accustomed to encountering syncope (fainting), and thus must treat it on-site with one of these remedies: an infusion made from grains or a simple syrup prepared; extract it directly into three sips or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is congestion of the complexion (indicating some form of inflammation or blockage within the body), then perform phlebotomy to introduce fluid into the womb, scented with myrrh and aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamoman, gingerbread, and similant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you experience convulsions due to the mind'thy dampness caused by malevolent spirits within it, then induce sweating with steam from water and boar meat, applying aromatic essence where there is pain on one’s body; use that at any place desired.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When discussing causes previously mentioned in the division of syncopes for defecation, use them here too.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wishes to remove their arm and dissolve the patient'supurated fluid through catheterization should do this for how long? The drainage of said fluid is slow, following the quantity present in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Might who wants to affect their arm and strike their chest afterwards with forceful blows should apply pressure for seven hours or nine from the first surgery day.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May who wishes to pull the limb of their body contrary to where it has turned off (likely referring to twisting or injury), knows that such an occurrence may happen on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May this part of the body where you have cut and inflicted pain also become feverish; it originates from there when one is anemic with a large quantity, greatly amplified inflammation occurs within that triggers syncope (fainting), so by keeping all conditions for bloodletting intact, place your hand over the pulse of this body part to prevent its death due to fainting; because accidents may occur when bleeders are ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you intend to unfasten the arm and expel the sanctum'dictly following cleansing time, once its claw is already lubricated by blood flow from vein, and when it becomes difficult due to thickened sinus fluid that must be pressed under this forceful urge for evacuation - which would not serve well.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the finger inserted therein continuously; or draw out that which is coagulated in the vein of sanctification within it; or pause upon that tender alarum, either arsenic flake or saxon gemstone, and compress that area to keep the clot outside.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If a vein is swolthy, do not touch it lest the thrombosis become agitated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary for you to induce defecation (evacuate the bowels), there' extraneous cause should not be present; therefore, stimulate that part over where the ailment lies or in another vein if needed:
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein referred to as "vein of the arm" is punctured in the place of dark or bladder, when not torn apart or injured, it consists of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bleeding made by him is that the malady intrudes into his body in water, entering through where the flame enters and causing veins to become visible as they swell up therein.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Return its strength over that which is bound by the narrow space of constriction; and apply pressure along the transverse small to avoid longitudinally or sideways movement.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it is both the wide opening and your incision that are at which you perform this small cutting on the joint'supremely translating to: And it is through both the broad opening (perhaps referring to an incisional approach) and your surgical intervention present, whereupon we proceed with a minor cut precisely at the juncture of the limb.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you must restrain the flow of bile (which might imply managing a condition possibly related to digestion, such as gallstones), then repeat your action in the tail end and make sure that bile continues its course within this period until fulfilling what is necessary. The translation suggests an ancient practice similar to nowadays' cholecystectomy or lithotripsy where restraining excessive flow of bile (potentially related to stones causing blockage) and allowing it through controlled means could be
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you were in the summer days, then you would be exempt from performing your actions in the tail end (which could refer to procedures or treatments typically scheduled during colder months), and we pause the flow of bile within its waterfall down below until fulfilling what is necessary. This suggests a consideration for seasonal practices when it comes to medical interventions, likely related again to gallbladder treatment that might be postponed due to summer conditions conducive to such procedures happening at other times or in different seasons ("yest" and "yllen", which translate roughly as today and yesterday respectively).
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The incision of this vein is made safe such that it does not affect all other veins or nerves present; in fact, none here have a pulse nor nervous supply. Here the physician stresses on performing an invasive procedure like cutting into a vessel with minimal impact to surrounding structures – emphasizing precision and care for preserving what is essential (venae non pulsantes indicating potentially damaged or dead vessels).
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	E the surgery of the patient'dictum is attributed to foot diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand on the flexor muscle as long as possible after you have taken away their nerves that are stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Here applies the touch on the tail' extrémity and allows blood to flow there smoothly; if not applied at the extremity of the tail, then the blood will clot in the vessel of the vein, which is forbidden from circulation.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the blood is extracted according to necessity, rest over the vein and salt so that it does not clot together entirely; seemingly ensuring circulation throughout the entire body.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the strength of that surgery on her right side be for those illnesses in the womb (the uterus), it is given to them.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Even during the ashes of his lying down with it, there appears a likeness like that which you have experienced elsewhere.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The strength of the veins removed during phlebotomy is present in many illnesses found at different parts of the body, as well as menstrual diseases and retained menstruation, symptoms resembling those of old hernia cushions on legs and chests.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the bloodletting for you is that your humour infiltrates into your thigh and forms over there where cold poisons enter within; it stands on the joint between the foot and the vein, showing its pulse above this point—and from those branches extending upward onto the face of the leg bone.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	So apply a poultice made of more salt on the area where you applied pressure to both the calf and heel bandages, as it is better for absorption.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If a boil appears on the face of the body (the skin), then guard yourself against the nerves just beneath it over the area where the boil is located; pause your incision there for as long as you wish to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if it is necessary for you (the doctor/healer) with a lancet or scalpel, then
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if the sanction must be removed, then strike your patient'se foot in the buttock area and make them run it through there as long as they are purging or clearing out their bowels (this procedure seems to relate to a form of early medical detoxification).
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the lancet user makes an error during the first purge bath (cleansing), then reapply the scalpel to your patient's foot in their buttocks area; do not fear them, yet be wary of potential nerve damage as mentioned before. This line emphasizes caution and mindfulness when conducting such procedures given that errors could result in injury or further complications for both practitioner and the afflicted patient. The translation reflects a concern about maintaining sterile conditions to prevent adverse outcomes, highlighting an understanding of potential risks involved with early medical practices involving invasive instruments like scalpels (or lancets).
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Similarly affects the other foot's sole; this suggests that whatever treatment or condition being addressed, if it has an impact on one part of a patient’s body (such as their
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And regarding the condition affecting another foot's sole like Sciatic nerve pain (as mentioned in our previous discussion), urgently lift and hold up their ankle joint as directed before, likely implying some form of manual therapy or intervention to alleviate symptoms. The directive appears rooted in medieval medical practice where physical manipulation was a common approach for
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The youth of your patient is the reason (or pretext) when performing lancet insertion as part of sanction treatment; this could suggest that young patients were thought to have different physiological responses or healing capacities, which influenced their medical care in medieval times – a notew
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	Here comes the sentence to translate: The quality of his bathing is that it cleanses the patient'thy thighs within their body cavity under a lengthy bandage below them without apparent result.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, apply that poultice to each part as you can and according to the direction (transverse), better so: if applied internally or externally by insertion or sectioning, the location of your body will be secured.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: She is in great pain; and if you worsen that condition, a limb of her body will tremble, which appears on both hands near the ear and ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard your nerves, and let blood flow according to what you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Return those parts of restriction and pause back over the site of incision cut and tightened therein; this is where healing occurs.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From windiness and concerning these attributes of dressing that belong to them (the patient).
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors: "Quan dolor
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Joint pain can be caused by two ways according to the old methods of treatment: one is through an incision and removal from the sanction (a type of ancient medical practice), and the other method involves scarring after such a procedure has been carried out on the joint itself: "When joint pain occurs, it may be treated as follows per traditional remedies: one way includes making an incision to extract something harmful within its context, while the second entails creating marks or scars where
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This joint pain that is treated by incision and extraction according to traditional remedies can be due to arsenic or mercury: "The ventozacio in question which undergoes treatment through an incision may arise from the presence of substances like arsenic (or lead) within it,
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	For the joint pains treated by incision and extraction according to traditional remedies are found in various parts of the body: "The locations where these treatments for ventozacio, involving a cut and removal via sanctioning methods, take place include different areas within one's anatomy. One such site is above which pains may be paused (possibly referring to localized relief or temporary alleviation), while the second portion belongs to the head – specifically atop where these interventions occur: "In addition, ventozas might also involve certain spatulas used for incision purposes and are placed underneath both jaws. These procedures take place below what refers here as 'the neck' or cervical area (from Latin ‘cuis’), implying a region around the throat where treatment is administered: "The treatments may include two small lancets, which could be instruments used for precise cutting under medical supervision; and cuffs – potentially means of restraint to stabilize body parts during an operation. Here there's also reference to having ventozas from both braces or metal devices that might hold the joint in place: "Furthermore, procedures may involve two small bellows (perhaps a metaphor for tools used by healers), indicating some form of applied pressure therapy; and finally, treatments with needles – implying possibly bloodletting techniques as part of therapeutic interventions: "In summary, these sentences detail various traditional methods using different instruments to address joint pains through procedures involving incisions for extraction or other forms of treatment
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Even extracting the sanction is not from bones, but through small scattered veins in the flesh; thus it's extracted by suction using a flebectomy needle or its focus on any location where there has been full cleansing of the body cavities.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to provoke coughing for illness or due to continuous conditions, immediately induce that at all times during the meal and throughout the day in this place of rest, and whenever possible also at nighttime.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet: it's because these are occurrences among men where they seek out extraction from themselves through vomiting (vomitus) or diarrhea within their chest cavity; and with those whose abdomen swells up and roars inside them along with their head, face, throat, and causes darkness in the eyes—and who has misplaced where they came from. And these are people for whom intestines rebound (return) to its space within it's cavity; others have servants on both legs, as well as one servant atop them: holding their hands firmly placed therein.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it occurs at any cause of those things, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth part of the month, they command that wind motion be felt as pain which passes through during the day for three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the vitality of breeching from the neck is that when you bring it down to the head and into the chest, perhaps it may expel all humors from the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This incision is in the location of craniotomy for the head (brain surgery).
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not permissible for one who has a complete inflammation or fever to apply it here; they will bring great harm upon themselves.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Through which of those legs I use it, and in the areas where frequent illnesses occur.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May forgetfulness come upon that person who is over it; and because you command the bellows to make a small puff at each juncture for them, they fear generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May chill of air on the location for bloodletting from the black vein and bladder: through which you confer ashes, constrict breath and divide the sinews of breath, and cough up phlegm (bloodletting was a common treatment in medieval medicine to remove excess "black bile," believed to cause these symptoms).
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When a small stone is inflamed within it and if there's even just a brief pause allowed afterward, weakness will be generated in the limbs and abdomen.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the warmth of alhagi confers on headaches and swelling in the jaws, they migrate away from it, alleviating pains in the teeth'dictions—this is where to perform bloodletting at the base of the skull.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the bellows not to press on your hand so that it does not cut and cause bleeding into the artery, thereby interrupting blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Evening coolth from the mind comforts in the mouth, and decay of gums, as well as appearances related to illnesses present within the mouth; they arrive at locations for extraction procedures performed on those teeth inside their lips' oral cavities.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the warmth that occurs on the sinews through these instruments confer benefits to the patient, which is achieved by their heat accumulation.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When ordered not to proceed with incision in cutting (scarification), as the flesh is stripped bare and the nerves and arteries are exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is from this wind that they blow over the hollows of the back and confer with the purulent ulcers on the belly,
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the bellows to produce a strong draft made of charcoal, and direct it towards areas with deep cracks, ensure that gentle blowing breezes pass through them for precise scraping during cauterization.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May gentle breezes from the cushions for gradual manifestation, which drive out all pain in the body and alleviate old pains of rheumatism and menstrual discomfort; they also provoke monthly bleeds, causing both vaginal and anal discharge. They act as a placebo for dilation procedures performed by experienced midwives or barbers (who may have provided medical services in the past).
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Even so they may weaken all parts of the body and cause fainting spells therein.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	E from the cold winds is derived its vitality, which belongs to the warmth of the patient'thy legs' cushions.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	When the position of the breeze is that it stops the wind during entering and draining quickly afterwards without prolonging the position of the breezes, but rather pauses those leaking places momentarily and returns them there, allowing humors to ascend through gustation.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this process; continue until you see the place redden and swell, at which point will appear the groan of pain.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you scrape and suck up small amounts at a time, pay attention in the disposition of the limbs.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that house is made of rare flesh tendons and you do not treat it with care or fail to apply pressure, so the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When ordered by the suction device, increase the incision and press a poultice on for ease of drainage.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sanction is swolthy, then you should scrape it gently in several times; by the first treatment, direct flow to the area and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	May now occur in the second phase of acquiring knowledge about removing the large stone (presumably referring to gallstones or stones within some organ).
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanction is caused by dirtiness (impurity), then it requires a clean cut on the smooth part for recovery to continue.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And at last, when we extract the small stone from the joint or toe, that suffices for us one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a sickness (mot sanctus), then cut it out with the instrument of cutting; and if they tell us that the sickness is thick (sicut sanguinis), let's cut through it beforehand by means of cutting.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of cauterization in which only the depth of the spine is concerned.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the uterine cord is thick, hard, blackened (fuscus), and their pulses are streaming (streitium), making the locations of the navel warm, lubricated, softening resolutely; if it's summer time, apply oil from aloe or lavender flowers, honeydew jelly, cumin seed oil, or sanctus herb to these likenesses.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick and heavy, then apply honey, or balm of St. John'dict (wortain), oil of Aloe, wine vinegar, to their appearance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be that the bellows is made of large leather straps for tendons, and those are forbidden from oil, and what applies to these places in terms of ventilation should have ash soaked waterfalls or cold water (from solar beds, or wells near brooks) or rainwater, similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And it is from that which the sanction comes due to moisture, washing their breath with water of myrtle and sumac, or in a manner similar to these things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that which the surplus is heavy, wash their breaths with wine from ancient times or water of spring (chalybeate), or elderberry juice, or cowslip sap, and in some way resemble them all:
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that "winds and blood" flow properly through puncture (phlebotomy).
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When considering the meal: if it is either the warm air blower or that which has been used for colonic and ventral cleaning on you today (indicating feverishness and inflammation), consider causes of chilling, such as acetonic vinegar mixtures with endive greens and artichokes, along with parsley sprigs, balsamic herbs, honeydew juice, grapes (and their appearance).
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When their food is taken with apples and cheeses made from goats (cheese being referred to here as 'serbiges'), and vegetables cooked in wine ('agrase'), they appear well-mannered or pleasant.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that which the complexion is pale, extract in boiling wine and almond water, or essence of honey from seeds (possibly mead), and spices with a strong odor between Christmas and Epiphany; it's recommended for him to use little bitternal and bread, pausing the consumption of his dishes like peas, cabbage, beans, apples, fish guts, and clams.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in the day of fever and phlebotomy it is necessary for blood to flow more than food,
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	When given in beer or musc for three hours to Alcuin'thy physicians, either as a remedy before the wind shifts or after an apothecary has applied it, so that the main members are comforted and sanction becomes subtle; provided no one removes what was placed.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the windblown wounds that are being scabbed over be calming their feet, and on honeycomb (a type of rheumatic condition), and around the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, where these body parts do not suffer from cutting.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	No one is hurt by these but a binding of the member joints, when they are allowed to breatthy sojourn upon the breastbone in malady where there's an overflowing flow from the sanctus (of) the sanc (breast), and use it while breathbubbles rise within the body part concerned with this fluid excess. Rarely does such binding reduce or break up these windy movements, thereby alleviating pain in that area where discomfort originates.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is stopped over the humors in their discharges (likely referring to menstrual flow or other bodily excretions), for when these are increased by attraction of fluids into them, and this increase leads directly from excess moisture drawn upwards by gravity. Here they apply a poultice with an intention to reduce the humors over their ronhos (vulva/anus) or poyra (possibly referring to navel in some contexts), where fluid build-up occurs, using
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it resembles when pressure is applied to the belly and chest areas within those confines (likely referring to where poultices or compresses are placed on these specific body parts). Here, they apply a form of therapy that seems similar in concept—potentially suggesting some kind of manual manipulation or external
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These winds are administered by suction alone, and in other cases they are given with the use of a lance (implying that some form of direct manual therapy may be used). Here, various methods—possibly including techniques like cupping or needling acupuncture—are applied to
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some of these treatments involve the addition of water (potentially referring to an ointment or poultice that includes liquid) for ailments related to the belly area, indicating further treatment methods involving moisture application specific to this region's health issues. Herein are described
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is to fill the windblown (likely referring to a manual therapy technique or instrument such as acupuncture needles) with dry air, and sometimes water alone suffices; other times they use water in which plants are submerged that help draw out moisture. Here we learn about different techniques for filling these instruments—sometimes using nothing but pure atmospheristic elements (dry air), while at others plant-infused waters with medicinal properties may
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	When administering medication at the focus: it is two drops from each dripper as we have formed; and the quantity of medicine is a palm's measure; in its place, where it circulates within us, depending on how much enters inside with one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Its pain is due to excessive heat from the blood (red), with thick and heavy borders like a lion' extruded parts prevent it from maintaining its position on oneself.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Whenever mercury or iron is used in its crossover at the fire's focus (likely referring to a heating source involving these metals), then there will be paused light from the flame.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the main wind we have treated, and its small amount comes second according to those illnesses and that state of which it serves.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When liquefied bubbles of phlegm and swollen joints are other than those in young people's lungs and large limbs,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And as for the quality of applying this pressure over the limb is to gradually light a candle made of wax near it and apply that same warmth on the groin area where there'm winds (indicating possibly an inflammatory condition), so that the fire can be brought into contact with time, preventing the body part from being consumed by these internal elements.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Here she rests on the member of the thigh and holds her above the twitch that we have mentioned, so when they take deep breaths and do not support what is held onto it, causing steam to rise over that area, then at that moment the spasm dissolves.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	With fire according to its nature, and repeat that action if constipation arises from it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	When a vapor that is administered in the plague fever contains neither cross nor disruption and is not applied but filled with water, it rests on the limbs only for so long.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it should be done: This is how much air there must be; the more of this wind present, the better, so that a large amount of water can be absorbed.
Capitol .xcvii.	The provided text appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise discussing
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	When bloodletting is not performed on the extremities due to their small size and because they are close together with bones and teeth (potentially indicating fingers or mouth), it may be done instead in bare limbs, like when drawn upon the nose and face of those affected.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And for those who have found bloodsucking creatures in the ears of people using wooden toys,
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When full and in case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible for fluid from the area to drain out into healthy air (or evacuate), then one may be relieved of pain in good measure.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the location with water and apply moisture; it is cleansed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leg is extended and blood from hemorrhages remains, then take a wet linen cloth in your hand and place it inside where the residue has appeared; pause above to prevent further discharge of said residue.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the sanction is multiplied, then sulphur ground into three parts or small balls and applied to their causes specifically; when/as these are placed on the spot where beans have been cooked down, they harden therein, and the sanction descends (falls away).
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repetition of bloodletting when possible may change those things.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If blood vessels are forbidden from suspension, then they must be flogged in the fresh wound or have an arrow stuck within those areas where there is still some new bleeding; and these should stop once I feel any more coming of blood.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you wish for a poultice on those joints, sprinkle some powdered ash or salt thereon, and heat it up right away.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Ayssi begins what concerns restoration: of recovery.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine, and it concerns restoring a fracture and displacement of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, be wise that in this chapter the doctors and quacks brag about their knowledge of these matters, which at times they may not respect or read from ancient texts themselves.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason, we are deprived of the knowledge of these sciences on earth; and I have not ignored it at any time in my life; rather, for a long period after reading ancient texts and studying their understanding of them, extracted that science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Return or adjust in order of experience and study throughout one'thy life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol primier.	Capital First. (This phrase appears abstract without additional context; it
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summarize and gather from the essence of bone breaks, which are required before we begin to recall joints broken or varied by each one if any. (This sentence in English suggests that an initial summary is needed concerning various details about fractured bones prior to discussing specific cases.)
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, in the introduction to this chapter, I will outline the main points of the speech; and within these chapters that we discuss herein during consideration, craftsmen and carpenters must ensure they understand or comprehend those aspects—those are you and yourselves who know about them. (The English translation conveys an instruction to present summaries in a chapter's introduction while emphasizing the importance for skilled workers like artisans and masons not only to have knowledge but also understanding of such matters.)
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus it is said that when you experience a bone fracture or dislocation and twisting (sesame), if there'dict no specific cause preventing the procedure, then proceed with cauterization of this wound or repair of whatever has happened to them. Or else, whether they are inflamed due to feverish heat waves or intense chill winds is also considered a valid reason for intervention.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here comes the first source sentence in translation:
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And return (the intestine) back to its original place in which it usually stays, according to what has already been described for you hereinabove.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Therefore when the bone breaks begins to be repaified, then take care that malum (the humors) is cut by nutritious foods rich in bulk and heavy substance; similarly consume those cakes made of wheat boiled with water, rice, fruits, cheese from cow's milk, curdled skimmed milk (milk protein), fresh pork and veal meat, as well as the like for these nourishments.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	E understand that bones crack when they are present in the lower body and weakened individuals, it is impossible for them to remain connected and solid according to their natural disposition due to the purging of their limbs' humors.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	Evenly and steadily they continue according to their nature for as long as possible the removal of those members affected by these humors, just like how bones harden in children'thy age.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature itself adjusts and binds above the broken bones of any part of the body that appears swolthy like gluten (indicating an inflammatory reaction), within which one becomes encumbered, enclosed by those who gather together for consumption, as long as no cause prohibits this person from their own works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason it is necessary that we pause the foods of humoral excess, which include those with weight and thickness, as we have mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	According to different types of bone breakage according to different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	E understand that the tools for breaking bones are various according to the variety of body parts, and a break in the thighbone is different from a break in the skull bone; likewise, a fracture of the chest bone is different than a fracture of the ribs; similarly all other body members have their differences among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When you remember all kinds of bone fracture, explained separately in its own chapter hereinabove.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Motion various types of bone breakage in itself is seen by doctors (translation for clarification). The original text seems unclear and may lack complete phrasing
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various types of bone breaks in them; some is a curved break as they approach the stars (the implication here seems to be an analogy possibly relating movement or positioning with celests); and others according to the length of the bone: these include fractures at both ends, fragments from non-procedure sources similar when writing preparation is being made, and tiny cracked breaks.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The entire specialty is pain that occurs in restoration after recalling it specifically at their respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motley name of bone breakage.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For this translation task with the medieval text about medical understanding of bone fractures and healing:
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is no obvious twisting or breakage upon touching the bone and joint with force without causing great pain to the spleen and urethra, then it's not a fracture here present.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Here is the line-by-line translation:
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If an apsect comes as hemorrhage, leave it for up to several days until the bleeding stops; and then use your hands accordingly according to each movement you can lift or engage in.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	When you understand that restoration and cleaning of it are better than the bones in which I have suffered a cramp,
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And tighten that second one when its memory returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is satagious (inflamed), it becomes necessary to extend this broken limb part, whether it's leg or arm; or if your hand feels heavy and swolthy, then use thy own hands accordingly – be that for tendons of thyself, or a sinew plus with thy palms.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Even if your belt does not touch the waist during either of your operations or injuries, and perform according to the power you apply with one hand on another as a companion in these situations involving many forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation:
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Excessive stretching and compression, as the wise doctors have observed are often occasions for adhesion to occur during their treatment or may lead to contraction in the limbs they performed on.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:  
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of a relaxed limb is what I recommend, so that you understand how members are various in their smallness and greatness and shape of those very same ones.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	From those who are small arms and hands like this one, it is said that their cloak should be made of a thin but refined cloth for them to wrap themselves in.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May those who have large thighs or hips like a cloak and hardness, where the flesh binds tightly together all of which attaches to each other at the waist joint, preventing them from being able to bend in it (in that place).
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Now begins, apply pressure on your bowel evacuation as conveniently as possible for that patient' extrusion of three or four layers wrapped around their limb; tighten slightly with a small amount of force applied to the sinew.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Here applies the bandage around the location of the fracture with gentle pressure, gradually relieving constriction until most of the affected area is freed from tension.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Apply pressure on another bandage, and apply honey over these dressings carefully to avoid infection if there is no suppuration or abscess formation under the bandages, and put it back as much as possible; do so for several days until healing occurs; and keep yourself vigilant upon those bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Here come the splints of canna'alda race, and formed with care; they may be made from wood or reed stalks; their shape and form according to this size and appearance:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, if the astrolith placed over that fracture is large and a small one has been put under it for all other astroliths; its length according to how much in extension or shrinkage there is of the limb being considered—and your strength should be exerted on another bandage as per your first limitation mentioned, and this must rest upon the flesh following what we have said about strictures. It means that such a splint (the astrolith) based on its size relative to others under it is adjusted according to limb extension/contraction; strength should be applied where needed in relation to initial restrictions noted; everything aligns with how and where the fracture occurred, extending as necessary along those lines.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Where the threads are thick and thin, as they should be of wool; if the threads are thick, have seen them passed through in their operation with bone thongs when the tightening has reached equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And if it is necessary to make fine adjustments, do not bind them tightly among those waters you wish for, and where there are days between two stones of a day.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the malady is led through the extremities of the stones and causes stricture in your places, immediately cease those steps that lead to injury; for it will not inflict harm upon you then.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some breaks are in the bone and there is a disturbance in the spinal cord; therefore come back to mindfulness at that moment on which this particular characteristic occurs.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	E understand that when all body parts are broken on the first day; this causes limbs to break as well if not paused over time according to your knowledge of wound healing progression and timing.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how medics used them for the conditions that they fix: fractures and dislocations and twisting injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of splints when cold after bone healing is suitable for complex movements and mostly in the legs and breasts; it's not warmth nor effusion from which we concern ourselves: grain powder handles these manipulations, and wheat flour marrow provides movement to joint areas.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When you comfort him in this way, unless he curses that very book of humors, and his comfort is not thick nor subtle; use that as well.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Autotherapy remedy for fracture and dislocation with rosemary, comfrey root, acacia wood, horehound, and mint leaves; ground into meal from the seed of twelve ants by dragon'sea (magic); mixed in wine or almond milk if scalp is damaged. Use this remedy for good composition to repair broken bones jointly, providing relief especially for men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Other forms of placement that comfort and cause a fracture or twisting include: recipe with white honey from the bee, myrrh from the same source, aloe from it again, acacia also from this origin, balsamic resin from Armenia. xx;
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All have been ground in a mill for grinding the purgative medication, and their powders, administered with water or made from animal bladders/albumen (the translation assumes "huou" refers to an herbal preparation), are prepared as follows:
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Mending of the splint and bones apart at these locations causes pain in them, with a wound stitched up by thread, immersed in vinegar and oil for treatment: it is placed over that area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May not in this dressing be for restoration and you have applied cold application and removed pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other methods of cauterization that restore cuts: walnut and poppy seed fires, combined together make a healing plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulate with cast applied is the restoration of bone fracture and when you wish to resolve subperiosteal (a condition where a fragment has penetrated into soft tissue) osteomyelitis: mixture of alum, pillowcase, flower petals from violas, flour from wheat, all parts divided up and cut in three pieces; they are tied together with string at the wrist if the limb is not fractured.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is cut, then comfortably apply that same water of the colon or its waters and use them here.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering applied for restoring the first ulcer that must be attended to immediately: a mixture of rhizome and lentil seeds, and honey, mint, majorana, violet flowers from chamomile or water (from spring or summer), all chopped up; they are soaked in these waters according to the quality of the limb and rest period needed.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras not say in his free time that the patient is resting on a part of their limb except for reasons treated with wax and oil, and he recommends moving between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia have seen that there are pauses on the broken part of them for their restoration and about the causes in which they experience exsiccation due to warmth, grains (which could refer to herbs), seeds, or substances recommended by those same causes.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Mending for the wax that soothes injury and pain: recipe of cheese (possibly ricotta), from insides or hairs of unclean animals, grains of salt, ground and crumbled; they are powdered and pulverized, and their paste is a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you tear and separate it is that if not there occurs pain or bleeding nor does the bone break from its place, then do not remove your hand for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you feel severe pain or pressure at the location, then press on that area and apply a plaster thereon immediately.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If at times the abscess and swelling and pain and inflammation are already present throughout the body, as well as obstruction requiring bandaging and tightness, then repeat that treatment which you have applied to the patient' extramently (outside of their mouth).
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If there is no injury to any of those causes mentioned, then you allow it for three days or four or seven; and some measures may be taken throughout the next twenty days after appearance due to detachment of the limb, as previously stated, until fracture adheres, and flesh coagulates on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	When necessary adjustment is made in the tightness you may experience nowhere else but here and within your abdomen'thy belly full of malady substance, as soon as it becomes remembered by thee.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	May if you also find the fracture location and dry it out so much that nothing remains thereafter; as well, understand that nourishment is forbidden to prevent this area from healing further; thus provide yourself with water for three days continuously, apply a small poultice on that spot each day, through which nutrition will flow back into the affected limb and its injury will heal.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	May those who restore the limb injured without previous treatment, according to their customs and based on deformation, make an error in line with their practice; great fear prevails if water is applied directly or expands freely at this time for patients, as they become more inflamed.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	Even though they have not seen their physician yet, it is reasonable that they do not apply pressure at this time.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capital second: When you break a bone in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The spices of breaks are motes (implying they can provoke symptoms), and their forms vary, with causes that differ, some from the impact on spaces, which immediately enters into the bone, where it is called; or when a space pierces through a part of the body'thy flesh, impaling in your thighs hereby entering them too (indicating movement within these areas), and then by this action we name that spice. Or if said space penetrates any segment of bone tissue, puncturing thy flesh there without passing beyond to underneaside [of the body], it is termed leaping absolute fracture in Latin (indicating a complete break across joints).
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture or foreign object that has already penetrated the periosteum (the layer surrounding bone), is either in the face of the bone itself, and/thy small particles from these broken bones are present therein.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when a bone is broken within the skeleton'dictly and in its fine hair-like structure, it therefore goes unnamed this particular kind of microscopic bone fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When it is fractured either by breaking or striking of bone and seems like fragments are entering into joint parts, which becomes concave when struck with armbones during percussion and fragment entry into joint parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Mostly it hurts in the bones of the feet when they are covered with sweat and fever.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So for all these hardened fractures that are put on like separate plates or splints.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	When all this fluid returns to its place, it is in remedy for everything within it therein.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	With all these spices for detection regarding those and to investigate their tainted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	Specially designed for this purpose has been found upon the bone, and it is withheld therein until breakage appears black (fracture).
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture considerations must be given to signs and symptoms caused by excess humor (blood), if they indicate severe pain like in cholera vomiting, bleeding from ears or nose rupture, loss of understanding, collapse, fever acute, examination of bodily humors and prayers for those affected, their appearance reflects the signs related to fractures at major dispositions; thus healing is not achieved.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If an accident of poor circulation occurs, then you begin the healing for it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause is that pus has entered in the common meal with fever and at those times when it occurs during day number twelve of the entire arrangement on bone structure, then study as follows:
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is during the summer days and you bite your lips down to them by day seven, they become rotten due to excessive bread consumption, which leads to occurrences of such diseases that have been recommended for us.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already reached the brain covering (meninges), and consists of small and sharp fragments, then it is necessary to carefully insert the fragmented pieces as recommended by you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "You raise the head of the malady and examine over the bones second customarily done by touch according to how it twitches on its own in response.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you find bone decay (osteomyelitis), apply sanction or putrefactive cautery immediately, and then press the area with damp linens soaked in vinegar and oil to restrain pus exudation from the wound; thus ensuring that there is no further spread of blood flow. Begin treatment at the site of bone decay and proceed towards loosening (incision).
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When it is the second of two methods for operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One symptom is that you insert into the sinew such as this, and here it goes like so: And then apply another instrument of lesser length than that one; thus being its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	E assigns administration of poultices that have been placed beneath as needed for the second stage.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Using them for gentle pressing on the joints, in order that they do not hit their head and guide this one along.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is hard and sharp, then when you perform incisions within its course before administering leeches on the pillows (which are not deep), do so accordingly.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	E for there is no name given to this illness but the bones of the body where it rests at its endpoint or edge near that mark close to the head's top, which forbids being immersed and passing through the thickness of the bone—therefore:
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you grasp these many ladders according to the sharpness of each bone'seat wherein lies its extremity which is acute, and as for quantity in length or brevity shall correspond with the amount of sharpeness at this seat within all your brains.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of stones: Which quality allows it to pause the stone on the bone and turn that around inside which you know the bone has already been pierced; and after this, change the stone'dicts location, turning them wherever there remains a trace of size within or outside.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And when you take care with utmost caution that the inscriptions do not touch any cause of jaundice,
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone has been pierced by it and if separation continues at this point, extract that which comes out; for those are like incisors (teeth), although they may also be pushed upward or displaced as with other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If there is any damage or misalignment to the small and large bones, then take that which makes it easy for you to remove what doctors need from them; care for those pieces with oil and waxes, which we have at hand.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate line by line into English as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E percuss upon the joints of a parted limb where bones are easily moved apart when revolved, and you ascertain that your pancreas remains intact without incident in any manner of movement, provided that the physician is ignorant to all things for men and women; assuredly if he were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When there is any additional cause related to the pancreas in its abdominal locations (presumably referring to complications of a pancreatic condition), take that out from under it at the extremity where you inserted, and remove it with ease since it harms him and causes fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what is fractured or remains of the bone is its face, there are sharp painful spots within it; as for this roughness and subtleties, cover them with various quantities that you have prepared according to their needs. Place these amounts in all convenient places where they can be applied on their limbs and body, following precisely what has been done at the time of your intervention when the bone is fractured and its figure distorted.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	When you administer in your ratio at which the bones come together for chewing, and use a portion of that subtle substance under them as well as on their chest (holding hands), do not cease until reaching the point where both are needed to manage the gross secretion from these places and all this fine matter.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May there be any small breaks in the blood vessels or subtle fractures that you must administer care for as needed to correct them.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because they have not been treated over all of these that they studied in this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	Over what we have written here has shown us great breaks (or serious injuries).
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the pancreas is inflamed when you remove the bone, then take second linens as needed around it according to its size and immerse that in olive oil; place that on top of other rags soaked in wine and oil, holding above what remains until no wound appears. Apply another layered linnen underneoptionally submerged similarly, applying also there the same treatment you gave over this linen: do not strain it by how much flesh is left; administer only as much medication on that thread of pus remaining upon it – and apply a poultice made from raw fat (presumably spleen or liver), without tightening beyond what skin still covers.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop ministra medicinas amb las quals es superflua siccitat, assegillat con raíz de lin i farina d'erros, polvareta d'enses y artiloquia para estos.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Here comes the first source sentence for translation: And when these powders have been ground and are dry as they should be, apply them throughout the entirety of this medicine which has properties to prevent absorption and not to provoke biting or chewing sensation.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here is the line by line translation of each sentence:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When the wound is on the skull and you have opened it with your instrument, mainly when presenting treatment for it, there appears pain on its surface; therefore consider whether these accidents that we possess affect him completely.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If you do not alleviate the pain with medicine that is stopped above it (presumably some form of therapy or intervention being applied), but rather through medical practice, hereby addressing that very same pain using honey and oil in small portions placed on these lines, wrapped in cloth; thereupon apply pressure to this area over the navel. Additionally, ensure you place within it (the medicine) those healing spices deemed necessary for recovery.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III.: (The text following this title or section is
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When the nose is broken, go for a repair in the eating establishment as quickly as possible to seek immediate medical attention and treatment
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Be aware that when the nose is not broken but rather fractured into parts and pushed apart (perhaps due to some misfortduct), there are two bones involved; one of which contains cartilage, making it joint-like in nature ('quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa'). These pieces aren'thy splintered or shattered but rather held together with a type of grinding and twisting motion that does not involve breaking into separate fragments. This condition is often described as 'bending,' which suggests the bones may be out of place due to misalignment ('atricio e tortuositat') without completely fracturing, hence there might not necessarily be an open break or cut (hence "no es trencada"). It's essential in such cases for immediate medical assessment and potential intervention
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the bone fragments is broken in your nose (intruding and causing a break), you must insert that small piece back into its original position within the nostril ('engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic'), taking care to do so as directed. Afterward, it's important for them to return your nose to its normal shape again ("entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural"). This suggests a delicate process possibly requiring skilled intervention and proper alignment in order to restore the appearance of an intact nostril without leaving any noticeable bite marks. It's vital for this procedure, often referred to as repair or setlionation (placing back) by ancient medical practices, be done carefully with
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if it is for your ease (to alleviate pain), watch that you do not harm the patient'thy thighs during thy operation on their hernia.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper chest portion of the nose and does not come to that place itself, then cut a piece equal to the extent of the bone where it has broken.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If there is a break in two parts of the body, then perform as if you are performing it (likely referring to applying some form of treatment or mimicry).
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if it is possible to restore the patient' extrication from their pain on the first day of the injury, then otherwise wait for seven or eight days before allowing rest after applying an appropriate periodical remedy (ointment).
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply a device of cloth in the extremity of the nose if there is a fracture; or metal wires, if it's broken into parts, and place them as thick as necessary so that they expand beyond the nasal tip.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the medieval medical treatise:
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this thing, and if you wish, perform surgery.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you apply a cold compress or bandage with cloth soaked in vinegar and oil (or poultice), place it on the affected area to alleviate inflammation caused by other wounds.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	May you not injure an abscess if it is left untreated, then apply salt and flour from sifters to that area, place your hand over the spot where a flea may lie without cause; do nothing until such time as a louse becomes entrenched.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	May if bones of the nose are slightly broken or displaced, then cut over those areas with instruments I have prescribed for them; and fix that fracture, using the fluid that embodies it to consolidate, and apply dressings suitable for this purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you crush a worm that has entered the nose, cover it with some clay and insert tubes of lead inside so that its entire body is healed in total recovery.
Capitol .iiii.	Capitol III. (The Roman numeral "III" is used here
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Regarding jawbone fracture treatment in the restaurant setting, it appears there might be a mix-up or misunderstanding of contexts—restor
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone breaks and there's only one break without complete separation into two parts (not in bone fragments), if it is not displaced or curved at the joint margins—its prognosis, meaning how likely it will heal properly with minimal complications.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is broken into two pieces, then provide extension of parts so that movement may be possible for it to heal.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you experience discomfort in the teeth leading to breakage (possibly referring to dental issues), tighten those parts from which you hope relief will come through silver or gold filings or ceding; and take pause on the broken jawbone, and on the doubled cloth covering it upwards towards its length where the mandible is located. Place a finger alone along this entire extent of the jaw to avoid further damage while applying (possibly dental work), as long as you do not destroy what's already there.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When commanding the humors (body fluids), ensure rest and calmness, and stop the food from being swallowed by dragon lungs.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If your figure has become distorted due to any manner of illness, then tomorrow you should apply and massage the body part where it was altered; additionally place therein linen cloth soaked in pomade made from honey or album (milk), along with flour paste. Apply these substances gently on your figure for correction.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that bandage is applied and adjusted on it, ensuring the bone'setup remains unaltered, thus allowing healing if already injured to be restored strong; this fracture will recover in three simple sessions.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another dietary lapse occurs as an abscess with a caustic treatment, then apply what we have discussed for these types of colds within the wound until it heals and alleviate that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is wet mud (i.dict a broken bone soaked in bodily fluids), consider if it's detached from or displaced, then you should adjust those pieces to where they belong within the body for proper healing during that person's recovery period.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the poultice of the patient is dry, then apply more as needed on the wound according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have removed those satagias (impurities or blockages), and if they are not completely expelled from there, apply warmth using the poultice of earth if it is wide; otherwise, rest on one of the supports that suit this purpose to enable healing.
Capitol .v.	The given text seems to be from an old medical treatise discussing
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	When lifting or when a fracture occurs, it is related to the healing process of the sternum (furcula). Here's how we can
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When movements are continuous and the chest (where the sternum is located) moves forcefully as in a fight or strenuous activity, it may lead to bending or breaking of the breastbone. This type of breakage can be categorized into one of three ways:
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, separated, or split into parts that do not adhere together again; and restoration in these fragments is difficult, making the breakage seem as if on land (terrestrial), which requires healing within oneself (internal).
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	When the operation in that case occurs, when a fracture is set (broken), it requires two ministers: one holding his hand to assist and support the broken sternum, and another extending the colloid (the area around the breastbone) at that location.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And if you are about the bone to set it in those places where its form is according to how covered by flesh or not prominent at all. Do not place too little nor excessive depth into these fractures, as per their natural shape and covering with tissue.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If indigestion persists, cover the abdomen with a cloth or wool quickly according to your need; and raise and contract the chest as much as possible while keeping it within yourself so that you do not spill out what is inside of you.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the arm bone to the parts outside, through which it has already come down to the sternum, then malaume is raised above the chest and presses on one of its muscles with a large cushion.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	E the minister presses on the muscle of him at the joints while the bone of the shoulder blade is raised above its position in his shoulders; and then he corrects the fracture and applies pressure with those bands to it.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel chills in the neck and shoulders, it is time to break them over that area and extract those chills from there easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then you will engineer an incision of yours on one of those instruments that have been applied to this case (the chest bone), and place them where they serve as supports for the sternum; these are made of wood or iron. This refers to creating a surgical cut using tools provided in such cases—these could be wooden or metal implements designed specifically for supporting or manipulating parts like the sternum during an operation. Here, 'retenguda' likely means retained (or fixed), and this seems relevant when discussing fractures ('furcula le sturment').
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It seems like the original text is using Old French with influences from Latin and other Romance languages due to its vocabul extrémité médiévale et ses structures syntaxiques légèrement différentes du français moderne standardisé, notamment en raison des termes utilisés pour désigner les humors corporels (lesquels ne correspondaient pas à nos notions modernes de sang, lymphe ou bile). Cependant, I can provide an approximate translation based on the context and available vocab
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the operation is as you can possibly manage it; ensure there are both large and small limbs involved in this process at once. (This translation assumes that "extremitatz" refers to parts or appendages, which could be a misunderstanding due to archaic language use.)
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the wound where you have inserted pus from within the bone is wide open and bleeding profusely (presumably using "suturing"), adjust your fingers accordingly to perform this delicate task with a needle or stitching tool as required. ("Plagua" may refer here ambiguously either to flesh/skin, wound dressing material like gauze, or perhaps even small leeches used historically for bloodletting; context is key in translation.)
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the rupture is slight, or if you fear an abscess forming, then use small pieces of linen and powder according to the amount of ground flesh breakdown.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you apply a cauterizing agent (such as vinegar and oil), wrap it in cloth and place it on that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is crushed and its section(s), it's that a plaster made of flour mixed with egg white is applied on top of where the lion (a symbol for healing or specific area) rests, holding their hand firmly; also apply two layers over the putty/plaster. Then place another small tablet undernethy neckedness to ensure three fingers in length and elongated appearance along with that object below the fracture site; wrap it all together using cloth, then this wrapping around clothing is applied on top of where they stand above their injury's location; when needed, apply hand massage for them while turning head side-to-side (and similar motions), and reduce/tighten that region as much as possible. And whenever the fracture section becomes a separate entity again, it won’t remain hidden on you anymore.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Here is the line-by extralinguistic translation:
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: Return sleep of the malady on the chest over the breastbone, and quickly tap it gently so that he may fall asleep there for a small cushion; thus his helper from above is lifted up by the strength of that bone or muscle. 
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	E does not break through if you do not harden or scab it over within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	Strict and comfortable according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some are felt by those living at home during that time period.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI. (The Roman numeral "VI" is
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Regarding shoulder bone fracture treatment in a restaurant setting, it seems there might be some confusion as such medical situations are not typically
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	In regards to the broken spatula scenario at a restaurant location, it seems there's some mix-up in terms as suggested by your statement: "the handle (lu) is not broken but rather its edge/margin." Here’s an accurate translation and clarification of what
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it's the location of the handle (lu) that is broken—specifically, into shattered pieces or fragments at its edge/margin—it’s not from handling but rather an intentional act to prepare for use and reduce such breaks in their natural position. Here are comprehensive translations line by line:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Here comes the first source sentence: "E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May it be that when the stone is concave in some of the places on the scalpel'dictly, then you grasp that indentation with your thumb and press down firmly (stop as lion), ensuring to level off the blade evenly afterwards.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Return strength from below upwards, away from the tightening and firmness of the bed where it is not at risk due to its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament each day; and every time it is softened, lubricate it again and strengthen the leg if its socket has been dislocated from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	E lay the humors upon its flesh itself.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The tool (presumably a cautery or similar medical instrument) is restored in XX days or in .XXV days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and know that it concerns none of those bones from which fear or concern has not begun to dissipate.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed with the location of the shoulder and neck padlocks (which could refer to structures surrounding or protecting these areas), then divide over there, place them securely, as soon as we have discussed what is needed for the fracture of the sternum in a patient suffering from ossifying apatemy (a condition that may imply bone hardening due to excessive healing).
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.: (The text following this reference likely continues with
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Restauración de la fractura del hueso: (This translation suggests that the original treatise discusses methods for repairing a
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The thigh bones are broken or shattered by the cold at this spot on them, and perhaps their ends as well when moved about or crushed there: these limbs may then need to be carefully manipulated (or possibly set in place) due to fractures. The translation captures a medieval understanding of how injuries might occur from exposure to extreme temperatures leading to broken bones that would require attentive medical treatment, likely involving setting the bone back into
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	During the accidents of cold when it is broken (the heat), there are parts divided and pains intensified here, making labor difficult in this very place, with coughs and chest pain; such conditions are declared within these cracks where the bone has shattered—and they cannot be hidden from consciousness. This line suggests that fractures have significant physical manifestations including intense localized pains which make movements challenging for patients ("labor difficulty"), as well as systemic symptoms like cough and chest pain, emphasizing the severe impact of such injuries on both body movement and general health perception. The reference to "consciousness" implies that these physical signs are readily apparent or cannot be ignored by those affected.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	For the restoration of this person's bones when they have been fractured by cold and their thighbones are elevated above them with a pillow; there is an interval placed between the shoulders, using one cover for each limb—this line describes post-injury positioning where support devices such as cushions (referred to here colloquialdictly) or splints ("one covering per arm") are used. The practitioner then takes measures with muscles and back alignment, adjusts the shoulders so that they rest at two levels—this suggests careful manipulation of limb positioning for proper healing orientation along with gentle movements during treatment to suit what is feasible according to patient comfort ("to accordance"). Herein lies a description where both physical support devices (like pillows or splints) and manual techniques are employed, reflective of the therapeutic knowledge at that time regarding bone fractures caused by cold. The final part emphasizes return—the goal is for patients to regain their normal form after healing ("returning shape"), indicating an understanding in medieval medicine not only about immediate care but also recovery and rehabilitation of
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here comes the translation: Place padding over it with bandage and compress, applying gentle pressure on the broken bone undernethy chest (or back), encasing that in cloth; apply a thinner covering to those areas where there is no fracture breakdowns, moving along its curvature some times afterward for stricter compression. Keep an eye on the swelling at all times and continue applying pressure as it subsides.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke expulsion of that which has corroded or pruned within the location, and causes pain, ulceration for healing purposes (medical treatment), then remove the encrustation accordingly; also adjust the encompthyro where applicable on the face. Fix any strictures inside so as it may be cured.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.: (The translation of this line is not provided
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	When it's time for the shore restoration after they are broken, translates to: "Cuando es hora para la recuperación
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	When a fracture of the coast does not heal but in large places they are situated, and from their limbs it doesn't come to those cracks unless through porous stones that protrude; this implies that when there is an actual break or crack (fractura de las costas) along the shoreline, instead of mending as expected ("no catz sino en locs grosses"), these fractures are found in larger areas and not just at specific locations where one would expect them to heal. Furthermore, it suggests that fragments from their extremities (de lor de la partida)
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	I understand you're not afraid of your conscience when I question you about it; translates to: "Entiendo que tus temores sobre tu conciencia cuando me pregunto lo qué se dice." This means the speaker recognizes that their
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration should be attempted with wax as suggested by possible means within the guidelines provided (entro that sia engulhat segon que cove), and if necessary plasters or bandages are to be applied to the broken bones at the site, assuming they have consent from those affected. The translation addresses a method of repair for fractured areas with wax as an option according to what can realistically be done on-site ("engulhat segon que cove") and includes additional steps like applying plasters or bandages if needed (e implaste e strenhi le os trencat). It acknowledges the need for consent from those with fractured b
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the backbone fracture is declining towards the parts of division, then severe pain and piercing will occur at that place where you have cried out, along with this: difficulty in breathing (dyspnea), cough, chest tightness; all these are difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	Even then they are engaged in that motion within (the) body of water.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	From them they say: cover where the meals of humidity cause inflammation and expansion, so that the stomach will swell and be extended, and thus promote healing in parts beyond (the affected area).
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we drink this water to prevent it from causing rheumatic excrescency if not inflamed already; and if indeed they are inflamed, here comes the aid for such liquid.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: E dimissos ibus illis qui est pausata deus ventosa et quem succurrunt fortitudinis; sicut ratione se paret, magis enim temetis quod ventosa altera superfluis locum per defectibus.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And tell them that the place should be covered with wool which has already been submerged in oil for cauterization, and leave small pauses between the ribs until it is filled up again; then take care of the ulcer by caring for pleurisy caused by food or medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the hernia contracts violently and does not suffer, pinch it with a sharp pincers inserted by puncture into the area of pain; worry over therein as you fissure through that spot where bone fragments are broken off, apply pressure above using whatever instrument preserves tissue integrity (the one preceding this procedure), which facilitates handling and removal of such.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And adjust the patient'thy lips if they are great in size for comfort, and treat that which is inside until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an abscess that bursts open, then apply pressure with fingers and pause over the location so it is healed by the fluid applied to treat the abscess rupture.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When it is placed over the stomach where he sleeps, so that he becomes healthy.
Capitol .ix.	Based on my understanding of medieval Latin-influenced languages as
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The translation from a seemingly medically themed phrase using language influenced by Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French would be: "Of the restoration of the two-and-a
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	The translation into English would be: "For some cases of vertebrae fracture in the neck and backbone (spine), they resort to bracing these joints as well." Here's a line-by-line breakdown for clarity:
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When the fluid is applied to each limb and you know whether it will heal or not, then consider that if your hands have already softened and become numb and cannot be moisturized nor stretched anymore—and when those are constricted by tight bands or needles therein holding them, understand that they do not heal, for these conditions lead to mortality in the various diseases.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If those apply and feel pain in them due to tightness or piercing, you will know that the patient' extramedullary joint is saved and humors are healed with medicine.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see the likeness of water in the patient's spine and wish to know if it will heal or not, then take into account their weight as well.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you find that it is already soothed, apply to those who have become affected herein above the knees where they lay down and breath deeply, which will induce urination of their own accord; some may even recline on their backs as a result, understanding fully mortality, hence no longer requiring treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May it not be caused by any of those things; for then its cause is worse and harder (to treat).
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	E the treatment of it is that you perform self-catheterization with a catheter placed on the spinal disc herniated or eroded, possibly moistened by urine flow from the urethra during straining, and held in place for several hours until the catheter soothes the prolapsed disc.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And when one of the cushions providing comfort and existing, rests upon that limb where pain resides due to torture; command the humors (or fluids) not to take a break or sleep on the part causing suffering so it may heal.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you feel the grinding of bones or any cause that has already separated from them, then rest on the spine and press upon that bone; adjust the lips of your tools if it' extruded greatly; apply care to that part covered by skin, so long as healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	May your bone be broken at the hip joints and it is the end of life's thread; when you insert your hand into its left side below in that which remains after death (presumably referring to medical treatment postmortem), pause over there with plaster or sponge, if indigestion arises from these interventions, apply firm pressure.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel cracked pieces in the body, touch that area and stabilize it, doing so as part of healing what has already been done to become healthy again.
Capitol .x.	Capital Section (or Chapter) [Note: "Capitol
De restauracio de la ancha.	From Dining Hall Restoration [Note: The translation could be interpreted as the subject matter referring to
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the arches are broken or cracked (implying that they may have sustained such injuries), and if so, their breakage is simply communication at those extremities; located in length as well as declination to joints—herein pain manifests itself both where it was fractured and through a puncture. The splint (cane) becomes stunned when the bone breaks there [Note: This translation attempts to convey that if an arch or other body part is broken, one can feel this not only at distant extremities but also in localized pain upon examination/puncturing; and it suggests a reaction whereby medical staff may experience shock (fascinated) when they see the breakage of bones].
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of it is that you stretch your hand over where there'thy a fracture, which forms the figure of thee.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the bone is broken in just one limb of yours, then immediately you should fasten that part which has been bound with leather using an apparatus until it returns to its normal shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May it be that the fracture is in the long bone or already declining to parts, then you should speak with the malady within your belly until such time as preparations for mending this fracture are made by you.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have applied the plaster to that area, pause on this beam or bone piece, and stretch tightly over the place where there is no fear of a chiseling wound penetration nor removal of the spine.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	E unguent is applied where the fluid inside causes that particular narrowing in proportion to its filling and commands the malady (illness) within these areas, either under the patient'se back or on their chest side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you apply an incision with caution, then stop the extension of that cut and rest it until such time as that which came before has been sedated; afterward return to restore its original state, applying pressure therewith while accompanying him/her on foot.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If your bones are cracked or fractured, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	In translating this line by line from what seems like Medieval Latin
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	The translation of "Restauration du fragment d'adjuteur" into English, considering the context and similarity to medieval medical language with roots in Latin
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The phrase translates as "The adjutor (helper or assistant) that is between the shoulders atop of the shoulder blade." Here, 'adjutori' refers to a helper device used in medieval times for treating injuries such
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	The translation here is "If it's broken, the restoration of this device involves one or two tools; among these are those that you hold in your hand for direct guidance," which describes a manual technique used by medieval physicians to repair an injured helper. 'Fust pla de migiera groceza,' when translated more closely into English could mean "the handle with the sharp end of misery" – here, it refers metapthyically to tools that might be unpleasant or difficult but necessary for precise work in restoring
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The translation of this line would read: "They are held by two handles and suspended from the raised place," likely indicating that there were specific parts to an instrument or device designed for restoration in medieval times which had dual grips, allowing a physician control over its positioning during use
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The translation of this line is: "Follow the hump along a section; and with your uninjured arm, reach out over where it comes into contact at that spot under which its rod bends." Here, 'sezela' refers to an instrument or perhaps part thereof being manipulated for healing purposes. The instructions likely pertain to physically handling the device in a specific manner as indicated by medieval medical texts – using one arm while keeping another safe from injury and directing it along where needed ('titillic de lu') under certain conditions (e.g., warmth, represented here
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish the extension to be strong, hold tightly on the broken bone and that other splint, letting both servants stretch their limbs as far as possible.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the bone is close to the limb'dictor (muscle), then let it be immobilized on the splint above and below the injury site at once.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if it seems that the break is in the groin area, then have someone place a sling over that location and across the hernia.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: English translation: This enables her ease and strengthens it further as long as she covers herself properly after application for a good healing process; thus preventing decortication injury.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you cauterize the ulcer (apostema), it will heal within a week and stop bleeding by day seven; keep applying pressure with small bunches of suture thread in day six and oil-soaked bandages until then, when you tighten that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the interposition of armor that stops bleeding on the fracture, and wrapping with cloth over the bandage: place it around this assistant'thy aid; hold your hand across its body to prevent excessive movement from injuring the injured muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Pause the cloth and tightly over the assistant'gy arm to keep it in place, provided that there is not any cause from which the bone may be broken.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And uses tweezers (or possibly refers specifically to using pointed cautery tools). In this context, "stal
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And so rests the fractured piece that was pushed and forced out by other pieces; between any such piece lies its boundary line, which is equal in length according to how they are added together (three parts make a whole). In this translation:  
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Return strength above the bones at which I have mentioned in our discussion of the skull.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your constriction at the fracture site is pushed straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When I have lengthened the fracture as well as the smaller strain.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore, if you observe the state of the joints and tightness as we have discussed earlier in this hour when restoring the limb to its position, then do so accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear scab formation, then tomorrow with our having discussed this (the treatment), apply the restriction and stones within a day'thy seven hours.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Here comes the translation line by line:
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May if you are above in bed and there is not any cause of this fluid (humor), then do not remove the ligature until three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And his abdomen is lying on his back, and their hands are over the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Here comes the first sentence for translation: When resting on the caregiver who is fully covered in wool at once, and considering throughout the night or daytime whether the broken body part has not been dissolved nor dispersed its soft bandage, then correct your action accordingly.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	E pause the food of the malady according to its order nowad each day, so that the food is subtle during meals until it has been consumed in accordance with lunchtime; and if there are excesses from what eats them today.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to custom of the assistant and the cloth (or bandage) used, they should be strong in X days; furthermore, if they become loosened or their application is administered with oil and wax which correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If there is an injury that has become rusted (meaning the bone set in place), do not remove it from where you have placed it, and leave within days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Given that this text is from what appears to be an old medical manuscript with
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The translation for "Capitol .xii." in the context of bone fracture treatment seems incomplete or
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The given text appears to be in Old Spanish or a related Romance language with medieval Latin influences and discusses the anatomy of the arm as it pertains to bone fractures:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And only when either the great fire or small has been broken and their pieces have come together, so it is said that they break apart accidentally.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small fire below (probably referring to a candle or similar source of heat), its restoration is light and healing for them; therefore, their recovery will be also quickened.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the fire of it breaks down long enough for its bone is broken, and healing becomes difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When that putrefied matter from it arrives when two bones are broken,
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is fractured is the small one above (likely referring to a specific part of the skull or spine), it is convenient for the doctor, and you must restore it quickly so that while doing this healing process, his head can be kept comfortable.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that when a great fire is what you seek (to heat or treat), once applied the forceful extension has ceased.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two fires are combined together in ignition, then you should stop their withdrawal forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When the figure of your hand must be rested and extended over a limb (likely an arm or leg), place it on the parts below, as well as all others, with their hands placed accordingly; one atop another, each beneath its partner's feet, while the patient lies prone upon a couch that has been lowered.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if a hernia is present in or near the patient now and then changes position within them, to prevent the malady from worsening further.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	When it is necessary for the minister to extend their arm from where they are placed on either side of or above them, and another minister extends outward as if something else were being held up by hand,
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And lift up (or raise) the doctor's hand that draws away what is better according to form/shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the fracture of the bone you find that there is pain throughout the entire body at your touch herein lies proof for repairing and healing yourself with care as necessary.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in you separate satiety that pushes the navel and is not within your hope for restoration, then stand upon it as directed above (by us).
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May if the bone is broken and has entered into a single drop of water (implying that it's already absorbed some fluid), then take care of that particular issue.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you cauterize the ulcer on your patient'se restoration site, then line up linen dipped in olive oil and white wax between scrutiny and subtlety, stretching said cloth over that strictured area until the ulcer recedes; once done so, apply poultice made of powdered moonstone mixed with clay heated for treatment to this immobilization bandage where there is a fracture placed by you (and secured firmly).
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	E understand that the name of the bones in the arm is found within its major arrangements or a fracture occurring at one focus point or two points simultaneously initiated.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	When the clothes covering the fracture are soft and not hard or tight, it is necessary for elastic cloth to be chosen according to what suits them best naturally, as we recommend when healing wounds together.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the body part and ligaments as they are toned down today.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any cause for which correction is necessary, apply it to the affected limb and make sure that bleeding stops within where you have applied pressure until such time.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Whenever you find that part of the body locked in and contracted (restrained), then return it back into position so as not to maintain or worsen the tightness/contracture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If extraction is softened and the bone seems to return to those places, then correct what you have done with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Here comes the first sentence to translate: Consider if nourishment is prohibited for excessive swelling of the limb; otherwise, soften that little and ease it gradually over the days until reaching that sustenance again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If in the malady there is not any cause of those that have been said, do not attempt to drain it within two days or send them away from these ones,
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And bring up its limb from within the malady'dicted by motionlessness, and have it sleep on their chest.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You understand that this fracture is healed in either xxx days or xxxii days, and all according to the complexity of the injuries and the positioning of the vital spirits.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.: (This line does not appear to contain any
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	The text provided appears to be in a Romance language, possibly Catalan or another dialect influenced by Latin and similar languages like Spanish, Italian, or French. The phrase "Restauracio de fract
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	The provided text seems to be in Catalan and translates roughly into English as follows:
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When you have the patient'thy fracture or dislocation following it thereafter moves down and extends itself in that manner for an equal distance from above, then apply pressure to the injured part over this extension.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Extend the minister' extraneous (broken) bones and let the doctor manipulate them where they are in good conjunction (proper alignment).
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And when you place an emplastrum and bandage on it without curing the ulcer (apostema), then adjust the splint below according to the size of the area, which means that you have already wrapped this in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	May it be that the joint pain is in the parts of the womb and then appears like threads of cloth held together by hands, commanding the womb to tighten at the point pressed with its own hand; make those threads long (or forceful).
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Whereas the body is clothed in which it rises, to ensure that the body rests on the palm; and tighten this second one as well.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	May it be that if the fracture is in parts beyond repair, then cease to press below and above stone fragments of the damaged part on your palm so that your hand becomes covered (protected) and tight; also pause the swelling, as when you turn over your body between the limbs where they connect with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break the bones of your fingers, and it is in those very digits that they are broken, then bind them as tightly as possible with a strand from the palm and if you wish to pause for three days so that the fracture heals and does not become swolthy.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	May it be so that if the fracture is in those places mentioned hereinabove (like this or elsewhere), as at the source of warmth, or near the navel, or around the ankle; and continue along these lines, which they say when touching upon the foot. Or pause on that small stone for a moment until it feels better, similar to how we have them here in the hand.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider it in your restoration process and arrange the application of applied poultice—at which stage of treatment we are discussing when a cause is addressed as told by you.
Capitol .xiv.	Capitol .xiv. (The provided text does not contain enough
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	In this line, it appears that the term "restauracio" refers to a treatment or repair process for an injury involving the hip bone (coxa). However,
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone (cuisse) is broken and has been declared to have fallen apart as time passes, indicating urgency for proper treatment or repair ("convertit en mort"). This line suggests that the injury to the patient's hip bone may be worsening over time due to neglect. The use of poetic language emphasizes the gravity of a poorly managed fracture and possibly its impact on both mobility (indicated by 
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	In this line, it appears that the mention of "liement" refers to a form of binding or immobilization device used in medieval medicine for treating broken bones like fractures (fractura). The goal is to stabilize and securely hold together ("strenhut") not just at the site where the break occurred, but also with additional means as needed. This method likely involved various types of materials or implements fashioned into braces that would be applied directly over "the fracture." These supports are designed so tightly they press against and secure to both sides (
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Here the mention of "le ministre" refers perhaps not only to another medical instrument but could imply additional layers or components added as needed ("la seva qualitat"), specifically when the broken bone (fractura) is in its healing position within the body'dictate a comprehensive approach to immobilization and support. This suggests an escalation of treatment
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Here the mention of "razitz" implies some form of external intervention or surgical procedure that may be required for a hip bone (cueyssa) injury ("lahoras sia propda al denolh"). It describes how, during such an operation ('denolyng'), one might use additional supports—possibly splints made with liament material. These external devices would help maintain the injured area's shape and alignment while internal healing takes place (described as "la fractura," which is Spanish for 'fracture'). The phrase indicates that these tools are not only crucial but also strategically applied to both imm
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the injury is due to excessive cold, then it will cause pain in various parts of the body immediately; and such tendons should be tightened with wax (or similar substance) on demand as needed for healing purposes only.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Here the doctor gently restrains the limbs until he reduces that second into its natural similarity and joints are reconnected properly through good union; provided you do not painlessly immobilize a contracted part of the body.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If you have an ulcer in the wound, then leave that area for several days until the sore heals itself and return to your care afterwards.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strictness of the limb is pain: it wraps around the fracture with a hard bandage, folded twice or thrice, and reduces excess; furthermore, wrap again within so that reaches down to the ankle and knee joints where their tendons are located.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Here the long linen is introduced between the thigh and the specific portion of the dress as needed at each division, and their extremities are brought close to this part where excess fabric from the bandage remains; they rotate over the thigh and the waistband accordingly.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And apply pressure on that wound's location and place some of the stones from there above the bone in the groin area where it is broken.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Return and fill the emptiness between the sheet and the thighs with heavy clothes to ensure that bleeding is stopped (coagulation).
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Here begins the contraction of strong heat from the mercury above the site of the three-layered or fourfold breakage; and as you move away from the location of the fracture, your constriction becomes less severe, and softer clay is placed with moisture.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Return the limbs to their joints and tightly bind the ends of other parts together such that they do not come out from their place again.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Here the structure is placed on that so as not to wound or fracture its member nor cause abscesses and ulcers therein; if any of these causes are present in it then you must depart from here, and correct all such things according to what has been explained regularly.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	May if bone is pressed on the other that placed it, then you must take out what can be removed from there; and if not possible, press upon it and cure whatever has been remembered before healing begins.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Here come the first sentence to translate: And in some cases this hip breakage is also strenuous and requires adjustment with these braces as we have mentioned beforehand.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Whenever the patient' extrication occurs during such a restoration act; and if it is restored alone without application of another cushion, then he must continue walking from where he has started his movement.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	E understand that the thigh is tense in 40 days or a few months and all this fluid accumulates according to the variety of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	The given text is written in medieval medical terminology with an amalgam of
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	La frase "la restauració de la fractura de la rolla" se traduce al inglés como "the restoration of the elbow fracture." Here is
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	La frase se traduce al inglés como "you may reduce the elbow joint displacement gradually." Aquí hay una línea por línea traducción:
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If you break it (the bone), they are not simply a crack or dislocation in their parts; rather, everything is asleep and there' extrinsic feeling present.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the patient is achieved by applying warm water that has been broken up from their parts within which it can be added and conjoined as needed for horse riding ease and simplicity in construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And apply pressure and bandage over that round stone if you have difficulty with it; firmly press below to prevent the flow of humors from above.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	E return all the arrangements we have recommended for other fractures too, as if applying cast and resembling those who are immobilized so that they may heal in this water which is necessary for them to enter into recovery after their accident.
Capitol .xvi.	The provided medieval text seems to deal with medical practices related to joint pain (g
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	La restitución o cicatrização de una fractura en el codo, comúnmente conocida como "cambra
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Comprende que el codo consta de dos huesos entrelazados donde se origina comúnmente llamar "camba," y otro más pequeño llamado enlatado o foco; estos son los términos utilizados para describir dicho área del codo.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	Estás aplicando hierbas para el manejo tanto del codo como del brazo; ambos requieren reparación y la intervención terapéutica aquí mencionada abarca ambas extremidades superiores, lo que implica un procedimiento médico.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	Si se separan los huesos en el codo (camba), entonces toda parte del codo ya no está unida; esto significa que ha ocurrido una fractura completa donde todos los fragmentos deben ser restaurados o repar
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	Si se separan el hueso más delicado dentro del codo (el foco), entonces toda parte de esa región ha sido dividida; esto indica una lesión grave donde los fragmentos óseos también están rotos, y esta situación requ
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	Si se rompe el hueso más grande dentro del codo (la parte gruesa), restaura típicalislo con cuidado y prudencia; esto hace referencia al hecho de que tal fractura puede requerir un tratamiento especializado, indicando una causa fuera del alcance habitual o ordinario.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	When applying extension and bearing exergy (vital energy) according to that particular method, do so with the use of elbows, legs, and tongue movements as directed by this procedure:
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Mayhaps if the crack in the hock is caused by hamstring strains that contract and pull apart, then apply pressure with your strength to aid healing.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and when you are about to perform the entirety of the surgery with wooden splints that have been allowed time since they were used in soles (meaning footwear), these will serve as pins holding together wounds; attach them especially to those joints where there is swelling due to rheumatism, and do not use fingers for this task. Here comes the translation line by line:
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Envelop the cloth over each garment according to its length and pause one on the division of the cushion belonging to either side, ensuring that they remain within the putrid substance at the foot' extraterrestrial language appears a blend of Latin with Italianate influences. Here is an attempt to translate line by line:
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "Apply dressings in three locations of extremities and at nighttime; this method is forbidden for movement on either side'supreme position," which implies that it's advised not to move from an ideal or resting posture during sleep, as per medieval medical advice.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a bolt of wood is administered according to the length of the couch, and it is held in place on the bed so that it maintains its motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Mostly when you perform this action in a fracture, and at that moment it is done properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii. (The given text does not contain a clear statement
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	From the break in the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Although the toe does not suffer from complete breakage entirely; some breaks may occur in the leg bones (fractures), and they do not experience pain but numbness within their joints of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot are broken and have been lifted between them, then let the humors rest on the foot above ground that has been prepared in advance for this purpose.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Return the foot over what is raised from those bones and apply warmth to them; press and massage these into place until they return to their respective locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Return cauterization and pressure below the belly of the body using a small table with two covers:
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	When you strengthen that limb of the body' extrinsic structure, have done so with cloth and other sources from which doctors digest;
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	When three or four days have passed, then you remove the ligament and crush/break the bones that are either fractured or displaced, and thus surgery becomes necessary with these complications.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	May if you have made cuts (trinches), then restore those parts, and apply them to the affected areas as instructed by me in their restoration.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Here is the line by line translation:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If you have fractured the bones of either two or three joints (or possibly more), then rest on any one of these mentioned stones covered by a lion'sup quilt under your chest, and press tightly with a board at the base of your foot to ensure that the tongue remains in good condition.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you that you do not overlook all the causes mentioned to you in other accidents we have discussed, and I shall consider everything related to this water (humor) issue.
Capitol .xviii.	The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of Latin or a Romance
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	From the fragmentary English sentence you've given, it seems like there might be some typographical errors and possibly an attempt to describe a medical condition related to bone fractures in women (femina), pelvis (os of the penteon - os pertaining
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone of a woman is broken (fractura), it tends to be protruding outwardly and slightly inclined towards one side of the pelvis; hencefors its holders keep pressure behind where they can, indicating immediate first aid or stabilization efforts. This translation attempts to convey urgent care for an acute hip fracture in a female patient, taking into account historical medical terminology that might have been used during medieval times when Latin-based vernacgy was still prevalent among educated professionals like physicians and surge
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The matroness (femina) should be applied pressure to the broken hip bone, and she may hold it in place with hope; for as long as this is done near where there's support from above underneath her leg that has been fractured, until then when no further injury occurs at or around its location. This translation aims to convey medieval first aid practices involving immobilization of an injured hip bone and positioning techniques used before modern medical interventions became the norm—emphasizing manual support as preventive care during transportation for treatment without advanced surgical equipment, which aligns with historical approaches described in traditional healing texts.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Return the pillows to their places on both of them, and when urinating becomes easier due to these cushions facilitating it, return that second by which they are made comfortable back to its original position according to necessity, as dictated by willful action.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	When rest is given for seven days or these are brought in herein, then that one is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take once upon the sheep'se wool and tighten it over the patient's abdomen using a cane made of bamboo; insert all the way into their belly until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When it is filled with blood and stays for two days after being treated, then enters the state of healing.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of either man or woman are broken, administer to them rest and treatment here provided; give them water that we have recommended for their thighbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	When it is not hidden in these specific breaks and rarely occurs, mainly to the area that I refer directly as my fundamental principle for restoration and constriction herein, thus understood by you.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the pain occurs in the groin when it is twisted, take linseed oil (or another remedy), and apply it there; cover with a cloth wrap, and keep covered for three days or send these here, and be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. (The ".xix." may indicate chapter
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When bone healing in children, here is the translation line by line:
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	With such an injury to the bone where you have fractured it, and mostly if your arm or adjutant'sin (helper) is also significantly swollen like your shoulder or theirs who assists with setting up for amputation herein described, then attend immediately as instructed by those experienced in this procedure.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the patient' extrudes or has an obstruction, then you must sit with them to grind over their belly where they are stuck until other causes disappear (implying that if there is a blockage causing distension of the abdomen). It suggests medical attention and care for patients experiencing symptoms possibly related to intestinal issues.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When bone healing begins on that particular day, do not extend it further unless an abscess forms.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May you alleviate the ulcer with cauterization; after that, heal it within one day so long as the ulcer subsides, but do not treat it on the third and fourth days in total, for then bad accidents may occur.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If your bone is broken and protrudes through the skin, it's essential that you attempt to reduce (set) that very quickly with ease for yourself and a little extension effort.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May if you have not prepared and the equipment of your patient is in their throats, then reduce that part with yours; this joint which was formed by iron, its length being seven or eight digits (inches) long, according to the quantity of soil (bone density), as follows: hence it becomes necessary for a doctor to prune these three or four parts depending on what is required for treatment in all types of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And give back (or return), and for it not be twisted or compressed on that in the hour of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it happens:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E is nominatum in Graecum "laber venatorem", sicut pala.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that which is paused at its end should climb onto the end of the bone protruding.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	When it enters into a restoration period that returns the bones and is gently massaged on any of its joints,
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then you should grasp the ends of the fracture with your hands, and if that broken limb is delicate so as not to take on such a device for good reason (good medical practice), then insert the instrument into the bone where it has power over moisture.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May you not be able to reduce the bone of all that we have recommended, then proceed as follows: Separate out and collect what little fluid has come from our recommendations; or use one of your saws for this task if it's within your capability.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Return that which is rough in the bone'dict and small cuts;
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and reduction of it occurs violently causing severe pain to linger, you understand that the bone will not return to its original place on its own; therefore, provide great care for the affected joint (gout).
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and you submerge the cloth tightly around the head (presumably for bandaging or treatment), especially in summer, without pause over dirt or any other cause that could wet it, so that no accidental spillage occurs leading to rot and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "And administer needles in the hour of meat digestion, and lay them down so that the exposed rabies contract is covered with bandages according to the amount of the suck.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: "E guarda te am total care you do not strain yourself if there is a crack (fracture), for such movements avoided by careful physicians over time can cause pain in your bones or make them decay, which becomes illness.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If it is a flexible bowing of the bone that differs from other types of fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the child is large or ill-formed and you fear those harmful accidents upon them which cause pain in that place, do not cease until they are wrapped up tightly with hard cloths at the site of swelling and discomfort; thereupon no further action should be taken.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When once or twice a day the patient starts to have diarrhea herein caused by bile production within them (the humor), then remove from undernethy which you've laid on that part where it rested, and administer medicines made of linseed ointment as per our custom when treating intestinal disorders—when we use lint seed-based medicine products along with various similar preparations for this.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And when you have prepared the ligament and considered the patient' extraneous matter each day morning and evening, until it is consolidated and closed up, so that the puncture can easily travel from body parts throughout as desired.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If days pass and the belt is not secured or falls off of it, then you understand that small parts are moving around to make the child wander away.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those satagias (which are separated and extracted), which cannot be kept apart and cause the limb to hurt when they do so, take note of them according as it is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you have softened or loosened the area affected by decay and putrefaction, it is said that pausing for one of these fluids necessary to treat as mentioned earlier in this chapter describes such action taken during care.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: When in the water where my speech and your presentation are taking place, when large bones crack, they rise up with those of the thighs and helpers, without suspecting attachment or removal from it for long periods due to excessively hot waters which can lead to death; having seen that you have provided such care, if not already done so: continue doing this treatment for twenty days or thirty. And when you see me again, further care will be given as needed.
Capitol .xx.	Capital ".xx." (The provided Latin-influenced text
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	From the care of lynching that you provide for any bone breakage in the limbs." (This sentence appears to be related to medieval medical practices concerning treatment after a fracture, indicating attention is given to immobilization
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	During the healing of this lynching in the limb's remains, mostly at joints, and mainly held by its own figure on the body part; strictly forbidden for it to engage in normal bodily function." (This sentence suggests a medical approach where care is taken during bone fracture recovery with special focus on maintaining positional integrity around the affected area. The patient's limb should not move as if its own natural movements were permitted.)
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore administer in that medicine which has staunched blood flow from it into cupping herbs and liniments; apply some of these to the affected limb(s), or all, ensuring their topical application with its own dressing made from cloth (bandage) soaked in wine vinegar or saltwater bath, or gauze pad. Secure them snugly over the lynching site using clean linen and bandages for a good fit; compress this area filled with such remedies to aid healing through proper constriction pressure applied directly on top of it in soaked material like cotton wool, or even wood shavings. (This text outlines the practical application of medicines intended to stop bleeding and promote circulation for an injured limb while emphasizing dressing techniques with specific materials mentioned.)
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the knot is already in stone and ironwork and it necessitates to provoke that outgrowth of said coating, then divide this excessively large part with a sharp instrument so as not to remove any further beyond what has been needed; cleanse these residues within wherein they are housed using an alkaline reagent. Treatment will continue until healing is achieved.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.: This line appears incomplete or out of context as
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the bone is set and secured, gently restoring it according to its natural position or function as per Roman tradition:
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the subtle body (the marrow) and flesh are returned to their proper place: no longer it hurts due to causes such as: excessive tightness of the sinews inside that prevent nourishment from reaching the limb; or an abundance of bone adhesion; or unnecessary movement outside one's natural time; or swelling in the thigh area and distension within.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Care for the excess water is to drain it from the body and make the patient'dict heart tender within, administer baths, and apply poultices and leeches on him/her.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Here is the translation line by line:
Capitol .xxii.	The provided text seems like it could be from an old medical manuscript combining elements of
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	When the bones are broken and fixed in a twisted manner, it is forbidden to operate on them at once.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you have healed the illness of that member'thy bent and raised joints, and it is for this reason affected in shape by that part, though not prohibited from natural operation; nevertheless do not receive into your hands that man who exists with a new fracture on his limb.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Mays already those who have been treated by doctors and restorers, we fear for their lost reputation due to this operation.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	May joint locking and nodules be recent occurrences; if they are encysted in the water vessel where their thighs reside (which may have been softened by herbs, high alkali, razor blades), accompanied with honey and spirits similar to these substances—then apply plaster on top of it for mollification, using diallagium as sweet medicine; or if a mucolagin derived from the ashes of alkaline wood (and oil/fats extracted by pressing sesame seeds) is present along with linseed grease prepared in women's breasts—then apply this on top for mollification, these being remedies named after Grecian consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	When some substances are melted away by constant cold breeze and their administration induces movement in the entire body at all times of day,
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	May it be that the twisted state was yesterday and today a painful condition has become stone-like and necessitating care with iron tools because: if the patient's pus is rising up above their cessations, continuously dissolving bone structure, excess water beyond the knotting of this particular doctor's threadwork underlies it all—and such ailment administered willingly by those solicitous at its study.
Capitol .xxiii.	The provided medieval medical text seems nonsensical when attempting direct translation without proper
De sermo en dislocacio.	Given that "de sermo in dislocatio" translates to English as "from speech
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to any of the joints in one's body that prevents movement and necessitates attention from a medical professional; it brings on significant pain and swelling into the groin area (malu).  
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when you bend down to adjust a dislocation, forcefully straighten it out immediately and not delay; if there is any delay, the joint becomes arthritic making reduction difficult again.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	For so that there is not gout or prolapse in the hour of application, frequent movements bring about cramps and pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When you pour vinegar (or acid), cover yourself with the flaubotomy of the thighs and wait until the inflammation subsides; then bind your limb to watercress stalks and oil, for ease in reduction.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every part of it will be cured by the water from which its memory returns in that place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And when the displacement of joints follows after a break, it enters from one side into the other side.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol XXIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of treatment for jaw dislocation nowhere (or in English translation) has been provided within this paragraph as it only contains instructions and descriptions of procedures or observations,
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Of treatment for jaw dislocation if not set; and temporarily fractured joints can be managed by: either they are slightly realigned at their location with minimal effort, or the entire displacement is rectified within which saliva from the mouth (malaxus) must prevent that tooth/teeth cannot remain in place nor close one's mouth properly; and patient’thy tongue wrapped around his word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	May when the detachment of them is little, they return themselves back by a small cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May it be that if there is a complete and total dislocation, then immediately apply the reduction technique of your physician, without delay for all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce the patient' extrication (reposition), especially if both jaws are dislocated, then apply warm waters and oil down their tailbone and into the rectum until reduction of both occurs; thus we have what has been said hereinabove.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	So when they return and their mouths are closed but not soothed, place powder on those spots of cloth where the drape is sewn together, apply wax and oil for relief; this eases his mind'thy limbs.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is administered easily, and you should not work on the opening of the mouth for food consumption and drinking until the jawbone has been numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and cannot be converted back into place during the proper moments, they are followed by continuous fevers and constant diarrhea, and similarly with bloating of the abdomen; likewise frequent purulent colitis.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you take it again, then realize that I have lost it; and move diligently towards the place to which I took this substance within X days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv. (The given text does not provide enough context
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of a shoulder dislocation and injury to the arm' extrinsic muscles:
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fur finally is not dislocated from the loins due to its continued position on the body; and some times it becomes dislocated at the lower region, which is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of him is that the malady ascends his two legs and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Return (or apply) pressure at that location with your hand or firmly pressed part of it; she/he will return there again.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Return your pause (holding pressure) over that plaster and crushed stones/ashes, which are very hard.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that person who sits on their hips remain in place today, not dislocated at any time; if it is reduced and manipulated as we have explained and according to what you are equipped for handling.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Here the pressure is applied to that dressing, and with pills, extraction, command the humors (or fluids) to settle down and rest within until it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	At this moment of caregiving, reduction is achieved in the patient' extramuscular part when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	The provided text appears to be from an old medical treatise discussing symptoms
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	When it comes to the reduction of a muscle strain, here is what might generally follow based on typical medieval or archaic language patterns combined with an
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	It is known that the muscle has not become dislocated but according to three methods; one of these involves moving it back towards its original position quickly, possibly indicating immediate action or swift repositioning as recommended by medical practitioners at the time who would understand this formulation in their own lexicon.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second method involves moving the displaced portion of the muscle away from where it has become misaligned, and this requires force without causing further issues at either end near the shoulder or in relation to nerves—this hints at a nuanced approach considering anatomical relationships crucial for safe treatment. It's essential during these procedures not only to address the immediate concern but also safeguard against additional complications that could arise from misapplication of force, reflecting medieval medicine’s attention even then to holistic care and avoidance of further harm.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is a displacement and departure of the body'sflesh from its place, mainly in those parts where fleshes are thin, dislocation occurs; perhaps also when there are movements of bones, illness goes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	When the limb is touched lightly or palpated with a hammer, and its muscles are fixed by applied pressure due to previous displacement, this suggests joint inflammation which needs medical attention.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now when you cry out that you are overbearing and heavy upon me (the physician), then proceed with the healing of me.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Here comes the first source sentence translated line by line into English:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is displaced from its position or joints and you must apply touch treatment without fear of causing harm:
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this dislocation it is said that a light reduction occurs when it becomes cold and descends into the abdomen.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of the patient is for the minister to lift their body up into parts above it and pause with tightly pressed hands on its surface until they return there, lifting the part back up again; afterward pausing a little while before returning them gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May if for water returns not and from the consumption that dislocation occurs, hurry to bathe the malady in tailwater (i.dict "tailwater" as a type of natural spring or running water), where it is administered with bonebroth meant to soften joints and liniments composed of fenugreek, mustard seed, honey, applied along with its high-altitude crustacean shell fragments (interpreted herein possibly referring to seafood).
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to proceed with this treatment: make present a long home that is from the waist and belonging to it; immediately insert your muscle into the groove of the waist, lifting upwards while keeping inserted in place until the hernia hangs suspended in air, another servant pulls out the mass (likely referring to protruded intestine) from inside just below its belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the lumbago is loose, then it should be observed that another cause has caused its suspension; when this happens, it will return violently in such a way.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate: And another method of reduction is as follows: a long staff with its head remains on the ground; similar to a mortar' extrusion which should not be thick nor subtle, and it is positioned downstairs near the patient’s buttocks quickly. The spinal column rests upon this stick atop the bedclothes, while the hernia lies along the length of the staff; concurrently extend your arm from that other part for strengthening purposes, so that when these forces come together swiftly, it returns to its proper place promptly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If reduction of it is difficult for all the reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment: grasp a quantity with which its length reaches two arm' extranches (the extremities), and rotate that amount along its axis by four degrees as follows:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Even over his head place linen wraps for that sword does not pierce through the hollow (of the body).
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Return the chest pillow to its place within the parts immediately and extend your arm over it; hold the staff above you along with the arms of both servants (likely referring to medical attendants or aids), as well as the extension of one's own limbs.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the body's interior is completed according to any possible way you can do it; and when you pause occasionally for your patient's sinewy spirit of wool which quantity needs preparation with powdered moly from mines or eggshell, apply this plaster prepared on muscles in order that they may be turned upwards above the constriction point; then twist the ligament over the poultice and attach your patient'thy arm to their collarbone so it is secured. Let nothing come out of its socket for seven days without a sound, hoarse voice appearing.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When food consumed from sickness is sparingly provided and the body feels relief, then place it for healing on you.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Return food that has been given in greater amounts and engage it in some sort of motion; therefore, if it is closed off and not softened, then already healing occurs.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that you have caused or for another reason, then in that case administer three kinds of cautery as taught in the school of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all of this pain is present and the ligament and joint are not closed for seven days after being sutured (stitched), then they will reduce swelling over time, but it cannot be fixed nor raised above these parts; you understand that these bones belong to the upper part of the muscle or its extension/smoothing out.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is felt in the chest and thighs or lower parts, reduction is done by pushing and extension until return (back to normal position).
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When it is administered in that place, and heals within which it was applied,
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If you worsen the state of gravity in the limb and slow down its movement, then let that gravity be relieved until it returns to its original natural condition.
Capitol .xxvii.	The text provided seems like an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise using archa
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	For the care of hip dislocation, it would translate to: "About the treatment for the dislocation of the hip." In this line
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You understand that the hip joint is difficult and appears dislocated; it's usually displaced in all directions but mostly between the parts forward (anteriorly) and backward (posteriorly), meaning when you adjust a previously dislocated hips, at this moment your declaration becomes manifest. For now, its angle curves downwards such that one cannot bend their arms or touch it with those hands; as for the joint itself is concave – here's evidence of displacement which indicates how to proceed in treatment:
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When you have the coxae (hips), reduce their dislocation to such an extent that they return to normal position; if there is a fracture lithotomy in place as well, it' extrication will be difficult and unlikely for complete recovery regardless – especially when present at other parts of the body where sprains occur with greater intensity, accompanied by frequent movements towards said location leading potentially toward death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When the restoration is possible, it means that the leg must be extended as far as possible and the arms expanded; have yourselves on the hips and thighs of the patient, pushing at their joint where they hold onto themselves or with the palm's base inside to return them back.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	May it be that if the dislocation is in the joints ahead of time (presently), then return to where they are twisted back together when pressed upon by your hand inside, while you touch their wrist on the spot where bone meets skin.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If sprain does not submit to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	When two ministers stretch out their arms and hold that instrument between them, thus preventing its excessive extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And return his arm completely turned around (revolved), placing it under the patient' extraneous covering or lariat for support and protection.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, apply some oil to it so that those causes which help in its lubrication are alleviated, and then gently massage the joint until it returns to normal function;
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Here comes the sentence to translate: Apply the reduction of him that is paused upon that paste in which his fixity and discharge are made with albumen's substance, and its distention attenuated by means of strictures descending from the collarbone, suspended arm resting on acute points.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Return it is placed back; and so if the joint forms in its place, then you should return that ligament to it and fixate it therewith.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see the joint not strained, then apply the plaster and bandage repeatedly for several days until it is externalized; after that, return that as well.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you apply pressure to the reduction of the joint, its position is in motion, and administer moist dressing with warmth gently applied internally until it has subsided; where there's a hernia at the fatty mass movement site, tie it up securely here. Apply this treatment above the joint during daytime and nighttime.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Intramedical bath enters where there is moisture (or fluid).
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish to pause over that wet and split cow hole at the border, press firmly on it for some time; this will dry out and return to its proper disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide text for translation but appears as a
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	In the treatment of hernia protrusion, it is at the joint between the arm and body where care should be focused. (This translation assumes that "Capitol" refers to a specific medical topic or context related to this discussion.) Here's an attempt based on Latin-der
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	For a protruded abdomen (or what is referred to as "malassen"), the reduction of displacement involves joints elsewhere—it might occur at an articulation or may result in apatheism, necessitating immediate local application with heat treatment ("local applications"). The urgency for reducing it when protrusion occurs implies that prompt action should be taken where possible to reestablish the proper position. (This translation is formulated on understanding "malassen" as a term used within this context related to hernia and assuming 'alcunas vetz' refers to multiple joints or sites, while also translating medical terminology.) Here are more interpretations:
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you stop the joint'supremaunite (groin) above a table and extend it from there; let the doctor or their hand rest upon the impending juncture, and push it back to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Even if it is considered that the palm has remained on the stomach of her/him, then make sure to position their hips over a table for extension and reduction; if dislocation precedes this must be placed in such way backward relative to them so as metaphorical hand (doctor) can rest above potential joint connection.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	So then if it returns soon, good things follow; but if not, that which is strong will soften the ulcer and prevent its treatment from continuing here for several days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	May the joint according to its twisted nature; and not in vain does it heal, for its own cause is softened and cannot be stretched further—know that the nerves are either compressed or strained, and only when you apply force with cautery will you provide a reason (cause) for this fluid.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	So when they retire (return), place your hand on the one that has been recommended for them, and rest their body upon it for days; then cut off and also exercise both parts of what is placed thereon, as well as the belly'seat whereof you hold hands.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	May it be that if the patient' extricates and experiences any form of pressure or gravity in there, then apply some water to his tail region and cold compresses for several paces, until he is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of joint displacement.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some days they are displaced throughout the entire body.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a part of the body is dislocated at either their hands or abdomen, tighten and push it back into place until they return to normal.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Place support under the head of this person, and suspend that portion which has been dislocated, allowing it to rest for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	After returning that which has been brought out and extended inside into where it is anchored today.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When the pain occurs at night or daytime, listen to that second account and do not delay it until morning; let this flow during those days when restrained.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When it seems like water (i.dict "aqua"), if the patient's abdomen is dislocated ("dislocat al ventre de la ma"), bring that element to where the first operation will take place, so healing can occur ("entro que sia sanat").
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it appears that fluid is coming out in other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx.	Unfortunately, it seems there was an error in providing text for translation
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The provided phrase "Capitol .xxx." is not a complete sentence and appears to contain nonsensical elements or typographical errors, making it difficult to understand
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in the back or neck becomes dislocated completely, and localized movement occurs therein which is not treated, then death approaches as it enters into a state related to ill humor (malignum humorum). Here "ill humor" likely refers to an imbalance among bodily fluids believed by medieval physicians to affect health. The phrase translates the concern for timely and appropriate medical intervention in cases of severe spinal dislocation, underscoring its potentially fatal consequences without proper care according to historical perspects on medicine related with humoral theory—a prevalent notion during
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When such an evil humor (ill-humor) is excreted from the body on its own accord and cannot be retained, it moves or flows along to various limbs of oneself or others' legs with cushions under them; another may move a spinal vertebra here, which then also has movement in parts as well as potential for curative treatment. Here "evil humor" refers again to the imbalance among bodily fluids that was thought by medieval physicians to impact health negatively.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Thus it is swolthy behind and has no yellow discharge.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure for them be that you will consider if their yellowish dyspepsia is not a cure or healing of all things therein; in which case, it shall neither become a remedy nor restore health entirely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May enter through castration or percussion/palpation to these areas; they return the ancient ways of treatment discussed in a detailed speech, which may include extracting and preparing various instruments from this for their demonstration today.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	When you have cooled the inflammation from below in the area of pain and seem to be affected by two layers herein, it is not healing or recovery for that which was damaged; rather, it appears as if something else still causes suffering within those two layers.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	From that one is not cured but only healed by what you have applied directly on their two places appropriately with the liquid that I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	It is that the humidity (or excess fluid) extends over their face and cheek down from above of bone/skin surface, and it spreads quickly through limb joints to avoid being visible on their chest skin.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place one stake upright on the ground at the end of the patient's leg beyond their head, and another in a vise holding up the legs elsewhere, preventing them from moving too much.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the staff and does not leave it in the pit; another minister takes that form with their stick as well.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Here comes the translation line by line:
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Here the minister extends the ligature to the part of the beam, ensuring that neither beams nor their respective fixtures are left loosely attached; yet not as tightly bound as we have previously mentioned.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places their hands on the spinal vertebra that returns strength, and adjusts them over thereon plateau until they return too, whereupon he/she will make appropriate corrections to maintain balance or posture.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return through this method, then take a table of which the length or width is three feet, and dig into the wall where we have previously stated that the hernia should be located within its limit at the extreme point of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Here is the line by line translation:
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to turn the area that has been revolved above, then remain on your back with the head of the malady at the end of the two staves; these poles are as long as an arm, and where they meet is a palm'dictum - it has already become troubled in some of the staves where movement occurs, each one firmly fixed to earth so that no further spreading can occur.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And if you have a staff in which it is turned (presumably for some therape extraneous rite or treatment), then rotate the same within the two halves of both staves.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the limb there is a defect where it forms its staff (referring to some kind of medical apparatus or structure within), whose length is equivalent to that which has been rotated, and in the other two staves they seem similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Return the sinew you have cut in the groin of the patient where he must lie on it (the area), and the sinews you've cut into the thighs when turning him over, which is necessary for supporting his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And for each turn and position that you need, apply one servant who tightens the turn at its place; have the doctor manipulate the spine as we've discussed.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is how it goes for suffering from arthritis (or "torn" in this
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then place a bandage on the location where it'thy backbone has been positioned correctly; after applying wax-coated dressings around and over this area as directed by pages three or four of these instructions—these represent its length, enough to press into the affected space left dry from gelation. And above the spinal column lies my placement on it.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And restore its ligaments as mentioned beforehand, and place it under the nourishment humors within so that it heals.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any imminent threat at the site of healing, then it is recommended that medicines be used to moisten and cleanse the treatment table for a long time, which we have been advised; and already has been applied a layer of lead in this place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Here are the translations line by line:
Capitol .xxxi.	Given that this text is written in an archaic or possibly dead language
De curacio de anca dislocada.	For the treatment of a dislocated hip, historically one might refer to:
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You understand that the joint between the wide and the muscle does not necessarily entail dislocation only once or twice; do not harden these places where you have already caused pain in other smaller body parts with concave shapes, just as when they are made sensitive by your treatment.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	E the joint of the large is dislocated according to four movements, it may be dislocated at the parts located inside, or outside, or forward, or backward, or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly are dislocated at joints of limbs and rarely at parts ahead or behind the joints.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	When the dislocation of his limb is found at the joints it becomes long and hard due to inflammation that was placed there from healthiness, making him unable to bend their knee with their tongue as they attempt an apostematic incision for cauterization so that the head of the thigh can come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And because that which has caused his displacement is located outside of him, the accidents or injuries are contrary to this injury.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When the patient's limb is dislocated further down due to pressure from below (the cushion), it does not necessarily double their current pain in that area; if progression occurs and they are unable to move above, urine retention happens inside them, and a pad must be placed on their foot over the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	E the name of that person to whom dislocation occurs behind is such that it cannot expand the joint or bend which has already been bent out of its position; thus placed cushion under them, and another on their legs/chest holding hands tightly in place preventing further displacement.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May the reduction of these spices in this dislocation is what you consider, and as long as the dislocation is old and ancient, already treated with the reductions that you administer here today according to its disposition; consequently, there'thy no need for further prognostication.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In which the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, then turn that to water (meaning you should immobilize it with a wet limp), extend that joint both upwards towards the upper parts of the body and downwards towards the lower parts, and apply pressure symmetrically on the right and left side. Once applied, this method returns strength without need for other treatments.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	May it be that if the patient does not return in this manner during treatment: then have those preparing for you present a strong and extend the cushion from under their parted legs placed here (with time intervals or immediately), holding onto other necessary instruments, also to spread out the ma of what is above them on each leg timely; while another assists by stretching this upward element with careful timing so hands are held.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if there is an extension out of the loin or from one side of the chest to another side of the chest (implying possible swelling due to fluid accumulation), it should be managed accordingly:
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if all of them are extended during a fever until the humoral sickness is lifted and begins to descend into its place on the earth, so that it no longer protrudes downwardly.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This particular form of extension occurs in all four (it refers to joints).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns due to water (humors) that we have mentioned, then it is necessary for all special waters (remedies or treatments specific to this patient' extraneous matter).
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the patient's own reduction, when it is dislocated, and the displacement occurs at joint parts, so that the hernia rises onto its back side; and place breaks in the thigh area where between the head of the hip bone and the location where one lies on their leg, holding their hands.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister with strong breath blows the limbs of him/her backward significantly, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular substance is a curative for which this limb has been reduced, compared to other substances.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	May it be excused on you and not obeyed to this specific type of treatment for all, wherein two pills from the patient'seems are bound together with thread strong as ligature (ligament), above both legs bones and below both leg veins.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Whenever any part of his body corresponds in length to four digits and the thigh extends as far as two digits, then such is considered normal for that person.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And position the patient's waist on the top of the chair, so that it is in a comfortable manner, and its length from head to toe corresponds approximately to two cubits (a measure roughly equivalent to about 18 inches or half a meter).
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Here comes the sentence to translate: E propone a a young man strong that he reduces the head of the thigh, and it is suspended by another young man; likewise, another youth removes the thigh at its strength return to place, whereby quickly returns the juncture.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when it dislocates from the part removed, the hernia presses on the thigh according to how we have previously prepared in the groin; and its sling rests directly over the affected area of the hernia and chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Every minister extends to its respective area, and the doctor holds their instrument according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So then, if you obey the prescription, it will be greatly relieved; and otherwise, rest on that which we have said in a gentle manner for that very reason.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mayhaps the thigh (male) rests upon their knees so slightly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When dislocation occurs in the limbs below, then it is necessary to stretch out and hold one hand over each thigh of the patient; this course tells us what must be done: with your right palm placed on top of the leg'thyroid (possibly referring to a body part related to movement or support), you apply pressure here as well.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the joints behind, do not cover up until the groin extends to the parts in front of it; those who have covered will be present when his ankle becomes dislocated from these points forward, as we mentioned earlier about his face and ligaments being extended. There'thy no harm (no guayre).
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When compression is applied with a tabletop over the location where joint pain occurs,
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So that the reduction is complete as I cover it—and the term for 'reduction' in this context does not concern you, and from your thighs place cushions on them; when you again manipulate those joints and extend the swolthy flesh outside of the bandage, you realize which part covered by that has returned to its cavity. At that point, adjust hinges and padding in between compressures so as not for thickness at any portion should become engorged—and secure it with a belt or girdle tightly attached around; fix this restraint on the body for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Return the sinew and ligaments, and compare one cushion with another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those twisted in yourself, you understand that the dislocation is already closed, and so let the humors flow out of it.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of suppuration (infection), then return and apply that dressing as per your first application technique, and leave it on for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Here is the line by line translation of the text into English:
Capitol .xxxii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any contextual text for
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The phrase "curacio di dislocazione del dente," when translated into English, would mean "treatment of tooth
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The provided text seems to be in Occitan (also known as Provençal), which is distinct from Latin and has similarities with Italian, Spanish, French due to its regional origin within France where these languages have historically been spoken:
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The name of the dislocation is that you command the humor to apply its cushion at the thigh, and if it has already been done, understand that the joint has become dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it is His Majesty'thy relief that his couch stays firmly in the position of rest, not laboring.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Return and apply that device to the couch, securing it with bandages for three or four days, and secure those as well.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's walking device for more than a few days until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If your reduction of it is excused from you, then apply strong extension to the ligaments mentioned in its previous treatment for the joint.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any coherent medical
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The phrase in question seems related to the treatment of a tarsometatarsal (Lisfranc) joint dislocation, which is an
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus bone sometimes recovers on its own after initial treatment (petite remoción), but in some cases it becomes dislocated again, and the injury to the ligaments or joint surfaces is considered fracture-ligamentous due to this repeated displacement. Here'dictation translates into English as:
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The translation of the given medieval medical treatise line by line into English is as follows:
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May the cure of his return be through ease and it will be extended for as long as necessary until he returns homeward.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment of him when dislocated as a compliment, fix the thigh properly with this strong and capable minister from behind his two located at that place where he lies (in bed).
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place yourself on the sole of your right foot belonging to a patient above ground in their hip region, and also hold onto your left hand from that portion below your head located at the pelvic bone'dictor:
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Return the arm to your left for two steps, and raise it further with both hands so that its finger bone is at the level of your shoulder cushion; press on the hand'gyte (forearm) therewith.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	When applied according to what has been previously discussed or mentioned.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	When you press the patient'thy chest into the firm couch and yourself are at the bedside,
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if he returns to health within a diet or two weeks from this treatment, and when his foot swells up again, repeat the operation; but each time that one goes back, they return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May you be prohibited from performing the reduction of your patient at this time; if that happens, then let their groin speak about its two positions on earth below us and enclose it with a tight cloth covering to prevent letting out the hernia.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor applies pressure on the displacement with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thighs at their joints until the displacement returns to its ease of movement.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation is returned and it's declared that you are healed from this reduction of him/her, then apply strong emplastrum (bandage) tightly around that tendon, and bind your foot to its ligature (ligament).
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Where you fear or protect the tendons that are behind on the foot, to ensure that the ligament over it does not tear violently and maintain strength for this.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Return it there for two or three days and if the bandage softens, remove that extra material.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Return that part of it either in the morning or at noon (and) forbid the consumption of food for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it not be certain that the dislocation will occur in that space and which does not receive treatment, nor is there any healing care for it.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you apply cold application treatment (applied externally), then take care of it in the place where we have previously described its condition for healing and bandaging purposes until it is revitalized/healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The text provided appears to be from an old medical manuscript with archaic language elements that
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Regarding the care for displacements of bones in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When that person who is dislocated has moved their jaw only a little due to extension of the joints; and if it' extrication (removal or release) is not difficult, extract them carefully.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	May it be that the dislocation is in the knee joints of their body, then make sure to straighten out this misalignment either on the heel bone or over a table while they are still coming (or moving).
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Here you stand with your weight on the foot, and pause there where pressure is applied to that part of the foot near the joints, allowing it entry so as to return within (which means healing), and see if the swelling disappears from there and does not appear again in its prominent position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Here is the translation line by line:
Capitol .xxxv.	Given that "Capitol" does not provide any coherent text
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	When joint pain is caused by spondylosis or a bone break, or in any other case of the body's ensemble (this could imply injuries to various parts).
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter any cause of that, and you pierce through the cure (treatment) for it and in restoring him/her as well, success is guaranteed to prevent death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Now you must perform the reduction in the patient'thy condition as quickly as possible, so that it does not develop into an abscess (an inflamed mass filled with pus).
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the member returns as we desire to treat it with this diet that heals and removes the fluid appropriate for its needs, based on what is necessary according to the oiled liniments dried up.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation occurs and there is a bending of the separated bones, then you must realign them, making sure that in water they have what was mentioned earlier about this fluid (the "acidus" or acidic substance referred to at these locations).
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid according to your will that from within the body flows through its channels what I have told you; for this is better for you as part of your Creator, possibly everlasting in contributing to your glory, and perhaps health during your lifetime here on Earth.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi finisces well the words of Albucasis perfectly, as God wills it not.
Amen.	The provided text appears to be an ex
