After completing the book for you, my children, on this science of medicine which is complete and includes its complement, and having reached the end thereof through explanations and his own declarations, it becomes necessary for me to add to you this Treatise which forms part of the practice section, that is, surgery with its manual.
Since the art of surgery practised with a hand is in our area and time completely isolated, perhaps until knowledge of it disappears and its practice ceases. Then only partial descriptions remain from the ancient books, which have been altered by hands; errors and hesitations occur until intentions are exhausted, making his efforts prolonged. I find it necessary to revive that art using the arrangement of this Treatise according to principles derived from position, explanation, and abbreviation. To incorporate knowledge about the forms of surgical instruments such as cautery and other tools used in surgery. The addition comes from an explanation and the correction of what is needed.
The reason why a skilled artisan cannot be found practising his art with his own hands in our current time is: because the art of medicine is long and requires him to engage in the study of anatomy as described by Galen before this. He must know the functions of the organs, their shapes, how they join and separate. He must have knowledge of bones, nerves, sinews, their numbers, exit places for them. And he needs to understand pulsating veins and quiet veins, and where these exit from in the body.
And because of this, said Hippocrates, the name with its name is much, and the work with its performance is little, especially in the art of hands.
We have already spoken about this at the beginning of this book.
Because whoever does not understand what we said about anatomy will fall into error, just as many of them are that train in this knowledge and boast about it without understanding, and without experience.
What happened was that I saw a vain doctor drain a scrofulous pustule on a woman's neck, and injured some arteries in the neck. Therefore, the woman's blood flowed until she died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who thought he would extract a stone from urine, which was progressing in age, and the stone was large. So he went to him, and extracted it along with part of the bladder. As a result, the man died on the third day.
And indeed, I was already called upon to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone, and the condition of the patient, that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was taking a post at one of our lords' territories due to his knowledge in medicine: and it happened that there was a black eunuch with him, who had a fracture near the heel in his leg. The doctor acted without knowing what he was doing, tightened the fracture over the wound with bandages and pins, and applied strong pressure without allowing any air to escape from the wound.
Then he completed what was desired of him according to his wishes. He discharged him after a few days and instructed him not to loosen the bandage. He stood like that until the pustule on his leg and foot burst, and he ended up in ruin.
I was therefore called to him: and I rushed to loosen the bandage; and peace followed, and he was released from his pains.
However, corruption had already been established in the limb: and I was unable to arrest it.
So therefore, corruption ceased to roam within the limb until its demise.
And I saw another physician who had pierced the cancerous abscess; and after days, an ulcer formed until his illness became evident to the lord.
Which is why, when there's a pure cancer due to black bile, then it should not be approached with iron completely unless it's within an organ that can withstand the operation, so that the entire thing can be removed.
And because of this, my children, you must know that an operation with the hand is divided into two parts: namely, one where health is associated with the operation; and one where there is danger in multiple dispositions.
And I have already indicated in every part of this book where an operation comes about that involves fear and anxiety.
Therefore, you must be cautious about this and dismiss it: so as not to find a foolish way for speaking and being disgraceful.
So receive this with care and concern and protection, and treat your patients with ease and strength, utilizing a better path for healing through God's grace to benefit health and commendable succession. And dismiss the terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure. Take away your souls from what makes you afraid, so as not to allow hesitation in your faith and advantage when it comes to entering into them.
For there is more that remains for your glory, and it's higher in this world, and finally towards your qualities.
Galen had indeed said so in some of his instructions. Do not treat bad illness: fear the name of the doctor's evil.
And now, I divide this Treatise into three Chapters.
Chapter one.
Chapter one deals with the use of the cautery with fire, and the cautery with acute medicine, organized from head to feet, and the forms of instruments and tools for the cautery: and everything necessary for the operation.
Chapter two.
Chapter two deals with the sectioning and puncturing, bloodletting and venting, and wounds: as well as the removal of arrows and similar objects: and everything else organized in forms of instruments.
Chapter three.
Chapter three deals with the restoration, dislocation, and treatment of torsions, and similar issues. It is organized from head to feet in terms of the forms of instruments.
But before recalling the procedure of using it, one must say about its qualities and effects. And to which constitution they are applicable.
I say that the discussion about the quality of the cautery's healing effect and its adverse effects is a lengthy and subtle one. It involves knowledge and hidden secrets.
Many wise men have spoken on this topic and there were disagreements among them. Indeed, I am content with only a little of their discourse to avoid going too far into detail.
I therefore say that the cauterizing agent is universal for all combinations, whether with matter or without matter: excepting two combinations, which are the hot combination without matter, and the dry combination without matter.
In terms of heat and dryness with matter, they differ. Some have said that the cauterizing agent is beneficial in those cases. And others said the opposite to this, namely that the cauterizing agent is not suitable in dryness, which comes from heat and dryness: for the nature of fire is heat; and it is inconvenient that one should heal from a hot and dry condition with something that is also hot and dry.
And the one who says the opposite argued that when you compare a human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that a human body is cold. And he said further that by means of cauterization, benefit happens in every kind of dryness which comes from heat affecting humans' bodies: for when you take into account a human body and its moisture compared to the nature of fire, you find out that the human body is cold.
And indeed I say this through his argument, because I have seen that from experience this is often the case.
However, one should not apply it to this unless they have already been proven and exercised in the final chapter on the cauterizing process, and have learned about the diversity of human compositions, the nature of illnesses within themselves, their causes, the circumstances surrounding them, and the duration of those conditions.
As for the other compositions, there is no fear to you regarding these: particularly in conditions of coldness and moisture. Indeed, all the doctors have agreed on these matters: and they did not differ on the benefit of cauterization in them.
And know that from the secret of healing through a cautery with fire, and the goodness of it compared to a cautery with burning medicine: because fire is simple, its action does not reach unless towards the member that is being cauterized: and it does not harm another member connected to it, unless by a small damage.
Indeed, the action of medicine that burns reaches out to that which is extended from the limbs: and perhaps it causes difficult healing illnesses to occur in the body, and perhaps it kills.
But fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it overflows.
Now indeed, through experience, we have come to understand this because of the depth and dedication in studying with expertise, and our position above truthfulness in matters: and due to that, we are excused from the length of discourse.
And if it were not the case, because this does not fit within my book, I would reveal to you a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies through their expulsion, which expels illnesses with philosophical demonstrative speech that would be enlightening for your minds.
And know my children, that they disagree during the time when it should be done for a cautery to take place, and they put forward better times of truth.
And I say that a cautery suits at any time: therefore, the damage caused by time is submerged in the benefit that is drawn towards the cautery. And especially if a cautery is done due to pains from necessary, strong, sudden ones which do not tolerate delay: therefore, because it is feared that something worse might happen than the small harm caused by time's unavailability.
And do not let it be in your minds, my sons, this notion that is rejected by no one except for the vulgar and dull doctors, namely that sickness which can be cured by cautery does not always return. And they assume that the result is different than what they think: because cautery is not a replacement for medicine, which alters the composition, and expels moisture which causes problems leading to pains.
However, cautery is indeed beneficial over medicine due to the rapidity of his health and the strength of his treatment, and the vastness of his dominion: it's possible that illness may return at some point during his constitution, according to the weakness of the patient, and the nature of their illness, and its strength. And what is prepared in their body from the aggregation of surplus there: and what comes to them in acquisition through food, and similar things through the causes, unless it becomes an illness where cautery is administered.
Subtle illness in a few surplus and moisture parts like in teeth cautery for toothache, and similar ones, it is possible that this pain does not return to him. But that happens in few cases.
But it's also the discourse of the crowd, stating that cautery is the last resort of medicine, is a correct discourse: not towards what they aim for in it. For they believe there is no cure which comes with medicine, nor after the end of cautery.
However, it's contrary to that and their intent; the notion that cautery is the last resort of medicine isn't true unless when we used methods of cure in any illness and those medicines didn't apply. Then later on we used cautery at the end of the process and it did apply: thus there arises the idea that cautery is the last resort of medicine, which doesn't correspond to what the crowd and many dull doctors understand.
Ancient people said that a cautery with gold is better than one with iron. And they said this not just because of the value of gold and its substance but also because it does not create pus at the site of the cautery. However, it is not absolutely true: for I have already tested this and found that it does not make that happen in certain bodies without others.
And the cautery with this is good and better than one with iron, as they said. However, when you heat the cautery with fire made from gold, it is not revealed to you when it heats according to your desire due to the color of the gold: and when it reaches its cooling point, and if you add a fire over it, it liquifies in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into employment from that: and because of this, we have a cautery with iron instead which is quicker and closer to operations, in accordance with its purpose.
And indeed, I have already organized this chapter on the cautery according to sections, and arranged those from head to foot so that someone seeking what they want can find it.
Title II.
Compare here the cauterization against the dominion of humidity and coldness on the brain: these are two causes of swelling, and many flows of humor from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and many symptoms of drowsiness, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all sicknesses which occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, swelling, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar diseases resulting from illnesses.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the sick: for it is necessary that in the first place with a restorative medicated wash, their head be cleansed over three nights, or four, according to what the strength of the sick person requires, and their age, and their habit.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a new razor. Next have him sit between your hands in a square formation, so that his hands are now on his chest.
Next place the base of your palm over the base of their nose between their eyes. And wherever your middle finger therefore explores, mark that spot with an unheated tool.
Next apply the Oil of Cauterization: this is its form.
Then place it over the marked spot with an unheated tool, applying pressure that you gradually increase by your hand, and you rotate it. Next quickly raise your hand and observe the spot.
If you see that an amount of alkali has escaped from the bone or an amount of herbs, then raise your hand. And if not, apply your hand repeatedly with a hot iron or when cooled by another tool until you see the bones as I have told you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, immerse the head, and place it over the spot; and let him go for three days.
Then place the butter-soaked head on it and let him go over the spot until the scab is destroyed by fire. Then take care of it with the fourfold balsam ointment until it is healed.
They have said that the more a wound remains open, the more pus is emitted. Therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone and that the cauterizing tool should be kept until it heats something of thickness from the bone.
Then after what is burnt off from the bone, it is cured afterwards.
And others say that it should be done until the cauterizing tool reaches all the way to where an impression is made in the bone, so that the end of the bone drops and forms like a shape from a carving: or an instrument that women place immersed which is somewhat similar to the alphabet. And they believe that gases emerge from this location around the head, and the wound should be kept open for a long time.
Then it should be cured until it has consolidated.
To me, these two kinds of cauterization do not seem entirely different except for certain individuals according to the way of fear.
And letting it heal naturally, as far as I'm concerned, is better for the health of the individual.
Indeed, the head weakens from the solution of its natural continuity: as we have testified with regard to other body parts; and especially when the head itself is naturally weak. And the first kind of cauterization is more beneficial and better for me, and I rely on it, so I use it accordingly in health.
Head III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head: and this lasts in the sick person, and they use herbs, baths, head washes, oils, and fomentations. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery as we have narrated, and there is nothing from those that does not fit it: then consider. And if the head is of a robust nature, it is not weak, and finds a sudden coldness: then cauterize with another cautery under that slightly. Then cauterize it over every horn of its head with a cautery, so that the skin does not be disturbed, and discover from the bone the quantity that we have narrated. And cauterize it with one cautery at the top of its head, in the place that is called a groove: and there is a spot where the windpipe is placed: and raise your blade here, and you will not expose the mouth. Indeed, it finds intense pain due to this, and differs from the pain of other more cauterized heads.
And I will say this about the cautery: and it should be a cautery used for cauterizing horns of the head, and the back of its head should require a finer cautery for cauterizing the middle part of the head.
Head IV.
When there occurs pain and swelling in part of the head, or when the pain extends up to the eye, and it is treated with purging medicines for the head, and other treatments are administered as previously described in the divisions of illnesses, but does not encompass all aspects; then cauterization is done according to two methods: either cauterization using a burning medicine: or with iron.
The cautery, when used with sharp medicine, is as follows: you should take one tooth from the alveolus, and remove its cortex, then sever its extremities from both sides. Next, divide the pain area during bleeding with a wide cup until a spot beneath the skin is made, where the tooth will be extracted.
Therefore introduce him inside under the skin until it is hidden: then bind it above with a constriction suitable for the swelling; and let him rest fifteen hours afterwards dissolve the bandage, and extract garlic and leave him for two or three days. Then place on top a cloth soaked in butter until pus forms: and care him with ointment until he is fully recovered.
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in my twelfth treatise on medical remedies.
The cautery treatment for it with iron is according to this manner. Cautery by fire, which has this form.
And it is named Clavius: because the shape of its head resembles that of a key, having some curvature and there is a small elevation in the middle of it.
Then place it over the spot and hold your hand. And you should move the iron gradually with speed: and let there be a quantity being burnt as thick as its middle part is, according to the thickness of the skin. And raise your hand so that it does not burn the artery which is below, and there is a flow of blood.
Then soak the cloth in salt water and place it over the spot, then let him rest for three days. Then place the cloth with butter on top of it. And care him with ointment until he is fully recovered.
And if you have a case of half-head disease, cauterize this hemi-craniectomy with the second surgical incision method of cautery. And from the arterial incision in this hemi-head, not the old proper one.
On the method of cauterization for the ancient half-head.
When treating a half-head ailment, with what we have discussed from the previous cure, and what we have said in divisions of illnesses, and if this treatment is not effective: then you will observe from the illness that what was stated from the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, does not suffice. And when you see symptoms arising from the illness that indicate it's insufficient, namely that which we described when applying the first method of cautery, then it is necessary to use the second surgical incision method of cautery Cauterii until the affected area turns white after marks appear above the pain line. The length of this mark should be half a finger or somewhat like that: and hold your hand still for one moment, pressing it until you reach an artery, and continue until you have reached the opening.
However, it is necessary for you to avoid burning the side of the jaw that moves during chewing, or the nerve that moves it, so as not to cause cramps.
And be vigilant and take care of the blood flow from the artery that has been severed. Indeed, during the severance of this (artery), there is a fear, and especially for the one who does not know what he is doing, and is not studious or experienced: and he lets the operation go from him at first.
And I advise with the recall of the regulation of blood flow accidents from the artery according to its own method, and in this place of the book.
If you observe an illness from which the person does not recover with this cautery, and if you see the weak body enduring the cautery in the middle of the head, as we described, take care of the wound until it heals.
And if you observe the need, administer the cautery as we said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery when using a cautery with two scalpels. For this reason, the cautery is better and more effective.
§ On the method of applying a cautery in ear pain.
When ear pain occurs due to cold and the symptoms are alleviated after rinsing with warm water, along with other treatments that we mentioned for its division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery: this is called the 'Punctum', which has this shape.
Then make the puncture(s) around the entire area of the ear, as indicated: or around both sides if pain occurs in both ears simultaneously. And extend it with the cautery from the base of the ear slightly, after marking the spots with a heated probe: and let the number of cautery marks be ten throughout each ear, as if that were the case.
And then attend to those areas until they heal.
§ On the method of applying a cautery in the case of torture.
Chapter VII.
The type of torture that is healed with cautery is only due to conditions originating from phlegm, as we described in the divisions of illnesses.
And apply the appropriate cautery for the condition that occurs due to dryness and muscle spasm.
When treatments for this form of surgery involve the use of herbs, and gargles, and not yielding results with your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient using three cauteries: one at the base of the ear, and a second slightly below its proper time, and a third at the junction of both lips.
And place your cautery on the weaker side opposite the affected area. Because healing does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is to apply the cautery with it directly on the tip of the upper ear below the horn of the head, a little inward. And do this again at another time; whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And hold your hand with the cautery until the amount equal to half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it resembles a knife, as its previous description shows. However, it should not be thinner by much, as you see; and there must be a knife that has an excess width somewhat.
Then attend to the areas affected by this, until they heal completely.
[The instruction begins on how to perform cauterization in cases of old apoplexy.]
When apoplexy is advanced and your treatment does not yield results as described, and the patient does not have a fever, then apply four cauteries over all of his or her horns (or bones), and use a cautery in the middle of the head as previously explained, and a cautery at the back of the head according to what has preceded: and the degree of the cauterization should be according to what has preceded.
Even cautery is done with a cauterizing tool on the mouth of the stomach: and it is more extreme.
Then clean it, as what precedes it.
Title IX.
It is necessary that in the mouth one inserts first a large piece of masticatory wax, and a pill to purify the brain.
Next cut the entire head of the sick person, and place on their scalp the plaster described for the use of saffron in the plaster treatise. And apply it occasionally.
Indeed, that is the measure of the cauterizer: and do this according to the same order that I said there.
If therefore it is healed by this means, it is good. If not, then do three types of cautery on the posterior part of his head, which is descending from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and place between each cautery a thickness equal to that of a finger.
Next care for the cauterizer as what has preceded it.
If however one adds to it and the sick person is able to tolerate that: then do the cauterizer on the middle part. If you want an addition, then cauterize him over the two horns (of the skull).
Then care for him until he is healed: and apply the cauterizer with oil according to the form that has been provided.
Section: On the manner of cauterizing in Paralysis and softening.
Title X.
It is necessary that you proceed with the purification of the head using wax and as we have said.
Then cut the sick person's head: afterwards, apply a cautery to it in the middle of the head, and over every horn of the head, and over its posterior part, and three times on the cervical vertebrae.
If you are lacking in the comfort of body from many such illnesses and it is a sick person enduring them strongly: then apply four cauteries over the cervical vertebrae, and with the last one, keep applying until a large amount of skin burns off, and raise your hand. Then take care of it, until it is healed: and thus apply the oil cautery.
¶ Concerning the method of applying the cautery in epilepsy.
Epileptic does not need cautery, unless it is the one whose epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore, you must purify his brain first when he is sick, and with the rest of the treatment we have mentioned in the division: when the patient is large, or endures the taste of medicines.
But if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then gargling and brain purifying mastications are administered before many days with the improvement of foods.
Then cut his head off, afterwards apply a single cautery to it in the middle of the head as previously instructed in method. And another cautery on his backside, and over every horn of his head with yet another cautery. If the patient is strong and can endure it, then apply the cauteries I have mentioned in the case of paralysis, and body softening over the cervical vertebrae and back vertebrae. And let it be an oil cautery according to the method that has been given beforehand.
If the patient is a child, then apply a delicate cautery in accordance with this manner.
On the method of cauterization in Melancholia.
When the cause of melancholia is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then apply the cautery upon it, which we have described for one who has palsy.
And if the cause of melancholia is excess descending to melancholy and the body is moistened, then give him a drink that purifies his brain, as prescribed in the division: then shave the sick person's head, and make afterwards a neat bandage made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and have the sick person supported square from every part while sitting.
Then present the liniment. And it is more suitable made from old goat's butter. And warm him up with the heat of the fire tempered to a measure that he can tolerate when it is inserted into him. Then evacuate him in the middle of his head within a circle, and let him go until he cools down.
Perform this for the sick person once every week, with his regular treatment being beneficial, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, perform the cautery by making numerous small punctures, and while holding your hand with the cautery: indeed, let there be a smell from it.
This is because this appearance of the cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on it a cloth that has been soaked in old butter or chicken fat.
On the method of cauterization when descending into water for the eye.
Head十三
When the beginning of water in the eye is shown to you through the signs I mentioned in division, then start and administer it to the patient, with whatever will cleanse his head.
And guard him from all moisture and make him sit in a bath, fasting for certain days.
Then instruct him to shave his head and cauterize himself in the middle of his head. Then, if the descent of water has occurred in both eyes simultaneously: cauterize him twice, each time with two administrations, or from one side if it has occurred in only one eye. Remove all nerves and arteries under the skin with the cautery: let the cauterization be long in width like the time periods, and beware of blood flow.
If you see anything from it, then immediately remove whatever is possible with any available medicine. I practice with wisdom when dealing with removal of arteries and their severing, and caution against blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized at the neck, under two bones, with two final applications of cautery.
On the method of cauterization using old tear ducts.
When the tears of the eyes are abundant and they cover veins and arteries that are outside the manifest head (the area visible externally), it is determined that this results from excess cold phlegm. In such cases, cauterization should be performed using the same method as I described for the onset of water descending, the cauterization in the middle of the head, with two applications of cautery at intervals of two time periods, and twice at the neck under two bones. And if you are short-sighted due to addition, then cauterize him on all sides around the eyes, above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Regarding the method of cauterization during the smell of Naso's womb.
When you are treating that, along with what we have mentioned about division, and the treatment doesn't match: then hasten, and administer three nights of an infusion of dry coxcombs. Then shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery, using an oily cautery. Then cauterize it with a 'claw' shaped cautery using two cauterizations, above the two eyebrows slightly above the hair.
And guard against the artery, do not hit it.
This is the form of the cautery 'Clavi'.
Regarding the method of cauterization during the softening of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye softens due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this lunar cautery.
And if it's water, cauterize it slightly above the two eyebrows with two cauterizations in every part: and stretch them by two hours: and let the length of all cauterizations be according to the lengths of the eyebrows: and do not finish your hand with the cautery instead, according to the quantity that burns the third eyelid.
Regarding the method of cauterization when the eyelashes are turned in and irritate the eye.
The cautery operates in two manners according to two methods: either the cautery with fire or the cautery with burning medicine.
In the case of a cautery with fire, it is advised that the patient first removes his hair, if there are any among them who cleanse them, until they extend and align. If however they pierce him at his rise: then bind his eyes with the blindfold so that they do not move until birth.
When then they are born and aligned, then place the patient's head on your breast: afterwards mark over his eyelids with a heated tool, a mark that should resemble the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of this mark be near the hair.
Then place it soaked with albumen on the eye: or on the eye with psyllium mucus.
Next, you use a cautery of this form, using fire.
Then apply the cautery to the figure you marked gradually in many places, until the entire visible surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, is burned completely.
And the sign of your work's health is: if you can see that the eyelids of the eye have now contracted, and hair has been raised at the point of the eye.
Lift your hand then: and let him go free for three days.
Then apply Butter to him over it until the scab is eradicated. Next, care for him with ointment until he is healed.
If any hair returns after an hour, and the eyelid softens: then reapply the cautery to that place as you did initially.
If they are hairs at the lower part: then cauterize them until they reach their natural place: and level them so that they do not prick the eyes.
It is as if you should instruct the sick person to remove the hairs until they extend and level off. Make it so that from the cloth of the material, the shape of a leaf of myrtle is formed.
Then take from known soap and from sandalwood that has not absorbed water, the weight of an ounce or approximately this: then grind these together with good grinding, and make this process while stirring it, so as not to cool it. Then spread out from it on the sheet you made like the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and place it over the eyelid(s) of one or two eyes. And place under the eye a piece of cotton soaked in egg white: and let the head of the sick person be on your breast.
And place your index finger on the medicine, and press it moderately. And you move it as often as the patient feels the irritation of the medicine, because its touch is like that of fire.
So long as he continues to experience the touch that he has discovered as irritating, then release the medicine, and move it with your finger. When the irritation ceases, then remove the medicine, and rinse the eye with water.
Then examine if you see the eyelid lifting like during contraction with fire or incision; it is good: and if not, then repeatedly apply medicine over that spot where the medicine does not stick, without damaging, until your operation has been completed and the eye contracts.
Then place over it butter with the skin, until the dry skin is removed. Next, care for him with the balsamic ointment or another, until he is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the operation, to keep your final vigilance, so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after a day and something from the hair irritates the eye, then apply the medicine repeatedly to that place on the lid that is softening properly, just as you did at first. Then care for him until he is healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you will know that the size and fineness of human eyes vary. Therefore, consider this accordingly: and do not hide the path of rectitude for him who has a zeal for this art.
§ On the method of cauterization in lacrimal fistula.
When you treat the fistula, according to what we said about divisions of illnesses, and if your treatment is not effective: then, it should be necessary for you to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your bosom and have them hold their head minister (a small stool or bench) between their hands in such a way that it does not move or shift when holding their own head.
Then place the infused Butta on the eyelid or over the eye with a mucus from egg whites, or with a mucus of psyllium: then apply the cautery instrument, which has this form.
Let the cone be, as the shape of a reed's feather with the point cut by one tool from its extremity, just like when making a cauterizer: and if you wish it to penetrate to the other end, and if your tool wishes to go upwards, try this way.
But this cone is better for your work.
Then express the窦 (fistula) if it is open, and extract pus from it and cleanse it; and if it is not open, then open it up and remove its pus.
Then place the then onto it Cauterium (cauterizer), which is made to burn intensely.
And hold your hand with it close to the Cauterium near the eye, up to the part of the nose, so that your hand does not wander or disturb the patient: and place the Cauterium on the fatty part of the eye, and destroy it.
If therefore you have reached the beginning of your cauterizer up to the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then apply the cauterizer once, or twice if you need it: and let that heal for three days.
Then place the Cotum (possibly referring to a dressing or ointment) with butter, and take care of it with an ointment for drying until it heals.
If forty days pass and he does not heal: then place over it a sharp corrosive medicine until the mouth is uncovered: and cut it according to how it reaches into its chapter.
And there is another method for the cauterization of a窦 (fistula), which some said at first. Go to the site of the窦 (fistula), and open it up. Then place a fine tool, that is, a slender cannula, into this opening. The form of this is as follows. And pour into it a quantity of drachms of melted lead, and hold your hand with the good Canna retention, and the sick person must not move at all, so that no running or any liquidified lead reaches his eye.
And it is necessary for you to place on the sick person's eye a solution in milk, or in water.
For lead burns the site of the fistula and heals it with marvellous healing.
And what if the fistula is healed, along with what we said about cautery and healing, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to apply the nostril opening, and to direct the fistula back into its own course through the nose, according to how it will find itself at its proper place.
Section on the method of cautering in clefts of the lips.
Many times there occur clefts in the lips which they call hairs, and especially in children's lips.
And when you care for these clefts, as we said about the division of complaints, and if there is no effective treatment, then apply a small cautery by fire according to this form.
And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then place it already ignited hastily within the clefts, until the cautery reaches deep into the clefts.
Afterwards care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Section on the method of cautering in an orifice of the mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth: then pus is formed and ruptures. Afterwards it coagulates and pus runs out, and a fistula forms. Then one should treat that area, and not accumulate treatment there; thus, when required, use hot cautery according to what quantity it absorbs in the fistula. Then introduce the glowing object into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated metal reaches its depth, and the final part of it. Do this once, or twice at intervals.
Then continue to treat it after that, as we have described the treatment until when it is treated.
If therefore pus is removed and healing occurs, it will be good. And if not, then it will be necessary to uncover the location and remove the putrid mouth according to what comes at its head.
¶ On the method of applying cautery to gums, and softened teeth.
When the gum becomes softened due to moisture and teeth begin to move, and you treat it with medicines without accumulating treatment: then place the head of the patient in your bosom.
Then apply the hot cautery which will take this form afterwards, so that you place a tube over the tooth and introduce the glowing cautery into it. And hold your hand slightly there until the patient feels the heat of the fire already reaching the root of the teeth.
And raise your hand: then apply the cautery several times, according to what you desire.
Then let the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out.
Indeed, the tooth is set in motion, and the gum is softened and tightened, and moisture that has become spoiled is dried.
Regarding the manner of cauterizing in dental pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is coldness within the tooth itself, or a worm, and when treatment with medicines does not alleviate it, then cautery on the tooth is done in two ways: either with buttered cautery; or with an iron cautery.
The cautery with butter is as follows: take the heated butter and apply it to the bulla, either in a copper funnel or on a dressing. Then take some cotton, and wrap it around the tip of the probe. Then immerse this in heated butter: and place it on the painful tooth as quickly as possible, hold it until it cools down: then repeat this several times, until the power of heat reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth: and place the heated iron over it until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth cavity.
The cautery with fire is done by aiming at an air tube or a metal tube. And let there be something of thickness within its body so that the heat of the fire does not reach the weak mouth.
Then the fire cautery, whose form it will take: place it over that tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
Do this repeatedly, for the pain is alleviated, or on that same day, or the following day.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill the mouth of that cautery with a good wick and hold it for one hour. Then he should expel it.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Apply the cautery with whatever extremity is possible according to what can be done: and this is the form of a cannula.
Section on the method of applying cautery in strophiles.
When strophiles are affected by phlegm and cold humors, and do not respond to treatments for digestion through medicines, and increase the rate of digestion: then shape a cauterizing instrument with this form.
Having two open ends, so that smoke escapes from one end at the cauterizing point through the other end: and place the ignited object once on the blister, and if needed a second time until it reaches to the bottom of the blister.
If the blister is small, then place the cauterizer according to the size of the blister.
Then release it for three days, and place on it an infusion in butter until what was burnt by the fire is removed.
Then care for it with the salve of the teeth until the form of the cannula heals.
Section on the method of applying cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When humors accumulate over the bronchial canal, especially when this is associated with a cold constitution, then it must be treated initially with dissolved medicines by the patient.
Then cauterize him at the base of his throat above the depression: and be careful not to reach with the cauterizing instrument either into the throat or onto the skin, unless something prevents it.
Then cauterize him with the cauterizing instrument at the junction of the neck and the last vertebrae of his neck by removing it to the end. And make sure that the cauterizing tool is like a key according to the manner of the one that preceded it.
Then take care of him with whatever has gone before until he is healed.
In the manner of cauterization for pulmonary diseases and coughing.
When the cough and pulmonary discomfort are caused by cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever, tuberculosis, or an old discomfort: then cauterize him with two cauterizations above the windpipe in depressed areas, gently, vacantly. And use another cauterizing instrument in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and make sure the cauterization is like the shape that went before, resembling a cannula.
And if you wish to perform your cauterization by puncturing with a cauterizing tool known as 'Punctum', which has the form that precedes it when puncturing ear pain, and have the punctures made from thirty points up until about elsewhere.
Then take care of him with what has been prescribed previously, until he is healed.
And now let the cauterization have three branches: according to this shape. Therefore, when you treat him with that cauterization, do so in place of one single three-pronged cauterizing tool.
Title XXVII.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to moisture and does not settle back into its original position during its returning time after the dislocation, until it has that habit of returning for him, then when a slight movement dislocates it as we have already testified that thing, then you must return the dislocation in the first place. Then the patient is enveloped or wrapped on his back, or on his healthy side. Then raise the skin which is inside the Ulna up to your superior left hand fingers and if the articulation gets dislocated towards the interior.
Then, having two wicks with fire, I hold the cautery tool. The shape of which is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side of the limb, and you will achieve a figure resembling four cautery marks.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a tool that has three wicks, for then there appears a figure of six like those made by three cauterizations: and they are wicks according to the fineness of the test.
This is the shape of the cautery tool that has three wicks.
And sometimes an additional method is added to this one, so there are eight cauteries in total.
Then place the ground-up stalks with salt on top of the cautery. Then ensure that the patient remains calm so that no part of their limb moves at any time until they are comfortable.
And if the dislocation is towards the top and this happens rarely, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a triangular cautery or with many-pointed cauterizations.
For the connection becomes strong and the moisture is removed: and the sick person is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When coldness and abundant moisture occur in the stomach until it is separated from its composition, and catarrhs increase towards it, and there are frequent methods of treatment without much effect: then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and extend his legs, and his hands. Then apply with three cauterizations, one as large as the width of a finger under the cochlea of the chest, and one similar to the clavicle in size. Apply two further cauterizations below these, each from the edge of one cauterization, until you obtain the figure of a triangular shape after the cauterizations have healed. And stretch between the two so that they do not join when pus is being produced.
And let the depth of the cauterization be equal to the thickness of two-thirds of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let there be one cauterization that makes this cauterization according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by puncturing it with one that trembles from this cauterization: and as you draw signs over the stomach's puncture according to the amount you can do with a cautery: then cauterize it again with the point cauterization: and then treat it with the treatment which preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the cold exterior (Epar).
When an occurrence of pain in the shoulder blade is due to coldness and moisture, or from a heavy wind, until it escapes from its natural disposition of excess discharge, and when the patient recovers as we have said, but does not benefit in that situation: then the patient must be supported on their neck, and with an cautery three applications of cauterization according to this figure, and this quantity below Epar's area at the point where the human arm enters from the hypochondriac region: and there should be space between every application according to the thickness of a finger: and the cauterization should be as long as the body itself is in straight line: and do not apply your hand with the cautery for too long.
And let there be the quantity of what is burnt due to the thickness of the skin, half the quantity not added: and let the patient stand on their own feet.
If however they are not standing, then let them be lying down, who have already stretched out their legs, and raised their arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And indeed, it is possible for you to apply these types of cautery with a surgical knife when you have skill and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself so that you do not proceed too far in cautery and burn the thickness of the skin throughout, causing the whole body to be burned, which reaches the intestines: since there is thinness there, know that.
Section on how to perform cautery for boils in the shoulder blade region.
When there is an exiture, and you need to know if that boil is located within the flesh of the shoulder blade or on its covering tissue: then if it's in the flesh of the shoulder blade, the patient will experience pain and heaviness without sharpness: and if it's within the covering tissue of the shoulder blade, there is a sudden sharpness with pain. And you can see that it has tired out his doctors' treatment.
Therefore, it is necessary that the patient should supinate his/her neck. Then draw the place for applying the cautery with an iron: then use the lamp that is compared to a rod. And this is its form. And when using it to cauterize with the cautery, continue until the whole skin burns up, and penetrate through to the siphon, until all the pus comes out: then take care of itself in the healing process until it heals.
And it is not necessary for me to use this type of cautery, except for those who have a deep interest in the medical art: and when these illnesses come together with their experience often: then he should dare upon such operations.
But rather to dismiss her, for me it is better.
Section: On the method of cauterization for Pleuresis (a disease of the pleura).
The old ones said that the cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be used for cold Pleuresis according to this method. And it is like this: you should take one of the longer roots from dry Aristolochia, a root that can be found there, and it should be about the thickness of a finger. Then immerse it in oil: and then light it on fire. Then use one cautery to cauterize the area between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck, and with two smaller cauteries at an incline, apply them slightly below the part where the beard is.
And also with two cauteries at an incline on the area between the 5th and 6th ribs towards the back slightly. And another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And for three cauterizations from behind: one where there are between two spoons; and two cauterizations from the two sides of the chest, lower cauterization which is between two spoons.
And it should not be that you compress your hand with the cautery, but there should be an evident smell of the skin while doing so.
And some of the ancients have said that there are people who use a cautery similar to a rod made of iron; they heat it, and then insert it into the space between the ribs until it reaches the abscess, until it comes out clean: just as we described in Epi's abscess.
But in this puncture with the cautery, there is a risk that either the patient dies immediately, or a sinus occurs in the place, which cannot be healed.
¶ On the method of cauterization for the Splenic Node Chapter XXXII.
When you treat spleen ailments, as we have discussed for the treatment of diseases by division, if your cure does not work, then there is a cautery on that according to three ways, which are all correct.
One of which is, to make three or four lines in a row according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the cautery that precedes it.
And let there be between every cautery a thickness like that of a finger, or somewhat more or less.
And the method of applying the cautery should be the same as we described for the cautery on Epi's (the spleen).
And do not compress your hand with the cautery: and have the patient lying supine on his back.
And another method for cautery is: having two true fire-cauteries as we described in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus: and lift up the skin which is directly over the spleen, where the patient's left arm reaches. And let your lifting be according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall longitudinally according to the length of the body.
Then insert two lit candles inside, until you penetrate the skin from one side. Then remove the cautery instrument: hence, four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cautery and three wicks.
Then after you let the cautery out to discharge pus for many days, it is because it is more effective than the rest which preceded from the treatment.
¶ Regarding the method of cauterization in hydrocele.
The cautery does not fall into hydrocele, unless it is specifically asclitic [which likely refers to a specific type of hydrocele].
When you treat hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in our division, and if the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one single cautery over the stomach, another over the epar (which could refer to a specific anatomical area), and one over the spleen, and two cauterizations after the back between the ribs, and one directly in the chest, and another directly over the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be as close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery so that it discharges pus over a long period of time.
And do not discharge the patient from treatment after the cautery with it: what needs to be done is that two intentions should unite in this case: and he will hasten towards its healing with God's help.
But the shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be a key: according to its preceding shape; and for that one with which the back is cauterized, it should be an olive, according to its preceding shape.
On the manner of applying cautery to feet and thighs.
When blisters occur in Hydrophilic patients, and become filled with yellowish water: you must apply the cautery on the heel of the foot at a spot which is between the outer ear and the ankle. And raise your hand with the cautery, without twisting it. Then raise your hand again, and don't go back to that spot completely.
For the yellow water remains and according to this form apply the cautery.
Then, apply two cauteries on each of the two thighs in every thigh area. Do this with a cauterizer with an end similar to a knife tip. The cauterization should be in accordance with the length of the thigh, one below the knee joint and another slightly lower than the middle part of the thigh. Apply two cauteries over all hip joints. Let the open cauterizer heal without treatment for some time until some water remains from it. Then treat it along with what we have previously discussed.
On the method of applying cautery in a solution for the stomach.
Title XXXV.
When there is a stomach solution due to cold and moisture until the retaining and digesting powers which are in the stomach and intestines become weak; treat this condition according to the methods of treatment, not allowing it to heal. You will see an infirm person tolerating excessive vigor from the cauterization, then apply a large cautery over their stomach with what was used previously for stomach cautery using a circular method. Apply four small ring-like cauteries around the umbilicus, and a thin triangular cautery underneath. Then apply a large one on the navel or use two cauterizations above it.
And if you see excessive moisture and an infirm person tolerating this, then apply the cauterization over the ribs with a large cautery, and over all parts of his body. You might also add two small cauterizations on the stomach near the large one.
For indeed, the healing is successful, whose aid never fails.
关于如何灼烧痔疮的方法。
Title XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids or one, and they are from thick, cold, or damp fluids, and when they are treated with what we said in division (presumably referring to a previous section of the text), but do not yield effective treatment: then apply three cauteries on the lower vertebral line beneath the navel, roughly triangularly cut into parts, and apply a cautery under the belly button as if with two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach has been cooled and his food is not being digested, and you see that he looks pale, then apply a large cautery over the stomach according to what precedes, and with a cauterizing instrument over his spleen, and another over his liver with an arm-shaped cauterizing instrument: and remove the open cauterization at some point in time. Then take care of him until he is healed.
Title XXXVII.
When you remove an althel (a type of abscess), then apply the cautery that is similar to a radius [or rod]. Then insert the ignited instrument into the removed althel (a type of abscess): and continue your hand until the cautery reaches the opening from which blood runs: do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many althels (abscesses), then apply each with a cautery according to what we have narrated. Then care for them with what yields help from ointments until they are healed.
And if you apply a large cautery to it, it is more effective for improvement.
The method of applying the cautery to an anal fistula.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not comply with the division and operation that we described in its proper place, and is frightened by it, perhaps he will be cured with a cautery.
And when there arises a Fistula in someone, and it is old, pus flows from it and corrupted moisture. Therefore, what should be done is to probe it with a slender instrument. Then, ascertain the depth of its depth with your prodding.
Next, apply the cautery, which is similar to a rod. Then, insert yourself, burning, into the Fistula and determine how deep the tip has gone.
And repeatedly apply the cautery to it until all corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to your need's necessity.
And protect yourself from the irritation of nerves, if there are any, or large veins: Or if the fistula goes to the bladder body, or to the intestinal body, then protect yourself from all these places.
And do not perform that if the fistula is in a fleshy area: and you think, because it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the wound until it is healed.
But if the area seals and materials are removed from it, and a situation lasts for a long time: then you will know that it has been completely healed.
And if materials do not detach from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or the depth of its opening is corrupted, or somewhat like this comes out from there: whose memory will occur in its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or heavy winds, and it diminishes because of that which makes people weak, then you should cauterize him over the middle of his own kidneys, with a cauterizing tool over the entire kidney and using a cautery stick. Then recall that this is followed by a reminder.
And perhaps we should cauterize him again at the second location on his own middle part. Therefore three lines will come out. Therefore they are more effective in recovery.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to coldness and moisture until the unwell person does not retain urine, then cauterize him at the lower part of the middle on the bladder, where the hairs are starting, and with a cauterizing tool from the right side suminis, and the other from the left side of that: let the length of that cauterization be across like the width of a knuckle: and cauterize him in the inferior back or with two cauterizations if it requires that: and let it follow a preceding cauterization by the stick.
On the method of cauterizing the uterus.
When coldness and moisture occur in the uterus, and it is prohibited by that from conception, and her menstruation is corrupted, and the induction of them occurs late, and a pain occurs to her just at their arrival, then it must be cauterized with three cauterizations around the umbilicus, as we said about the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cauterizing tool on the lower part of the abdomen or back. And let there be the cauterization by stick.
On the method of cauterizing the ankh in the event of dislocation.
When the moist mucus extends to the ankh and causes its exit from its place, and the sign of this is that the shinbone extends over the other when they are brought together; and the location of dislocation is found within it as empty.
Therefore, you must cauterize the weak spot above the ankh of the affected person with a similar circular cautery: after marking it with the iron around the circumference of the bone, as it revolves, and let it fall upon the middle of the circle itself.
And if you do not have this cautery present, then cauterize it with three cauterizations, using a large oil-based cautery. And make the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the entire skin's quantity.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in Sciatica.
When a pain occurs in the shinbone of the ankh, and the cause is cold and moisture: and when the patient is treated with it as we said in division, but if the treatment does not cure and persists, then this continues: then you must release the patient from thick fluids using stinking pills or artificial pills, and similar. Then cauterize him/her.
And the method of cauterization for that is according to two methods: a cautery with heating substances, or a cautery with fire.
The cautery with fire, is according to many methods.
One method is to apply the cautery over the surface of the instrument itself with three triangular burnings, according to this form. And make them have a good depth, or a bad one. And let there be space that is between every burning, equal to the thickness of a finger's width: and make them burn with oil.
However, sometimes the cautery is applied centrally on the head of the instrument itself. Therefore, there are four burnings.
And if you apply the cautery with a circular form, which precedes the burning shape of the dislocation of the instrument, do it once: so that there is a circle containing the entire length of the tool.
And burn through the thickness of all the skin.
This is the method of the cautery for Sciatica, when the pain adheres to the instrument itself and does not extend until the thigh and leg.
But if it extends until the thigh and leg, then apply two burnings over the thigh, over the place where the patient was bent, where there is pain, and your burning on a bone four fingers wide towards the tropical part. And let it be a surgical knife-like burning.
And let the depth of the cautery correspond to the thickness of the skin.
And if the patient bends where the pain extends almost to the toes, then apply it there with a point-like burning, three, or four, or more if that is needed.
And if the pain is bent beneath the knee towards the leg, then apply it there with a single surgical knife-like burning.
And do this for every act of your cautery, that you not finish with the cautery itself so as to burn nerves or great arteries, and thereby leave upon the sick man a harmful evil or constriction.
And indeed I have seen one and another among those who have applied cautery to a stone above the knee joint, but finished with it in the cauterization process. As a result, there was swelling of the leg until a lump developed near the foot, and then the whole leg became completely perforated and rotten. Afterwards, there occurred a peritoneal rupture, and death followed this event.
If pain is felt in both parts at the same time, apply cautery to both according to this manner.
And some wise ones said that for the cautery of the ankle bone, this is the manner of its application. Make a similar iron rod, whose diameter is half a palm's width. And make it so that its size at the place of entry matches approximately the thickness of a finger's nucleus, or slightly less than this. Inside this second rod, place another third rod.
And let the space that is between every rod be equal to the size of a knuckle's width. Make the rods open from both ends and give them heights like a knuckle or two knuckles high: and make handles out of iron that are off-center fitting into the rods.
Then heat it in the fire until it turns red and sends out sparks. Afterwards, place it on a sand pile above the ankle bone of the sick person who is lying on their healthy side. Therefore, apply three round cauteries to him once each in the shape of a horseshoe.
Then let him rest for three days. After applying ointments with butter: and leave the wound open for many days. Then take care of it with the balm until it is healed.
Albucasis said, this form of cauterization, we do not often use it, due to the fear of its appearance: and therefore, because we find few who wait on it.
However, among the good cauterizations, there is one that tolerates it and finds its place with it.
The cauterization with those who endure medicines is such that you make two samia containing perforated rings, into which the hinge of his door descends from the air or iron, the length being similar to the walls: there should be two nodes in their height, or they themselves.
And let there be a space that is the quantity of two finger widths between them, and they should be open at the bottom and top: and let it contain itself towards each other according to this shape.
Then place her over the patient's hip on the sound side. And press your hand onto the patient's hipbone much. Then pour between two circles made from hot water, which should be heated with a little fire, and keep it for the duration of an hour: and the patient will endure its bite, and its drying, because he finds the bite like a flame until the biting subsides.
Then raise your hand with the tool and wipe away the hot water from the hipbone along with sweet water: then let that be for three days.
And put butter on it until the blackness of drying is removed: and leave that for a few days, and drain pus from it. It is indeed the last in assistance.
Then take care of it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or thigh, have him lie down in the water so that he is at equal height as you did when on the wide table.
And this is how to use warm water: and I have already written about it in the treatise on medical corrections. Take the alkali and ashes of both parts and mix them. Rub each one thoroughly and place them in a new jar whose bottom part has been pierced with a small hole according to the amount that will be added, its radius: and place under the base of the jar another treated jar; and remove the alkali and ashes from sweet water which should submerge both by about an inch. After this compress it with your hand until it is well compressed. And drain the jar until the sharp water reaches the bottom part of the treated jar.
Then aggregate all that water and pour it over another piece of ash. And apply the heat until it is renewed.
Indeed, then it will be of great sharpness which is used in many medical procedures and for cauterizing other body parts. Because it performs the action of fire itself.
And among medical treatments, when they are cauterized on the large table like tesis and cardo, as well as jujube and soap, in such a way that both are mixed together.
And Galen indeed recounted it in his writings about the treatment of a certain man according to ancient practices for the relief of pain in the hip and sciatic vein. And he praised its effectiveness greatly. And he said that no other treatment is needed and that he was cured by one means alone, until then, because perhaps he had entered the bathhouse, and came out already healed.
And it must be taken from the seat of the sore; and if green is not found there, take the dry, fresh one: and it should be ground much with a little fat, and placed on where pain is, or at the thigh, or in the hip: and it should be tied up, and left for three hours' worth, or as long as the patient finds the warmth of the application tolerable. Then immerse him in the bath.
And when his body becomes moist, have him sit on the throne (referring to the surgical chair or bed). The pain subsides and he heals.
And you will know that no one should use any cautery with these remedies unless after bodily evacuation.
And as Dioscorides has said, that the dung of goats, when used to cauterize a sciatic vein, relieves it: and this is how the cautery should be performed. A piece of wool is taken, and soaked in old oil, then placed over the deep spot, which is located between the big toe and the instep, closer to the instep.
Then take the dried dung of goats, and ignite it in fire until charcoal is formed.
Then place it over the wool and let it burn until it goes out. And repeat this process. Therefore, do not stop doing that until the sensation reaches to the ankle and rest is felt, meaning the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called the Cautery of Goats (Vaccinum).
Section on Cauterization of Back Pain
When pain occurs in the back for many reasons, whether due to circumstances, impact, overabundance of evacuation, and similar issues, from the infusion of cold material and moisture: indeed, cautery falls only in this single kind where it is made from the infusion of cold material.
Therefore, it is necessary after evacuating the patient with fetid pills and similar remedies, to make three lines across the back where there is pain, according to the width of half the circumference of the finger. After marking these lines with a burnishing tool, apply five burns or more depending on the quantity that comes out from the patient's tolerance by their virtue: and then perform cauterization using a cauterizing needle.
And if you wish, perform cauterization with three or four burns, using a central key-shaped cauterizing tool, according to this shape.
¶ Concerning the method of cauterization for the initial gibbosity.
This illness often happens to young boys.
And the sign of its beginning in children is this: a constriction occurs in breathing and movement upon him during evacuation, and you find at the last vertebra of the back and his nodes that it has begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
And when you see that and wish to do so, then cauterize him with a cauterizing tool that is circular according to this shape.
And apply the cauterizer evenly over all parts of the vertebrae: and if you wish, cauterize around each vertebra with a needle-shaped tool in two lines or three: and make the points close together.
Then care for the site until it heals with what we have said.
And be cautious, do not apply the cauterizer to a bump that appears during nerve spasm.
Concerning the method of applying the cauterizer for gout and ligament pains.
When joint pains are caused by cold moist substances that flow to any part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, according to the custom of the doctors, they call this condition properly gout.
So when gout caused by cold factors is being treated with its methods and the pains do not subside, then apply the cauterizer to remove those pains.
And it is that you apply the cauterizer after defecation around the area of the foot joints, with multiple applications of the cauterizer: and use an olive oil-based cauterizer.
And if you need to make marks on the face of the foot, then do so with the point of the cauterizer. And if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints and this happens frequently, then apply the cauterizer over each knee three times, or four times from every side, using the same cauterizer called 'Clavi'.
And if you need to use more of this cauterizer, then apply it as needed. And do not immerse your hand in the cauterizer, rather keep its thickness about as thick as skin only.
And if the pains ascend to the knees and back: then apply what we have instructed from the cauterizer in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then perforations should be made around the wrist, as two lines are said to be turned there.
If the pains still persist in the fingers, then punctures should be made over each knuckle point and also over the palmar ridge of the hand.
If the pains rise after days to the elbows, or to the shoulders, then apply cautery from every side.
And do not discharge the patient from good treatment, due to intolerance of medicines. For if good care is done and the phlegm is discharged with this cautery, God willing, it will be cured with this aid.
Concerning the method of applying cautery to Wounds.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or spermatic cord descends to the testicle, and if that starts close by: then it is necessary to immediately relieve the swelling in its own day for the sick person. And use the softer ones, from which feces will descend from his stomach.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and instruct him to hold his breath until he exhales, or until the spermatic cord or intestine becomes visible.
Then guide him back with your fingers and apply the cautery under the rupture on the palmar ridge in the shape of a mark whose end is similar to half the size of a circle, towards the upper part of the body.
Then apply the cautery with this form until it produces white fluid and discharges pus. Then guide the intestine or the spermatic cord back to its natural position. Then have the attendant place their hand on the location so that nothing escapes out of the intestines: and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and placed a bolster under it, and serving one is above his legs, and another serves him on his chest who holds the hands.
Then place the cauterizer over it at the mark, with your hand holding the cauterizer in line straight. And hold the person until you follow him with the mouth: or repeatedly alternate with another if you have not followed him from the beginning up to the mouth.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine during your cauterization period, so as not to burn it and allow it to escape through that above the patient resulting in either death or great harm.
And you should know that when you do not follow with the instrument during your cauterization, your operation is ineffective.
And it must be that the children's cauterizer is delicate, according to their measure.
Then take care with the rest of the ointment until healing occurs.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide the food of its length during the healing time which soothes its stomach: so that nothing escapes out of the intestines at defecation and diarrhea.
Then when it desires to stand after forty days, then administer a ligature made from the center and have him hold it for another forty days.
And he should be relieved of labor, overeating with food and drink, and from harsh commands.
For when this regimen is used, then it results in a complete healing.
And I will speak about the treatment of wounds with cutting in its own chapter.
When indeed wounds occur in the rest of the abdomen, and are beginning ones, and useful for not increasing, then cauterize the wound with a round cautery according to its size: let that which is burned be like one third of it. Then care for it, with what we have said: and do not allow its addition.
And some have said about the first ones: that the wound should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this shape.
After marking with the hot iron, and placing a line which is across the width on the upper side of the wound, and another line downwards. And place your hand with the triangular cautery in the middle.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
§ On the method of cauterization in pain due to condition, or impact.
Title 48.
When it happens in some limbs due to accident or impact causing pain; and that pain persists for a long time, and there is no healing with the doctors: then it must be cauterized with a punctum cautery.
And let the size of each member's cautery be according to its magnitude, and its thickness, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the twist, and the pain from it.
If therefore it heals with the first cautery, it is good. If not: then apply successive additional cauterizations.
For the custom of these pains is that they alternate from one member to another as it approaches them. Why it must be that you continue with them until the patient is healed with the use of cautery.
On the method of using cautery for leprosy.
However, leprosy sometimes benefits from the maximum therapeutic use of cautery. And especially the species of leprosy that results from phlegm and melancholy putrefaction: therefore, consider how to use the force of cautery against it.
If therefore leprosy is spreading and you have treated it according to what we said in the division, and it doesn't subside or stabilize: then consider when the corruption affects the entire composition of his body. Then apply cautery to him on the head over five applications: one centrally at the top of the head, and the second lower towards the forehead at the end of the hairline, and two more above that, and a fifth one behind the neck bones.
And the final application of your hand with cautery is until it leaves a small imprint in the mouth and causes the thick fumes to be expelled from there. Then apply further treatment by applying the cautery even on the spleen, following what has preceded.
And if the leprosy is already spread out on the patient and is clearly visible: then you should apply these cauteries as we described in the head section, and the cautery to the end of the nose, and two applications each over two maxillary bones, and two over the cervical vertebrae, and six over the thoracic vertebras, and a large one at the base of the tailbone and one above it, on his navel: and two over the hips: namely, on all the hip bone with one, and over both knees: one over each knee, and two over the shoulders, and two over the forearms, and two over the tenderness in his chest: and apply the cautery to every seam, from the seams between his fingers of hands and feet, and their toes: and cauterize over all the heel of his feet, and the knuckles of his hands.
And touch the nerves which are above the very end of the heel, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cauterizer on the root of the molar tooth, and on another on the opening of the stomach, and on yet another on the tailbone.
And know that the more you apply the cauterization, the more it will be beneficial and effective.
And you will know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as the healthy do; it is because their body is already stunned.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations be of appropriate size and quality according to body parts and joints: following the types of instruments.
Then apply the cauterization with herb flour mixed with honey, and other treatments, until the wound heals.
In The Method of Cauterization Using Stupefaction.
When a certain part becomes stunned and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then use cauterization on the stunned part, according to its size or quality.
And make your cauterization penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And sometimes cauterization is used for a certain stupor that happens to the hand and foot, at the foramen of the spinal column where the nerves move this limb: and the stupor is relieved.
However, do not apply it without understanding anatomy of the body and the movement of nerves exiting the limbs, unless one is wise in this field.
Head 51.
When you are dealing with Albaras and there is nothing from the medical inventions in it: then apply deep cauterization on it temporarily, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then care for it with herb flour, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of the hogweed, and pigeon's blood, and rabbit's blood: take one part from each. Mix all these together and spread them over a cloth, and apply them to the wound until healed.
On the method of cauterization in the Crab.
When the Crab is beginning, and you have placed it (the patient), then cauterize it with a circular cautery over its circumference as it revolves.
Wise ones said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
But to me it does not seem that way; because I fear it will fester, and I have seen this happen on several occasions.
And the better method is to cauterize it around its circumference as we said, or with multiple cauterizations.
On the method of cauterization for Abbevillians (Adubelati).
When someone has Abbevillians (Adubelati) and there is delay in maturing them, or due to excessive production causing it, or due to the age of the infirm person, when they are decrepit with little blood, or due to time and haste in maturing Adubelatis, then cauterize around it with many small puncturing cauteries. Then cut it off. And she will hasten with ripening.
If however you make a puncture in it with a cautery, then use the cautery kindled by fire, which has this form.
And place it in the middle of the prepared ashes until the skin penetrates: and let the cautery from what follows be weak, so that the flow of clean matter may be encouraged.
Then care for it until it is healed.
¶ On the method of applying a cautery to a sore spot.
Head 44.
A sore spot is nothing but corruption wandering within a limb, and it consumes the part: just as fire devours dry wood.
If therefore you see a sore spot in a place that can withstand a cautery with fire, then use many small and large pincers of the cautery according to what suits the location where the sore is present.
Then apply the cautery to all parts until you have eradicated the entire corruption, and there remains nothing at all from it.
Then let it heal for three days, and place over the areas that have been treated with a mixture of ground sulfur and oil until all the scabs and corruption are eradicated.
Then care for it using ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days, flesh is born with health, which lacks corruption, it is good.
And if not: then apply the cautery repeatedly over what remains from the corrupted areas.
And a sore spot is treated with sharp medicine sometimes. Indeed, it rises at the place of the cauterization.
True, yet the cautery with fire is more expedient than it seems: and indeed I have already mentioned its use with acute medicine in division. Therefore, receive that procedure there when you need it.
On the method of cautery in Clauws and Warts.
Title LV.
This ailment occurs many times in the lower parts of the feet: it is a large, filtered affliction which harms the foot.
Indeed, there is cautery for them according to two ways: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
As for cautery with fire, it should be made like a pen puncher that is similar to bird peckers. It should be made of iron according to the size of the claw on every side, and have fine edges.
Then place the heated instrument upon the claw. Then move the hand with the cautery around the area of the claw until the cautery reaches to the depth of the claw. Leave it for three days until pus begins to come out. Then plaster it with rue poultice mixed and ground with salt, and leave the poultice on overnight. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the site with a rejuvenating ointment until it heals.
If they do not heal and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then apply cautery with hot water. And you will receive a tube from air, or iron, or from bird beaks: and place it over the claw or wart. Then pour a small quantity of warm water into the cannula: keep your hand and move it with pressure from your hand, barely, so that an edge mark of the cannula is imprinted at the root of the clavicle, and let the warm water find a way to depth, to the root of the clavicle: and the patient should stay above the wound for one hour.
Then release it, for the clavus is removed along with its roots.
Do this one by one until you have dealt with all that is within the body.
Then take care of them after they are removed, considering what grows from the substance of ointments.
### Method for Cauterization in Tremor (Tremble).
When tremble happens to someone due to cold in the nerve, or from a quartan fever, or otherwise: then it is necessary that you apply four or five cauteries on the spinous processes of the back, and between each process with a cautery, and over his chest with a cautery, and over his stomach with a cautery.
Indeed, the tremble stops when an olive oil cautery is applied, and hastens the recovery from cold ailments.
### Method for Cauterization of Albathir
Title LVIII.
Sometimes, impurities called Albathir (which refers to pus that forms from corrupted materials) are expelled from the body.
Therefore, when they become visible, they should be treated by applying a thin, fine cautery over each head of the pus lump, with one end of the stick of myrtle being ignited at the fire. And when it comes to the long root of the Aristolochia plant. And with the use of a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the extremities are heated with a cautery at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method: and they do not increase in size, but the excess is broken down as they make use of them, and they heal through them.
However, it must be done after bloodletting with the phlebotomy procedure.
Regarding the method of applying cautery during the flow of blood from an artery at the wound.
Often blood flows from an artery which has been cut at the wound, whether it happens externally or at a cut by forceps, or a member's cautery, and similar to these: and it becomes difficult to remove it.
So when such a thing happens to someone, then immediately reach out with your hand towards the opening of the artery, and place your index finger over it: and press it strongly until the blood is trapped under your finger and does not escape from there at all.
Then place small pieces of olive oil-based cautery on fire and add many more: and blow over them until they burn intensely.
Then take one or slightly less, or more depending on the wound and location where the artery was severed, place the cautery over that blood vessel, immediately after you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is released.
If the blood is expelled as you raise your finger from the artery's opening and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, from those that are prepared on fire.
Do not cease to perform one after another until blood is expelled.
And beware, do not set fire to the nerve there, and let some other mischief happen to the sick person.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to sever it: especially if the artery is large, unless done with one of four methods. Or using a cautery, as we have said. Or by extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends contract and blood is expelled. Or it may be tied with strong thread. Or substances of medicinal properties may be placed upon it, which have the property of expelling blood, and then bound with a suitable compression using a pessary.
Those who perform the operation while binding it with a bandage and compressing it with cloth, or arranging things to burn together with similar ones, do not completely cut him off from this except rarely.
But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor nor medicine available, then he should start by placing the tip of his index finger over the vein opening, as we have told you before, and applying intense compression, until blood is expelled from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And the finger should not be moved. Above it, apply cold water constantly, until it is frozen and congealed, then cut it off.
And meanwhile, he should consider what needs to be done with the cautery or with medicine.
On Incision, Piercing, and Phlebotomy in Wounds and Similar Conditions.
We have discussed in the first chapter, every illness where it is appropriate to use a cautery and burning medicine, and its situations, causes of its occurrence, and tools for its application, as well as forms of cauteries.
And I placed the headings from head to foot there.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, to enlighten those who seek knowledge.
And before I start this, you need to learn about what is in this chapter that matches the fear mentioned in the first chapter on cautery.
And because of this, there should be greater caution in it, since in the operation described in this chapter, bleeding occurs frequently with blood, which sustains life at the point of incision or pustule, or the opening of exit, or treatment of wounds, or extraction of arrows, or incision over a stone, and similar cases: from all these there arises trembling and fear, and death befalls many of them.
And I warn you not to fall into that which causes hesitation, for sometimes such cases of people with illnesses occur within this art towards you. For there are those who become angry with their illness, and death is mild for them: due to the severity he finds from his illness and the length of his wickedness. And when sickness arises from fear that signifies death.
And from these comes the one who gives his medical treatment to you and enriches you with it, hoping for healing, but his illness is harmful.
One does not therefore need to agree with him who comes to you from them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more intense than your greed and your own rapacity. And do not assume anything from it before a certain knowledge, which verifies that there is a commendable succession to what has been achieved.
And use your care for the cure of all your patients, prediction and suggestion towards that which leads to proper health.
For in this there is assistance for you towards the attainment of fame and glory, and remembrance and praise.
May God inspire you, my children, his understanding, and not take away your guidance and inspiration: for that is within his power.
And indeed, I have organized this chapter by dividing it into sections, following what was done in the chapter on cautery, from the neck to the feet: so that you can find and obtain what you desire from it, and what you need.
¶ On the treatment of water which is added to infant's heads.
Chapter I.
Know that this illness often happens to infants after birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the baby without elevation.
And it also sometimes happens due to an unknown cause which is not known.
And indeed, I have not seen this illness in others as in infants: and death has approached every one of them from it. Therefore, it seems to me appropriate for me to abstain from the treatment in such cases.
And indeed I have seen an infant with its head filled with water, and the head would swell every day until it could not sit on itself due to the size of its head; and the humidity increased until it died.
And this kind of moisture either accumulates between the skin and the mouth, or accumulates beneath the bone above the tooth.
And the operation is as follows: if there is moisture between the skin and the mouth, and there is a slight abscess, then it should be that you make an incision in the middle of the head with one width, and let the length of the incision be roughly twice the size of two joints until the moisture drains.
And this is the form of a sputumill (a medical tool or device).
And if the moisture is significantly increased and the abscess is larger, then place these two incisions according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the openings of the head cavities from all parts: and water is pressed when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and what you do not hide from you: then it should be that you make three incisions in the middle of the head, according to this manner.
And after making the incision, remove all the moisture completely. Then stitch the incisions with bandages and poultices. Then wash that off with wine and oil up to the fifth day.
Then release the bandage, and take care of the wound with dressings and ointments.
And do not release the head's stitches until they have reached their normal width. And feed the patient with all dry food that is slightly moistened, until the member is comforted and healed.
And the other consideration for making an incision is to observe where the size of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
Because sometimes there is more at the back of the head, or at the top of the head, or on the right side, or on the left.
So ascend with your cut where pus and filling of water become visible to you: and divide that according to what is possible for you.
And observe, do not cut the artery and let blood flow out, causing the patient to die from that loss with water expulsion.
¶ On cutting arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When someone gets a cough affecting the eyes or chest and becomes unresponsive, and medical treatments are not effective: then, more so, the last resort is through cutting these two arteries.
Therefore, when you need to cut them, the patient must shave their head. Then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries become visible. Next, have the patient tighten their own neck with any piece of cloth they have. Then observe, where the pulse beats. The locations of both are places that are below the ears and sunk down; they rarely get hidden, unless in certain individuals.
Then mark both locations with a hot wax: and cut both using two sharp needles until the cuts reach the mouth: and this should be done across the width of the head.
And if necessary, insert the needles under the artery and cut it upwards with the cuts.
And let the length of the cut be about the width of two fingers.
For when an artery is cut, blood flows out with each beat of the heart, which jumps into the inner parts frequently.
If however, the artery is not apparent to touch, then it must be measured from the ear by three finger-widths of space. Then marks with the cautery, and proceed until you reach the mouth.
And that which needs to be discharged from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you will discharge more or less from it. Do the whole thing according to the quantity that appears to you from the disease of the patient and the filling of his artery.
Then examine towards the wound. Then if there is still something left towards the mouth from the siphon, then apply this so that no hot abscess forms: then bind the wound with linen strips.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Regarding the removal of arteries, which are found in the joints.
Chapter III.
When this happens to a person with old half-headache, or acute cough due to harsh humidities, and heat in the joints of the limbs, or from old soda water and similar things: when treated according to methods of medical treatment, it does not yield this result; then we have these illnesses for extracting arteries from the joints, or cauterizing them, as we have described.
The method of action for extracting them is to shave the hairs that are in the joints and extend towards the apparent artery in the joint. For it is revealed to you by its own pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few people or cases of cold illness.
If it is hidden from you, then have the patient bind their head with any of their cloth: then rub the area with a rough cloth. Or warm the area with hot water until you see an obvious manifestation. Then take the spatula, which I formed earlier. Then, with ease, scrape off the skin with it until you reach the artery. Then produce an incision in that area, and pull it upwards until you remove it from the skin, making sure to expose the layer of tissue beneath all around.
If however the artery is thin: then encircle it with the tip of the spatula. Then cut from that part according to the length of its extremities when stretched and contracted, so that there is no blood flow. For if you do not cut it and do not remove it, the blood will not rise completely.
Then drain out three-quarters of the blood until you reach one-sixth.
If the artery is large: then you must bind it in two places with a strong double thread made of silk or horsehair, so that it does not expand before the wounds heal and there is no blood flow.
Then cut off the excess which lies between the two ligaments. Do that either immediately or after another hour.
And if it bleeds, cauterize it with a cauterizing instrument until the ends of it are burned, using a surgical knife; until its extremities are affected and the site of the operation is stabilized.
And it's better to proceed with the surgery if the patient has a fever or is of hot complexion. Since the cauterization helps to end moisture issues. Therefore it is better for treatment purposes.
And it is necessary after the removal of arteries, that the place be filled with old plaster: and round about it let there be placed balls made in a central manner.
And after the extraction, it is cured with dry medicines which cause the growth of flesh, and with plasters, until it is healed.
If during your operation a flow of blood from the artery occurs, then quickly proceed to cut it off with a cautery or use zinc: and hold your hand until the blood is severed. If nothing of those [items] is present for you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood coagulates. And immerse the area with very cold water until the sharpness subsides, and tie it up according to what is necessary.
And the method that is easier and less burdensome for extracting an artery involves using a cautery with two knives: make sure the sharpness of both knives matches that of amalgam. However, they have an acuteness that is much less than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, the cold from each spreads out and does not cut through flesh with speed. Since there is a certain amount of thickness in them, the heat of the fire is contained within and flesh is cut through quickly: thus this method is better for every operation, easier, and more straightforward.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
And let there be the space between the two knives that is equal to the thickness of a finger. After you mark two spots with the hot iron, put down both burning ones until they reach the artery in both places. This will ensure what's between the ends stretches out. For this type of cauterization does not result in complete healing.
Head/Chapter IV.
Section on the care and frequent changing of lacrimal (tear) duct dressings from the eyes.
When there are frequent tears and a passage of these from the nasal ducts which are on top of the head outside, you won't find any need for medical treatment among medicines; you will notice that the patient's face has turned red already, and they feel a walking sensation in their forehead, just like ants moving. Their eyes are strained, wet, to the point where their hair roots have already been corroded by the tears. Their eyelids were heated due to the sharpness of the tears. Then, the ancients would use this method for treating them, and they named it 'Curing with Ense.'
And it is as if you were to shave off the hairs on his forehead for the sick person. Then make three cuts in the forehead that are equidistant and parallel to the length of the forehead. Each cut should be about two fingers long, and one cut will be equidistant from the nose at the center of the forehead; the second cut will be according to the length near the motion of tears, and the third one will come from the other side. Be careful not to touch the arteries that are on both sides during this procedure: extend your hand along the continuation of the two jaws, making sure there's a space equivalent to the sum of three fingers between each incision. Prepare a piece of sponge or many dried cloths; use them to soak up blood.
Then insert the tips of two lancets, and here follows the form for this procedure. From the incision at the temporal part up to the second incision: and remove all the skin between the two incisions, including the sifac which is above the mouth. Then perform that as well from the median incision up until the second incision. Then extract this spatula, and reinsert another tool, which is named the surgical knife, gently from one side, not sharply from the other part. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side against the attached flesh with the skin, and its flat side gently against the mouth: and push it until it reaches the median seam. And cut off everything hanging down from the head to the eyes: beyond that, continue the incision until what appears from the skin is reached.
Then do this from the median seam up to another seam.
And after the flow of blood has equalized, squeeze out places from the clotted blood residues.
Then place the cooked wax throughout each seam and put wools soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar over them. And see that no pus occurs hot.
And on the third day, dissolve the bandage and administer much infusion with warm water. Then care for it with the balsam ointment, and other remedies used for wounds, until it is healed.
Title V: The Head
§ On the care of acute tears and catarrhs in the eyes originating from within the head.
When such events occur to someone with acute catarrh, be vigilant, and observe how their eyes have become exhausted, pale, and already weakened in appearance: and the eyelids are inflamed, and hairs fall from them, and there is an intense headache deep within the head that hurts and causes sneezing. Then recognize these symptoms as indicating that unless originating from multiple veins, such material and catarrh cannot come about otherwise.
And a better treatment for them is this. And it is for you to instruct the sick person to shave their head. Next, cut an incision in the head of the patient right in the middle of the forehead, or a bit to each side depending on the width. Start cutting with the incision from the left time (indicating mastication) to the right time. Cut until you reach the mouth. Extend your hand away from the moving temporal joints during chewing. Continue cutting until the mouth is exposed and then dry off all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with surgical forceps or with sterilized tweezers from linen fabric. Then tighten with ointment above: and soak the ointments in wine and oil so that a hot abscess does not occur.
And when you release that and see that the hot abscess is already diminishing, then it will be necessary to rub the mouth until flesh begins to grow within it.
Then take care of it with a drying regimen that makes flesh grow: as if you take two parts of ground barley and four parts of colophony. Prepare the paste from these and apply it for the birth of flesh to occur in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
¶ Concerning the care for what falls into the Ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is of four kinds: either a mineral stone, similar to one, such as iron and sulfur; or it comes from plants, like chickpeas and beans; or it's some flexible substance like water, vinegar, and similar substances; or some kind of animal.
So when a stone or something similar falls into the ear, which does not add to nor increase in the ear, expose the ear to the sun: if you see the stone then distill some oil of violets or coriander seed into the ear. Then perform the extraction, and make him sneeze while you're administering it, and stuff his nostrils at the onset of the sneezing, after which you place pieces of cloth or wool around the inside of his ear, and then stretch his ear upwards.
Indeed, much relief comes with this care.
But if it does not relieve the condition, then administer the extraction with Gestis, that is, with fine Pizigaris: its shape is as follows.
But if it relieves the condition with Gestis, then it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction with an open-toothed hook that has few doublings.
But if it does not relieve the condition through this method, then make a tube from air and insert the tip of the tube deeply into the ear opening. Stuff with whatever is inside the circumference of the tube mixed with softened wax oil so that only the tube is exposed to the wind. Then extract it with your strong suction force.
Indeed, much relief comes from doing as we have described. But if this method does not provide relief: then take a piece from the metal cover of the helm or from vinegar, that is, from prepared gluten used to catch birds, a small amount. Place it at the tip of the radius after you have placed the skin centered above it in a circular shape: then insert it into the ear opening with ease, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
But if none of these methods provide relief, then prepare to divide it [the affected area], before a hot boil or twitching occurs.
And the size of the incision is such that it should reach the thin vein first within the head, and then remove it from the blood according to its strength. Then have the sick person sit between your hands, and turn their ear towards the top, and make a small incision at the base of their ear where there is depression for themselves: and let the cut be in the shape of a crescent until you reach the stone. Then remove it along with what is possible from your tools.
Then heal that cut as quickly as possible and take care of it until it is healed.
If something falling into the ear comes from grains that grow and swell, then administer the removal of it.
But if it does not yield to you for removal, then take a thin spatula, according to this shape.
And administer that with it by removing the same species from grains that fall into the ear, and do not do this, when you think, that that grain has already been moistened by the steam of the ear until you place it in large quantities: then remove them with tongs, or with a delicate gesture, or with suction as we said, for the removal of it is facilitated.
In water that enters the ear, the sick person should use a sneezing action with condensation first: and now has filled his/her own ear with a little cooked older substance: and he/she is lying on that ear, in which there is water. If therefore it comes out through that (method), it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin and tender, and warm them with fire slightly, and have the sick person insert one from these into his/her ear opening. And wash one part of his/her foot over this section, and strike it with another stone on the stone that is in the ear. So do not cease to perform this action with stones and stones until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out to such an extent that you take one from a papyrus or one from a reed and introduce its end into the ear: and you ignite the other end with fire until much of it has burned. Then take another reed and do this many times until all the water comes out; then remove it along with the cannula according to what was previously instructed on the stone.
However, when extracting an animal entering into it, if it is a small body such as a louse and similar to it, take care of it in the same way that I instructed for division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the senses, then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks: and what belongs to it is easier than all others which are held in the ear.
However, when extracting worms generated in the ear, if you take care of it with what we said in division and in the treatment of distillations, and your care is not sufficient: then you should look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something is visible there from the worms, then extract that with gestures, or with fine hooks.
If however nothing is visible there from anything, then take a cannula of this shape, it is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top: and introduce its fine end into the ear according to the quantity that the sick person can tolerate. Then suck with that strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms have come out.
If however they do not respond to you for an exit, then fill around the cannula with paste as I instructed on the stone.
If it does not come out with what we said, then administer the distillations that the ancients were already familiar with for infecting worms; and you will find this in the treatment of distillations.
And let there be your pouring out which you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this tool, whose form is depicted here. Just as you see it made from silver or copper, downwards tightly closed, within which there is an opening for small things, wider upwards.
So it should be that the one that pushes in the curvature of the cannula, is made from copper centrally. And if you wish to take the reed and wrap it with a thread in proportion: then pour oil, or juice, or whatever you want from these medicines into the cannula; and let it be inside the ear: then insert the reed with the thread above, and by your hand compress it until the oil can fill the cavity of hearing and the patient feels it internally. And that which is poured into the ear should already have been gently warmed by fire: and beware not to use what has been distilled too cold; for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
¶ On the care of wound (injury) in the ear.
Sometimes infants emerge from their mothers' wombs without being punctured.
And it also happens to some individuals where the healing process takes place inside the ear from an injury, or flesh is born there.
And this healing can occur deep within the ear's opening, which cannot be reached by force. Sometimes it happens close to the outer part of the opening and reaches that opening due to force.
So, what happens deep within the ear and cannot be seen, is often difficult to treat due to its various positions.
And for the one where force reaches it, you need to place the patient's ear in the sun and observe it. Then, if you see apparent healing, open it with a thin spatula tool whose shape is as follows; its end has some tiny width, part of which is sharp: and the rest of the spatula should be soft from both sides so it doesn't damage the ear.
If, therefore, excision originates from flesh within the ear canal: then hold it with a fine hook and cut it with a forceful ease until all the flesh is removed.
If the excision is deep within the ear: then take a fine, soft rod and heat it slightly with fire. Then put it into the ear canal.
If you feel the excision with that which is found by the sick person with gravity of hearing loss, try to open it with ease: and beware, do not injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a piece of grease according to the size of the opening you made in the Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are at ease about the healing of the wounds.
Or take grease and pour it into rose water, then grind over it powdered sesamum seed, and use it.
If you see the ear has become inflamed: then you must remove the grease, and allow it with another grease which you will apply in a cloth made with rose oil until the pustule settles warm: then care for it until it is completely healed.
If however there is a flow of blood: then immerse a sponge or cloths in cold water, and place the ear on it; and use the remaining remedies for stopping blood flow as described in the chapter on distillations.
Section: On the treatment of eyelids.
Title VIII.
These Althelil (presumably referring to eyelids or something related) that occur in the eyes sometimes become wet, and then become dry.
Therefore, you should hold them with tweezers or with a hook and cut them off their roots with forceps. Then place over the affected areas a mixture that has been ground.
If blood should flow from them, then cauterize them with a fine, lens-shaped cautery.
And it is better to cauterize after making the incision. Indeed, many times they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
Section on the Care of Eyeball Torsions in the Eye.
Title IX.
Many times something occurs in the eyelids that resembles a Granadilla in terms of its strength and hardness due to this it is called a Grandine: and it is an aggregation of large moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
Therefore, the operation is to examine this, when you see if a Grandine is progressing within it, which appears from the eyelid and moves to every part, and its nature is easy.
So find a cut over it across its width. Then scrape her off from all sides with ease until she is healed. Then hang her up with a hook, and cut her down.
If, however, you do not prepare to cut it for him unless after you have penetrated the eyelid with a small incision, then that weak thing will harm in some way.
If the cut is large: then bind it with stitches: and care for that until it heals.
And if it's small, no harm will come from it. The ointment restores itself and makes flesh whole.
And if the growth is directed from the outside to the inner parts of the ear towards the intrinsic surface, then turn back the eyelid and hang the mass with a hook. Apart from that, you need an incision, and press it from every side.
If the eyelid is extended through an incision, this does not harm in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision with a warm saline solution, and care for the wound with what promotes healing until the patient is healed.
Section on the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a grease that forms in the upper eyelid's tunics: and it happens quite often to children. And this greases their eyes, and they get morning conjunctivitis, and they cannot see the sun's rays, because tears flow towards them, and due to this they always lie on their faces, and sleep with them, and their eyelids are wet under their eyebrows, which has already been inflated: and the Axirnath appears prominent in the eye, and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of its operation is, that the patient should place his head on your bosom.
Then take flaxen cloth and prepare in it pennyroyal, and make from that a pennyroyal ring the size of which contains Axirnath on all sides. Then place it over her and press it with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the ring.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a thin blade, cuts occur across its width, and it is not a cut larger than that which occurs in deep bloodletting.
It may be necessary to find the entire skin until you reach Axirnath, for Axirnath proceeds from the cut according to the shape of a stub of white grease in various arrangements.
Therefore remove it with the cloth you have soaked between your fingers towards the outside. And move your hand to the right and left until it is spread out. Be careful not to add anything to the cut so that you do not scrape into the eye with the blade, causing harm to it.
If Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the cut, you should gently add a little to the cut until Axirnath proceeds. Then remove it, as we said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the area, then bind it with powders.
And among people there are those who sprinkle salt, and they place it in the depression of the cut, so that what remains from that moisture becomes liquid.
Then take care of that until it heals.
But if pus appears at the site of a warm wound, then care for it with soothing plaster until it heals.
§ On the methods of dealing with an inflamed eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft around the eye, causing it to wrinkle like it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow on the eyelids beyond their normal growth period and become old: then they harm the eye and cause various ailments to occur, such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and moisture, until this becomes the reason for the destruction of the eye.
And Al-Tausir certainly treats eye injuries in four ways. Or by using a cautery with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as explained in the chapter on cautery. Or Al-Tausir heals through incisions and stitches. Or with canals, as I am about to say.
It is necessary for you to place the patient's head on your breast. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, that is good. And if not, insert the point in it, where is the thread from the lower part of the eyelid. Let that penetrate with the thread above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid from which hairs are born. And pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it back together with the eye.
And then find within the part of the eyelid under the added hairs, going up to the larger lacrimal gland until it reaches the smaller lacrimal gland.
And then remove the thread. Place a small piece of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and then mark on top of the eyelid with an iron, to resemble the shape of a leaf of laurel.
However, it must be that the figure is according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for this already varies among humans.
For there are those who need to fall from the eyelid in quantity much, according to the quantity that softens from the eyelid.
And then find with the needle above the two lines you marked, and start from the larger lacrimal gland until reaching the smaller one, and make a single cut near natural hairs, as it is the thickness of a radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angular parts of the skin. Then scrape off (expose) the entire thing. Then, with the needle and a fine thread made of wool, stitch together (sew) the two labia. After that, clean away any blood, and make it adhere to what is superfluous from the threads above the two eyebrows, if it's possible to do so using certain things for this purpose: but if not, don't worry about it.
Then leave the suture and thread for up to three days or four: after that, take care of the next step.
And if you wish, remove the wound without a suture and take care of it together with whatever remains, allowing it to dry up and tighten. For the eyelid will be raised at the incision point of the wound and its aggregation: but it is better in the future.
This method of treatment for Ataxmir was taught by the ancients.
But there is concern over the sick person, and it comes from good treatment, and there is no fear within it.
And there is another method for treatment in Ataxmir as well: it involves making a mark over the eyelid that resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then lift the eyelid with three separated or combined hooks, according to this shape which follows, and then cut off what remains with parallel scissors, according to this shape, with equal cuts.
If however it is not possible for you to hold the hook and they do not match: then take an incision in which there is thread, and insert that into the middle of the shape. And insert another thread near the larger tear ducts, and a second thread near the smaller tear ducts. And stitch the threads together between your fingers with equal spacing.
Then raise your hand as high an equal elevation: and raise the skin over what is marked with the cut, as we have told.
Then, when dealing with wounds, join together the two lips with stitches: and attend to it until it heals.
If indeed an abscess should occur at your incision or your cut, then dress that abscess with a poultice and other remedies like it, which soothe from ointments.
And sometimes an eyelid occurs in such a way that the hairs of it will turn over.
Therefore, you should use what we said about cutting in that case: however, stitches for both are more artificial. ¶ On the care of Ataxmir with needles.
AND It is, to turn the eyelid and divide the cut that has been made, as I have told you. Then use your skill to make two needles or two slender sticks; their length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of spathula: and you have already made an incision at both ends in each part where you hold the thread.
Then join the two (needles or sticks) with their thinness over what protrudes from the eyelid of the eye, and tie each needle tightly from both ends, letting them go after a few days. The skin will be tightened and deteriorate until it falls off on its own.
If then the process is slow, cut it with forceps. Then care for it until it heals.
When it has hardened, raise the eyelid: and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two canulas, which you make according to this figure and measurement for their length and width.
Title: The Head: Chapter 12
Regarding the extraction of sharp pins in the eye with an awl.
The operation involves taking a fine needle and inserting a thin thread of silk into the area, gently. Then, join its ends together, and tie each of the knots with a very fine thread: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then make another fine thread to be composed under it in brief length, and tie its ends if you wish.
Then, the patient should place his head on your chest and position it near the sun to show the operation clearly: for this is a subtle or minute operation.
Next, insert the needle through the Alinxotati thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate into the eyelid gently until you remove it above the natural pin.
Then pull out the pin up to above Alinxotati: and insert it into Alinxotati's pin: if there is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it until the pin emerges from the eyelid with Alinxotati's pin.
If however Alinxotati is pulled and the pin does not emerge with it: pull Alinxotati downwards, along with the thread you had composed in it, until Alinxotati exits through the upper opening, and you observe it by eye: then you pull Alinxotati and the thread: and remove both of them, and close the eye: and leave the eye closed for two days or three, until the pin adheres to its place, and grows above it on the flesh.
If the hair is short, then either associate it with a long hair from natural hairs, and remove it together: or let it go until it extends through the space, and then remove it.
Title XIII.
When this happens to the eye with Alxatrati, it is named Leporina.
And this Alxatrati can be either natural or accidental.
Therefore, an accidental Alxatrati results from the consolidation of wounds, or sections, or cauterizations, and similar procedures.
And the method of performing this is to identify that consolidation, and to separate its edges. Place a piece of linen between those edges, then tie it until it heals.
And it should not be that you use things which dry and constrict for its treatment; because if you do this, the Alxatrati will return worse than it was before. Rather, use things which soften for it, like Greek fennel: soak it in water in which mallow has been boiled, linen seeds, and oil; mix with a soft ointment from some of the oils, then wrap it around the linen and care for it accordingly.
And your treasury of care is to use all your skills and ingenuity so that it does not harden into its initial shape.
And indeed, the operation that we have described is merely a correction of Alxatrati so that it does not return to its former shape at the place where it had completely been.
Regarding the care of Alxatrati that occurs in the lower eyelid, it is either a wrinkle or a contraction upwards to the right and left.
Title XIV.
This is what Alxatrati does below, which is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental arises from a bone, or a tear, or searing, and things similar to these.
And the operation for this is as follows: take a needle where there is double thread, and pass it through the flesh, so that it penetrates from the left tear to the right tear, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a broad scalpel. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good.
And if not, take the hair and place it in the tear, and rotate the eyelid with it. And make two tears in the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of both tears come from each of the corners of the incision until they meet and form an angle; until then they will form this shape, and that is the Greek letter 'lauda'.
Then remove that flesh by the amount which is the length of its sharp lower side, from what follows the eyelid. Next, join the separated parts together and attach them with a thread.
Then take care of them as we said before regarding softening medicines and stimulants until they heal.
And if Alxatrati should happen due to a tear or suture, or searing, then it must be that you find the tear flat under the eyelashes hairline, even if it has proceeded before. Then separate between two lips with a knife, according to what we said.
And the summary of our discussion about caring for Alxatrati, when it is above or below, means that he should care for her in that operation according to how she is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
Indeed, she is the multitude of diversities in form: and the prudent artisan prepares his mind with whatever method is possible for him until he returns to the figure towards its natural form or close to it, and the very patient does so according to what suits her from operation and tools in many positions.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or cornea.
This consolidation occurs in many people so that the upper eyelid becomes fixed with the white of the eye, and prevents it from performing its natural operations.
Therefore, you should insert the end of the rod under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a hook. Then strike the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be in accordance with the sharpness of the incision of the spatulas but is blunt slightly. This way, the patient will not be disturbed during surgery, remove the spatula, and damage his eye with its sharpness; and your cut should be like you scrape off that adhesion as easily until when the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and heals entirely.
Then pour into the eye salty water and wash it out: or distil over him from a sieve made, from zinc dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and eye with a linen thread: and place upon the eye wool saturated with the white of the eye. And after three days use the sieve, and with solid ones until it is healed.
On the incision of a nail and prominence of the flesh of tears.
Head XVI.
Know that the nail is according to two modes. Or it is neural: and it is similar to a hair being hard, fine. Or it is not neural, similar to the whiteness of ice that has been thawed: which when touched by iron, or if you try to take it with a hook, it can be cut off, and no hook will stick in it.
And both types do not begin unless from the larger tear ducts, until they extend gradually, until they reach their full extent, and obstruct vision, and hinder the movement of the eye.
And the method of operation for its incision is: when the patient puts his head on your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Next, gather the nail with a hook of minimal double thickness and extend it upwards. Next, take the point and insert it into a hair from horses', cows, or rabbits. And let there be strong thread, and double the end of the needle, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the tip and tie it to the nail with thread, and extend it upwards: and scrape off the side of the nail that follows the pupil as if you were holding it together with hair until behind its hindquarters.
Then cut the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a sharp instrument, or with blunt forks: and remove the natural flesh of the tears, so as not to happen that there is a continuous flow of tears from his incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with a hook alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then it should be scraped with a soft spatula, which has this form.
And beware, do not let the spatula touch the skin of the nail, and cause a break in it, and perforate the pupil.
Then after the incision, pour some ground salt or a sifted substance from zinc into the eye, and let it remain until another day. Then attend to it with what is necessary, until it is healed.
If the nail is not nerveous and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor can a hook be implanted within it, then this type of nail requires frequent treatment with medicines. It will heal as I have described in the division.
If you wish to penetrate it, then open the eye of the sick person, and take a soft spatula that is subtle, gentle, and has weak sharpness, according to this form. And shave the nail from above with reason and subtlety. And when you see that it itself is being thinned and crushed, and the reason prints into it, then distill from your own hour into the eye from a sifted substance from zinc, or from red sand, or ground salt: and fill the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation over it until everything of it is removed. Unless there appears to be an opposing hot pus blister within the eye: then remove it yourself, and attend to the blister until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation over it with subtlety until it is healed.
The prominence of the eyelid's flesh, if it causes significant harm when damaging the eye, should be suspended with a hook and the affected part should be cut from it. And not make the final cut, so as not to allow the flow of tears.
Next, soak a red wad or one made from zinc until it is healed.
¶ Concerning the operation on Alguardenic and flesh that grows inside the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Flesh of a reddish color sometimes is born in the eyes of some people, either mixed or placed on top of the pupil until it covers it, or approaches it, or presses against the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids inward: and it is likened to the balsamic rose.
And there is an operation for this as well; so that even the sick may place his head in your bosom. Then open his eyes and gather that entire flesh with suitable hooks for this purpose: and hold that with one pair of forceps, or bear it in your hand.
Then cut the flesh up to the first part until you finish the entire thing with a serrated blade. And be careful not to harm the eye during the operation: and let your cut coincide with where you are cutting it or using a spatula as we described in the incision of claws, or with large forceps that are used to gather anser (a type of bird), according to what its form will be after this chapter.
Once your cut is complete and all the Alguardenic flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with ground salt. Or distill a red powder into it, and similar treatments from corrosive medicines: and place a clove of garlic covered in almond oil on top of the eye. To keep it safe from heat.
If there is any remainder of the cautery and if your blood becomes warm, and you feel a warm pus: then remove the eye, and take care of it along with that which stops the pus.
Then continue to treat it together with the procedure until it heals.
And do similarly for the flesh that is added which happens in the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary that all weakness of the eyes arising from natural causes or accidental ones be treated with iron during operations: and you must not touch your hand into any of these operations until you discover what part of the body is able to endure this operation.
¶ On removing Sebel from the eye.
Title XVIII.
Sebel are the red veins that weave over the eye and prevent its own operation. They weaken the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore, you must first consider whether the eye where there is Sebel is strong and does not have any other illness besides Sebel: then collect its Sebel.
And it will happen that when you instruct the weak, he should place his head on your chest.
Then suspend those veins with one or two hooks according to your wisdom: and let the hook be finely doubled, as this shape is shown, or let there be two hooks graduated in one body, as this shape is shown.
Then collect those veins with fine forceps and with fineness, and remove the blood hour by hour until you feel those veins move out of the eye, and dissolve them. And beware not to hurt the eye with the edges of the spatula.
And let your operation be during midday before the sun, and be steadfast in your operation greatly: so that you do not cut unless those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill into the eye a green or red mixture, so that its sharpness may nourish what has remained from it.
And if however, it is not possible for you to collect all of that in that hour, then plaster the eye with what soothes the eye pain. And let a few days pass until its pain subsides. And secure it from hot drafts. Then apply it again according to the same method until it heals.
This is the form of the forceps.
¶ Reduction of Arista to the nose.
Chapter 19.
Doctors call the fistula 'Arista', which they treat with a cauterizing agent or an acute medication that burns according to what was previously described.
And if it is not healed, then there is no skill in that manner: unless you burn above the pustule at its birth, and extract all the moisture within it and pus until the mouth appears.
And when the mouth is revealed, and you see corruption or darkness within it, then shave it off with an instrument that has this form.
And they are called 'Asperis of the head'.
Make it from iron that is red-hot, and let its head be round like an azir, which should have a point made by the tip of a file or a fine puncture from a small chisel. And place it upon the corrupted part of the bone.
Then roll it between your fingers, and press your hand until you know that the corruption is already shaved. And do this several times.
Then restore the place with medicinal and cauterizing bandages.
If therefore the area is stabilized, and flesh begins to grow there, and the course of healing is removed: then it remains forty days, without renewing itself, nor getting worse, nor any event happening there. Then you will know that it has been healed already.
And if not, then there is no talent there except to reduce the sinus back to the nasal opening according to this form.
And proceed as follows when you remove the bone secondly with iron or with sharp medicine: and once the opening of the bone is detected, then take the drill according to this form. The end should be made of iron, triangular. And let the wood of it taper until the tip like what you see.
Then place that over the bone itself: and let it be near to the tear duct: and extend your hand from the eye a little. Then rotate your hand with the drill until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it. Through this, when he finds wind escaping from him as he holds his hand over his own nose.
So then restore the area with medicinal and cauterizing bandages, as I have taught you.
And when flesh begins to grow and the area hardens, then the material that was flowing externally returns to the nose. Therefore, it becomes lighter for the patient.
¶ On reducing the prominence of the eye.
Chapter XX.
When the eye is prominent in its entirety and no harm or diminution occurs in vision, then you must release the patient. Afterwards, let him bleed (perform phlebotomy). Later place suction flasks on his neck without incision, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a lotion made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and myrrh. Then, over the ointment with many powders, tie the eye from above.
And the amount of powders is: take soft cloths, many, and double each cloth from them over four: make many from them. Then place them one on top of another, according to the quantity that the eye needs: then tie them with a firm bandage of hard cloth above them.
And use iterative suction devices without cutting.
Then remove the suction instruments, and let the eye heal tightly day and night.
If the bandage has again softened, then it must be tightened much: afterwards remove the bandage day and night as we said.
If you see that the eye has returned to its normal condition, it is good; and if not, then repeatedly apply the ointment, powders, bandage, and suction devices until it heals.
¶ On cutting of the tunica vula.
Chapter XXI.
When a disruption occurs in the tunica vula, then it protrudes and extends outside the eyelids like a grain of sand from the eye, causing an irregular shape due to this and for the invasion by pathogens: then there is surgery on it, as I describe, and it is necessary to insert the tip of the instrument into the root of the granulation tissue starting from below to above.
Then insert another tip with a double thread at the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate. And remove the first tip according to its position.
Then cut through both threads at the site, and bind with it a part of the granulation tissue around an awl: and tighten it much.
Then extract it and place infused wool over the eye like a patch of albuginea. And let him go until the thread with the bone falls out.
Then care for the eye with it, which strengthens itself, until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the bone is tied from all sides with a circular piece of cloth until the eye attains great elevation.
Then a thin spatula is used to puncture through until it reaches the depth of the eye, and the wetness of albuginea flows out. The eye descends immediately after and enters in again. Then tighten it until healing occurs.
¶ On the care for Alcmena.
Head 22.
This illness known as Alcmena is not simply a thin film that collects in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation in this case is to have the patient sit on a prepared seat, or directly.
Then take the head with your hands from both sides, and move it until you feel the film come down to the lower parts of your eyes. Then it is shaped and does not descend, and the eye's view is released: and the sick person will see as they saw before. And if it doesn't descend below, you'll know there's water.
If however it is not prepared for the descent of the film as we said, then have the sick person sit between your hands. Then take the thin spatula and apply it above the corneal membrane at the part where it continues with the corneal tissue near the rim, until the film can come out.
When therefore he emerges, then distill into the eye hot water which you have mixed with honey: or water in which you already boiled the Greek fennel and honey: afterwards it is treated with all other treatments, until it heals.
Chapter on the care of the water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Title XXIII.
We have already discussed the form of water in division and what is suitable for puncturing, explaining and demonstrating it with words. Then receive this same according to health.
So then it must happen that you make the sick person sit between your hands as a square, opposite to the light and close to the sun. And tie the healthy eye of him, and tightly bind it, afterwards if the eye in which there is water is the left eye, use your right hand; or with your left hand if the eye is on the right side.
Then receive with your right hand if the eye is on the left side: or with your left hand if the eye is on the right side.
Then place the tip of the agatha near the crown along the width of the radius at the apparent white area of the smaller lacrimal gland. Then push the agatha with force and move your hand with it until the agatha penetrates into the eye's fog. And you feel that the agatha has already reached the dry part.
And it must be the measure of the agatha's journey to the depth, the measure of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the black area: and this is the crown of the eye. Indeed, you will see those things within the pupil with the vision of your eye, because of the clarity of the corneal coat.
Then place the agatha until it reaches the spot where there is water. Then press it downwards alternately one after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the patient sees that which he opens his sight upon immediately, and the mercury in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If the water therefore descends, then remove it after a second, except where mercury emerges.
When therefore it is removed, and does not ascend: then extract the mercury with ease: and you turn your hand gradually.
Then dissolve some clear beryl salt in water: and wash the eye with it afterward. Then place the entire lump of fat or wool浸过的rose oil around the eye, and garlic inside: then bind the healthy eye with it.
And we, as well as those of our time, place ground cumin with egg white on it.
And if the mercury does not obey you to enter into the eye because of its hardness, for it is from humans whose eye is extremely hard: then you must take a tool called Alberid's spatula, which has this shape.
Pierce it therefore with the spatula only at the joint, and do not fully insert your hand into the hole: and there should only be a way to make an opening for the mercury place subtly.
Then introduce the mercury as we have said.
And upon completing your task, prepare for the patient a well-centered resting place where he can sleep on his back in a dark room. And prevent him from all movements and coughing. Serve him food as nature finds soothing to him. And let him not move his head with either right or left hand at all.
And let the band be according to its own position until the third day.
Then release this within that dark house, and test its effectiveness: and show him the result. Then shorten the bandage until the seventh day.
And it should not be done at the time of treatment or immediately after the cut: rather, you need to let him do this thing elsewhere. This is because water rises quickly due to a strong wind.
If however, a warm pus occurs: then you should release the eye before the seventh day: and correct this along with what soothes the pus, until it is soothed. Then fully test its use, and place over his face an opening through which its use can be regulated for several days, while he exists in that dark house.
Then gradually leave the house and converse with him according to his own cases or circumstances.
And you will know that the student should not be excluded from seeing occasionally in a room with light: then he dares to attend upon surgery.
And indeed some of those who were from Alayrach have reached us, who said that something was done in Alayrach where a magnadn (possibly referring to an instrument or incision) was made, through which water is sucked.
But indeed no one has been seen among you here who did this; nor have I read of it in any ancient books. And it's possible that this is something new.
And these are the shapes and species of incisions using the magnadn (possibly referring to an instrument or incision), so that they stand over those who do not know them.
Make them of proper air material: and let their ends be similarly the same in thickness as these, and have an acute end.
Head XXIV.
On the care of the newly born flesh in the nose.
Sometimes, various kinds of flesh are born in the nose, from which something resembles many-footed scorpions; and from this there is cancerous flesh, stone-like, of a yellowish color. And from this, there is what is soft flesh, not of a yellowish color.
Therefore, for that which from these flesh parts is soft and not deceitful or cancerous, you should make it sit in your hands facing upwards like the sun, open its nostrils, and insert an implement into those flesh parts. Then guide them outwards, and cut off whatever you have identified from them with a sharp and thin instrument until you know that all the flesh has been completely removed.
And if there is something left from that which cannot be removed by cutting off, then shave it with one of the finer instruments until nothing remains from it. And if blood is dominant or if a hot boil occurs, then apply to it whatever is necessary: or it is from malignant boils, in which case proceed by cauterizing it until the blood is severed and all flesh has been removed.
Then, after making an incision into the nose, expel vinegar, water, or wine to it afterwards. And if the nose opens and moisture proceeds from there until it reaches the palate, then you will know that he/she is already healed.
And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that there is born flesh within him/her in the upper parts of the nasal bones, to which the tool does not reach with an incision.
So then it is necessary to use thread with some thickness and many knots in it. And place between every knot an amount of one finger or less. The patient should insert the end of the string into his nose with the bone, or as possible after performing something similar on himself: and pull their smell until it reaches up to the nostril and comes out over the throat.
And indeed, many times children like this Atom do it in schools: and it is an easy thing for him who wishes.
Then place the two ends of the string, one end which comes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nostril. Then prepare the incision of the flesh with knots that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh and threads of the string are together.
Then extract the thread and after clearing the blood, place the camphor you soaked in the Egyptian ointment into the nostril. Do this for three days or longer until the ointment coats the entire remaining flesh.
Then place a lead pipe at the end of the operation in the nostril for several days until it heals.
If however there is need for treatment that dries, use this one.
For the treatment of purging of the head, with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it out of silver or copper; let it be similar to a small lamp, open like a shell, and its opening in the same manner.
And if you wish, make the pipe closed, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for purging the head should be full and open: let there be a handle at its end, with which you will hold it, when you heat it with oil or whatever you wish from juices and other flowing substances.
Chapter 25.
Thelul often gives birth at the end of his nose, and it grows and increases with days until it forms an appearance.
And because of this, one should do away with that at the beginning of its appearance and remove it all. Then place over the site, or a cautery, or a burning medicine which is placed in its spot.
If the cutting of it therefore delays until it grows, then consider if it is stony, hard, with a yellowish color and few sensations: then do not touch it with iron because pus forms due to cancer.
Indeed, I have seen many times when one cuts the lump and then a great disease happens to him who had it.
And if the lump has a soft touch, and it is not yellow in color, and you see that an entire cut is possible within it, then treat the sick person, and cut it out without fear and without panic: and care for the site with what dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter 26.
On the suture of the nose, lips, and ears.
Know that when dislocation occurs in one of these cartilages, there is little need for the operation, unless it happens to certain individuals.
Therefore, when something happens to someone from that (referring to dislocation or displacement), you should consider if there is a recent wound with its blood: and then bind the wounds together with stitches. Afterwards, care for it until it heals.
And if the lips of the continuity of the solution have already been separated and each part is healthy, then it becomes necessary to remove all tissue visible from its skin until bleeding occurs. Then attach the two lips with stitches and tighten them. And apply over it dragon's blood powder and ground frankincense. Place above this pieces of a plaster mixture of diafinicon and another from consolidating plasters. And release the tied for two or three days. Then free him, and change the medicine: and release him until the threads come off by themselves. Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
The method for stitching is as follows: attach the continuity of the wound, or with pins, as we have described in the case of abdominal stitches; or stitch the wound with thread, as you should know.
Chapter XXVII.
¶ On the removal of nodules from the lips.
To many people, it often happens that hard nodules similar to seeds of plants are found within their lips: some of them are smaller and others are larger.
Therefore, you should open the lip and cut over every nodule on it, and hang it up with a hook, then pierce it from all sides.
Then fill the area after the cut with ground substances until blood begins to flow.
Then wash it with vinegar and care for the area with it until the wounds heal.
Chapter XXVIII.
¶ On making an incision in the tissue born on the gum.
Many times a flesh growth appears above the gum, which the ancients call an abuluss.
Therefore, you must suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it near its root, allowing the pus to drain or blood to flow.
Then place over the site something ground, such as powders or other embolizing agents, dry ones.
If the flesh returns after treatment (for it often does), then cut it again and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
Title XXIX.
¶ Concerning the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
Sometimes aggregations occur on the surfaces of teeth from within and extending to the outer part, and between the gums there are scaly, unpleasant layers, which sometimes decay and turn yellow or green until corruption reaches the gum and diseased teeth result from this.
Therefore, you must have the sick person sit between your hands and place their head in your bosom, then grind away the tooth and its dentin where you see scales and resemble sand: until nothing remains from them, similarly do this for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and others until they are cleansed.
If therefore what is at the beginning of reason is taken away from them, it is good: and if not, then apply the reason repeatedly over them on another day, secondly, and thirdly, until the final study reaches to what you wish.
And you will know that a tooth requires razors of various shapes and forms, with many figures: according to how they are prepared for your operation: because the razor used to remove teeth from the lower part is different from the one used to remove teeth between them, according to other forms.
And may those forms of razors be prepared for you that you see.
Title XXX.
¶ On the Extraction of Toothache.
It is necessary that you attend to the tooth with all your skill and resources when it is in pain, and do not delay in its removal. For there is nothing that can replace it when it's being removed: because it is a noble substance; until then, when there is no excuse for removing it, then the patient should be compelled to remove it themselves, so that it becomes firm and certain with you, that the tooth causing pain remains with you.
Indeed, the patient is often deceived by pain and thinks there's something wrong with the tooth and removes it themselves: afterwards, the pain persists until the unhealthy tooth has been removed.
For we have already seen that from the operation of bloodletting.
And when the tooth causing pain is certified to you himself, then it must be that you incise around the tooth with a small spatula, where there's something beneficial, until the gum softens from all sides: then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps on that part of the tooth and hold it in a good position, between your knees: you should hold it so firmly that it doesn't move. Then pull the tooth straight according to its direction, making sure not to break it.
If it does not come out then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides with ease, trying to move it as you did initially.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded, then you should fill that hole with a cloth and tie it with the tip of a thin rod so as not to break it when you are tightening your forceps on top of it.
And it is necessary that you precisely perform scarification around the gum from every part much.
And guard your strength so as not to break it yourself, and let a part of it remain, and return over the weak from that malice which is greater pain for him at first.
And beware, do not do that which the ignorant phlebotomists perform in their process, and overstep their courage towards removing it, beyond which they administer what we have narrated.
Indeed, many times they cause great illnesses to come about in men, of which the roots are harder to break and thus remain all or some of them. Or they extract it along with certain bones from the jawbone; as we have seen this happen on many occasions.
Then after its removal, it is rinsed with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If there happens a blood flow from the places (this often occurs), then rub something with zinc and fill the place with it. If this does not happen, burn it if you do not have access to zinc.
The forceps of fine shape that move the tooth initially, should have long ends, short handles, be thick, so they do not bend when pressed upon a tooth: they should resemble the thick handles until you tighten them, neither biting themselves nor bending. The ends should be short and made from iron or centered cast, having straight ends. And in their ends there should be teeth, some entering into others and being tight according to the necessary constriction, firmly.
And sometimes they make ends like the shape of the mouth of a bird which is called a stork, and they have a strong constriction.
Title XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured jaws' bones.
When there remains something at the site of tooth extraction which has broken off, then it is necessary to place a butter ball over the area for one or two days until the site softens. Then introduce to it with an applicator, or forceps; whose ends resemble the mouth of a bird that is named stork. The form of this tool is that of forceps.
Their ends are made like a file or like an Aliskilfgi, which is another tool in medieval surgery.
If however it does not respond to you when using these forceps, then you must cut over the root and remove all flesh, and insert an instrument called a small lever whose form is this.
Let its end be short, slightly thickened: and do not let it absorb water in order that it may not break.
If therefore the root escapes through this, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to assist with other tools whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular end has some thickness.
The form of the triangular end is thin.
And with other instruments and tools that precede it according to the number of teeth.
Assistance should also be given with this tool that resembles a large hook, which has this form - triangular ends twisted together, and containing some thickness to prevent it from breaking. It must not be soaked in water either.
And you will know that the tools for teeth are many: and other tools are not counted, and the skilled artisan, being subtle in his art, finds his own tool by himself according to what indicates him the operation and the discomforts themselves.
Because there are fields for which they did not say the tool of the ancients due to their diversity in species.
And if the mouth breaks from the jaw or from other bones of the mouth or it decays: then examine him in his place with what is suitable to him among the tools and forceps I mentioned in extraction of roots, and assist with gestures whose form is this.
Let there be a gradual thickening in it so that the mouth is constrained or held with him and does not escape or decay until the mouth comes out. And restore the place with medicines suitable for this purpose.
And if there is a small decay in the bone, then shave it from its own decay and care for it until it heals.
Title XXXII.
On the prominent closure of teeth over others.
When teeth do not grow according to their natural course, this unpleasant condition arises due to that form, particularly when it happens in women and girls, specifically during their menstrual periods.
Therefore, you must take into consideration. So if a tooth is born after another tooth and it does not fit, or there is the possibility of its being too long without grinding or shaping: then extract that tooth. If it is attached to another tooth, then use this tool with this form when you strike it in.
It is like a slender point made of iron that has very sharp tips.
And let your incision be on a day when you hit it for many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other comes out from the teeth.
If there is an elevated part exposed by his own burr: then the burr itself together with the burr from India, whose form is like this.
Let it be entirely from India, and the handle of its small points like that of a needle-making burr: with which the tooth is ground down gradually over many days with ease, so as not to disturb the tooth and for it to fall out. Then make it softer, finish it by grinding it with some razors.
If it is a tooth that breaks off when part of it is taken and hurts the tongue: then you must also use a burr on it until all roughness from that break has been removed and leveled. It should be flattened so as not to hurt the tongue, nor corrupt speech.
Title XXXIII.
Paragraph 1: Treatment of teeth with gold wires.
When there is shaking and disturbance in the front teeth due to impact or by chance, and it cannot be weakened enough to bite on what he eats so that they don't fall out: and when treatment with styptic medicines fails, then it's necessary for artistry to intervene and bind them with gold wire. For silver turns green and decays after days, but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of moderate thickness both in fineness and coarseness according to the quantity that fits between the teeth.
Indeed, the form of treatment is such that you take the wire and insert a double length between two healthy teeth. Then weave with both ends of the thread through the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the weaving to the tooth of the other side. Then continue the incision up to the point where you started: and apply your hand with subtlety and wisdom until it is not moved at all. And let the tightening that you do when tying the thread be noticeable on the roots of teeth, so as not to allow (excess).
Then cut off the superfluous ends of the thread with pincers; and gather both, then turn them over. And hide them between a healthy tooth and a moved tooth to avoid injuring the tongue; afterwards remove it such that it is tight until it remains.
If however they are severed or cut, tie them with another thread and it will be stable in such a way for the entire duration.
And this is the form of teeth, and the shape of holding two healthy teeth and two moving teeth together as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return to their places after the case of eruption and are held just as we described, remaining there. And it does this only if a skilled artisan is doing so.
And sometimes it happens that a certain part of the bone is adapted from the incisors: and it becomes like the form of a tooth, it is placed in its place, where the tooth is protected and tightened as we said, and remains, and serves with him for a long time.
Title XXXIV.
Sometimes this particular ligament that happens under the tongue is either natural, present since birth with every human being, or accidental, from an injury that has already healed.
And the operation for this is as follows: open the mouth of the sick person at the top in your hollow, and raise their tongue. Then cut that nerve ligament across its width until the tongue is no longer held back by it.
If there is any hardness and swelling in it, and that arises from the healing of wounds, then insert a hook into this, and make an opening through its width until you reach the ligament, and dissolve the swelling.
And beware, so that there is not a deep wound in the flesh, and you cut into an artery there, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Then, wash around the site of the incision with rose water, or with vinegar, or with cold water.
Then place under the tongue a linen bandage which the patient must wear every night: so that it does not harden again.
If however there occurs a flow of blood, then place over the site ashes to be sprinkled. If however the blood binds you, then cauterize the place with a lentiginous (slow-working) cautery, which is suitable for this: afterwards care for it together with other treatments until it heals.
Title: Thirty-Fifth Chapter
Sometimes an ulcer occurs under the tongue that resembles a toad's, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and perhaps it expands so much as to fill the mouth.
And the operation for this is, that you open the mouth of the patient under the sun and examine the ulcer.
If therefore you see it of a yellowish color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it descends to a whiter area where there is moisture, then insert a hook into it, and cut through it with fine scissors, and free it from all sides. If your blood overcomes you during your time of surgery, then place on it the zegi grain until the blood is removed. Then proceed to your surgery again until you remove it with its full complement.
Then mix it with vinegar and salt: and take care of the rest of the treatment until that stage, until it is healed.
¶ On the treatment of extracting two pairs of tonsils.
Chapter XXXVI.
Sometimes there occur between the throat and windpipe, that is glands which resemble cotton wool, which are found behind the tonsils: and they are named as two tonsils. When you treat them with what we have instructed in division and if they do not heal, then take note of this.
If therefore the abscess is hard, yellow in color and has few symptoms: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color, and the base of it is large: then do not touch it even with iron fearing the flow of blood, rather remove it until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it: or it will burst on itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and the base of it is thin: then you must puncture it.
And the operation is within it, which you should consider before your own surgery. If its abscess was warm and fully formed, or diminished somewhat, then therefore have him sit exposed to sunlight, and his head on your chest: open his mouth and let him accept it serving between his hands, and press his tongue below with this tool, whose form is as follows.
Make it from silver, or air, which should be thin like a knife.
When therefore you press on it with your tongue and a pus bubble becomes visible to you, and falls upon it: then take the curved instrument, and fix it in the tonsil, and draw it out as much as possible towards the external part, leaving a bit of them attached to the tunics.
Then cut into it with the tool, which has this shape that follows. It is assimilated with forfics (awl-like tools): however, the ends of these must be rounded so that each hole at the end of them is sharp and directly points to another. Therefore, take care that it be made from tempered iron or oiled.
If however this tool is not present, then cut it with the spatula, which has this form. Let it be sharp on one side, but not on the other side.
And after you cut the first tonsil, cut the second one according to the same manner of cutting.
Then after the operation, gargle the patient with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs during this, gargle with water that has boiled for garlic peels or leaves of myrtle and similar herbs until the bleeding stops. Then take care of them until healed.
And sometimes pus blisters appear elsewhere in the throat, other than the two tonsils. Therefore, cut those (pus blisters) according to what I said regarding the incision of the two tonsils equally.
And indeed, I have already treated a woman with pus in her throat that was born between her throat and would darken into blackness, it had almost closed off the entire throat; and the woman could hardly breathe when she used to take deep breaths, she also had been restricted from drinking water and eating for quite some time now. If she had survived for one more day, or even two days, it was likely that she would perish.
And the abscess had risen only as far so that it sent out two branches until they reached beyond two nasal holes.
Therefore I hastened properly and attached one of them to a hook of one of them. Then I pulled it, and a large segment came out from it.
Then cut it off where to grasp it by the nasal opening.
Then I did that which was done to it as it proceeded from the nasal opening on another side.
Then I opened its mouth and pressed its tongue; afterwards, I attached a hook to the abscess. Next, I cut off a part of it, and it did not bleed much except for a little blood. Therefore, the throat of the woman was cleared, and she immediately began drinking water, then she took food.
Therefore, I did not stop piercing that abscess many times for a long period of time. The abscess would form in the place where I pierced it until it stretched excessively and reached that point.
I devised a method and cauterized the abscess between her throat.
The result remained after the addition: then I walked away from her part and did not know what God had done to her afterwards.
### On the operation of cutting abscesses in the foot.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the mucus descends to the foot, and it forms an abscess, and if it is long, then it is called a perpendicular. And if there is a large, round swelling in the lower part, then it is also called a uua.
When it is healed with what we said about division, and the healing does not stick to it: then you will see that the hot abscess has settled within it, and it is thin: at this point, it must be cut into her.
And what is formed from that which is round, and does not have length, and is either bloody or of a light brown color, or black, and it lacks sensation: then the appropriate action is to make an incision in it. And there is fear over the weak one.
Therefore, when you see it according to the method I described from whiteness and its length, make the sick person sit near the sun: and press its tongue with a tool which will follow my description. Then fix a hook in a cup, and pull it downwards: and cut it with one of the two tools I mentioned for cutting both tonsils at once.
And you should not cut from it, except what is added above the natural termination without addition.
For if you cut more from it, you harm the voice and speech.
Then, after the cut, use what we described for cutting both tonsils at once: and take care of her until she is healed.
If the sick person is frightened by the cut, then you should use skill in his cauterization without fear and panic.
And the method of cauterization in this is not without water - and it is that you should place the sick person's head on your chest. Then press its tongue with the tool we described. Then take the water I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it with a flame from an unextinguished fire. Do not make the application too thick or too thin, fill the depression of this tool with it, whose form is as follows.
Place its extremity where the medicine is applied, just like the concavity of a cochlea's radius.
And place the instrument with medicine upon one part of it: and let the patient lie on his side so that the saliva from his mouth by means of the intrinsic medicine may flow out, in such a way that nothing descends from there to the throat of himself and hurts him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you apply that amount of the medicine for half an hour until you see it has diminished and calmed the irritation caused by the medicine.
And if you wish to drink water, place your finger at the extremity of the radius, and pour the water with medicine over it. Then insert the bone with the finger into the tube from above until the bone adheres to one part.
Perform this many times, until you achieve what you desire for the cauterization of the bone. Then release it; for it rises and falls after three days or four.
If you need to apply the medicine again, do so: and after cauterization clean around the bone with butter-soaked gauze and cleanse it using the material that is around his body from the medicine: and wash it with cold water.
And it is treated externally with ointments, and rinsed with gargles until it heals.
This method of treatment is more beneficial than an incision and lasts longer due to the fear it produces.
And sometimes it heals even with something that is finer than a cauterization and an incision: it heals through fumigation, according to this manner. Take a reed, hyssop, origanum, rute, sseah (possibly typo), chamomillam and similar from herbs: and gather all of them together or some of them into a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and let it boil: the pot should be stirred well inside. And there should be an opening in the middle of the pot, on which the concave instrument should be prepared according to this manner.
Let it be made of silver or copper: and insert the end, on which is the apple, into the patient's mouth until the vapor ascends to some extent above the cannula, until much obscures the tube.
Then iterate this many times, until healing occurs.
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of mumps. Indeed, it is added in the case of mumps: and you should not do this unless at the stage when there is a decline in its warmth.
If however this instrument is not present for you, then take a tube, and compose its end with the peel of an onion: so that the mouth of the patient is not burned: because the peel of the onion prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is good treatment with health.
Section on the removal of thorns and bones from the throat.
Title XXXVIII.
Many times it adheres in the throat, or in the mouth of an animal, or from a fish, or otherwise.
Therefore, you must extract what appears above what falls under the use of your tongue, after pressing the tongue with the tool towards the sun, and it is revealed to you what is in the throat.
And if what is not revealed to you and is hidden in the throat does not disappear before food is chewed in the stomach, it should make the patient vomit. Perhaps indeed, what has attached itself may come out through vomiting.
Or let the patient swallow a fragment of onion, or a root of lettuce, or swallow a slice of dry bread: or take a fragment of dried marine sponge that is soft, and tie it into a string, then swallow it. When therefore it reaches the place where the spikes, or mouth is, and is extracted, then he comes out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we said: then use the tool made of lead according to this shape.
Let it be thicker than a radius slightly, and at the end of it have curvature, which insert into its throat with ease: and let it have its head raised upwards.
And let it beware of contact with its epiglottis, so that no coughing happens to him and pushes the mouth or the spike out, or the physician pushes it in with his own hand.
But what the sick person inserts is better, because of their knowledge about the location of the matter: and pushes downward or pulls their hand with the tool upwards until it has extracted whatever was prepared for him completely.
¶ Concerning the extraction of the Blood Worm.
Chapter XXXIX.
When treating a bloodworm with what I said about dividing treatment among physicians and if it does not stick together, then examine the throat of the sick person in front of the sun, or after placing his tongue with the tool I told you.
If therefore your blow falls on the bloodworm, extract it with a small hook or with slender implements turned diagonally.
If it is not possible with them: then take a shallow cupped tube, and insert it into the sick's throat up to close to the throat: then insert the heated iron of the tube into the cupped part while holding it in fire. Do that many times, and let the sick person abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let her take the treated wound filled with cold water, and open his mouth in it: and let him drink his mouth with it, and do not swallow anything from it: and move the water one hour after another with his hand. Therefore, when the leech feels the water, it falls off.
But if it does not come off with what we have told you, then fumigate the sick person with bedbugs, or with wings using the tool that was described for the fumigation of an olla.
Do this many times, because it falls by itself.
And the method of operation during fumigation is as follows: take a pot containing live prunes with fire inside: and let the pot be covered with a lid, having a hole in it; and compose the end of the tool in that hole.
Then release the fumigation; and let the sick person place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. Therefore, the leech falls immediately.
But if it does not fall off, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And the sick person should tolerate thirst, and eat salty food, and herbs, and not drink water.
Therefore, it is necessary for this regimen to be followed.
And this is the form of the tool with which the leech is removed from the throat when it falls upon her.
It is similar to tongs, as you see: because there is this curvature in it which goes into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird which is called Ciconia, in which there is roughness like that of an iron saw: when it grips something, it does not release itself entirely.
On the incision of abscesses, their sections, and care in general.
Title XL.
The species of abscesses are many, arising from various modes, according to the recollection of them, namely one, and this single type within this book: they differ in the puncturing of them, and their sections, being divided into two methods.
One kind is within the abscess itself, and due to its exposure to moist conditions.
And the second method is because of the places where it occurs from within the body.
Because an abscess occurring at the head is another from an abscess occurrence at the anus: and an abscess occurring on a fatty area is another from an abscess happening at joints. And each of them has its own judgment according to their procedure.
And among abscesses are those that should not be punctured unless after the healing in them and its completion. And from these are those that should be punctured while they are raw and have not matured according to their completeness.
Like abscesses which are close to joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and extends, until the decay inside its surrounding possibly corrupts the tendons or nerves of that joint. This is the cause of the closer contraction of that member.
Or is it abscess at the main member: for if you delay the puncturing of it until its completion, it will harm either him or through that main member.
It is near the anus, puncture it then, the immature one: and there should not be a need to puncture a pus bubble that isn't fully digested, unless it is near the anus so as not to become deeply putrefied, and extends towards the inner parts of the anus, and creates a fistula, or forms at its end which does not heal.
It is necessary that you know the time of puncturing a pus bubble, which has matured according to the complement: and this occurs when there's alleviation of pain, decrease in fever, and reduction of redness, along with diminishment of pulse, and head discomfort related to the pus bubble: and all other signs.
It is necessary that you make the same puncture in the lower part of the pus bubble, and at a more pronounced prominence: and let the perforation extend longitudinally throughout the body, if the pus bubbles are located in hand and foot parts, cutaneous lesions, tendons, nerves, blood vessels, and lastly, in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those that reflect, proceed with the puncture according to that member.
But when pus bubbles are in fatty areas: then it is better to release its puncture until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the complement.
Because if you puncture it before that, the course of the poison from there will be prolonged, and many sores and pus will occur, and perhaps the edges will harden, and its depth.
And some pus bubbles are punctured longitudinally throughout the body due to necessity: or according to where that member needs it.
It is necessary that you administer a small puncture in small pus bubbles, and a wide puncture in large pus bubbles: or multiple sections similar to the size of the pus bubbles.
And they are from the abscesses, in which it is necessary that the skin be concave. And incision should be made when it has already become like a bandage and is done within the limit where it is already dead: as happens in many cases of pus and boils.
And from these are those which are cut by making a section with three angles. And from these is derived, like the shape of a leaf of myrtle into which an incision would be made.
As for the groin abscess.
And from these there are those that receive a round cut and a crescent-shaped cut, as well as others similar to them resulting from cuts.
As for the one that does not have a head, like the soft superficial abscesses, it must be pierced with a superficial or simply flat puncture.
And it must be done when the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus; you should pierce it so that nothing sticks and extract all the pus at once, indeed extract some part from within it. Then continue to treat the abscess until another day. Then again, extract some more from the pus.
Perform that (extractions) many times according to the process, until it is completely gone: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man who has deteriorated. For the animal spirit is resolved from one animal to another with the ejection of pus: and perhaps the sick person dies, and you do not know.
So be cautious about this chapter, it carries great caution.
And after your puncture for the abscesses, you must cleanse the wound: and consider afterwards. If therefore the ulna is less in the patient due to apotematisation (shortening by disease), or if there's a flat section, then administer linseed, or old soap. And if there is a large abscess and multiple perforating wounds are present, then you must introduce linseed into every wound until it reaches the opposite side.
And if you cut off a part of the skin in an abscess or hollowed it out: then it is necessary to fill it with old soap, or as when it is woven, or by removing the wool of linen without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then release it, and attend to that which needs to be handled with the ointment until it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood during your time for the operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after having soaked the cloth in them: and place it over the site of blood flow multiple times.
And if the flow of blood persisted, then it is necessary to administer treatment and care, as well as powders which I have described in various places of this book and from division.
And if it is during winter and the site of the abscess is among many nerves, then you must pour in powders mixed with wine and hot oil, and place them on the sites.
And if it is during summer and the areas are fatty, then you must place powders that have been soaked in water and oil, or mix it with wine and oil, and present it all cold. Until the third day when we said, then you must release the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its care what is suitable for it until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from knowledge of the cure of apNguồns universally.
According to the division of my explanation, I have already spoken about all apanguosns, how the way to their cure is treated singularly in this chapter.
Chapter XLI.
¶ On the division of apanguosns that occur in the skin of the head.
There are small apanguosns that occur in the skin of the head. They belong to a category called nodules which contain sacks like those found on them; they might as well be swollen chickens.
And there are many species of these.
Among them are fatty ones; among them are those that contain a moisture-like substance similar to mud; among them are those that contain a moisture-like substance similar to foam and powders; there are others like these, and among them are those that are stone-hard.
And concerning all sections and their removal, there is no fear during the operation because when you make a cut on them, there isn't any conflict with an artery.
And the operation for sectioning them is as you will experience it with the tool whose shape comes after this, which is called 'Intromissum', until you know what it contains.
For if there is that which contains moisture, then section it by cutting along its length in a superficial manner: according to this form.
And start the sectioning from line b to line g. When moisture is drained out, then scrape off (the area) which contains that moisture, and do not remove anything entirely from it.
Indeed, it returns many times if something remains from it.
Then immerse the head in Egyptian oil if there is any present; or else in water and salt. And fill it with this (substance) and allow it to heal for another day before removing it. Indeed it eats what remains from the wound.
Then apply it several times over what remains from the wound with the second and third Egyptian [substance], and if you need it, until you are confident that nothing remains of the wound. Then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
If it contains a fatty boil: then cut it according to this form, having the shape of a cross: and remove the horns between the two sections, and scrape it from every side: and try your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
If however the artery opposes you, then do what I will instruct you to do afterwards.
And similarly do in the boil if there is stone, from the section and care of it being the same as what we have said.
And the section over stone boils is easier since there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these boils that occur at the head in certain people, for which there is no moisture.
This is the case: for when I cut over a boil on the head of an old woman and found a boil like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if anyone hit it with force while pushing against it, it would wound itself.
However, with other boils that occur on the head, apart from these specific boils that happen on children's heads and at the ear roots, the section of all of them should be a superficial cut.
Or rather always puncture them from the lower part of them, so that the flow of healing may go downwards.
Then care for them with what is appropriate according to their treatment.
On the sectioning of Strobilus in the neck.
Title XLII.
Many times, such hernias occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And among those which occur in the neck, there is one and many: and they are generated from each other: and every Strobilus is within its own proper membrane, just as it is in nodes and hernias of the head, as we have described.
The forms of these Strobiluses are many. And among them, there are stony ones: and among them are those that contain moisture: and among them are evil ones, which do not respond to treatment.
So, for the one that you see among them with good arrangement in touch, whose color is clearly close to the skin tone, and can be moved throughout any part of it, and it isn't attached to neck nerves, nor to lymph nodes, nor to an artery, and it's not deep: you should cut her out by a superficial section from the upper part up to the lower part of the body along line b. to line g., and scrape her off from every part: and extend two skin flaps with a scalpel, or with many blades if needed, just as we have described in hernias of the head, and elsewhere, and extract it gradually.
And for caution, do not let the vein or nerve be hit.
And let the scalpel not be sharply pointed: so that you do not add your hand with the cut during surgery or unsettle the patient, and accidentally cut what is unnecessary.
If you do cut a vein, or an artery, or if it prevents you from performing the operation, then place in the wound some ground substance, or certain powders that stop bleeding, and tighten the wound, and release him until the pain of the hernia subsides and the wound heals: or if you want it to start putrefying.
For blood is removed by units, therefore proceed with your operation until completion.
Then, using your index finger, check if any of the Strophula remains with others: therefore cut them and clean those.
If there is a large vein in the root of the Strophula: then you must not cut that Strophula from its root. Instead, it should be tied with a double strong thread and allowed to fall off without causing damage.
Then fill the wound with the old wadding which you have already prepared in the Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the entire Strophula is cut, then you must join the lips of two wounds: and immediately take care of them yourself as soon as you see that there is no excess left.
If however you find that there is still excess due to the size of the Strophula, then you must aim to cut its root and remove it: and apply the stitch we have mentioned.
And regarding what the Strophula contains in terms of moisture, puncture it with a superficial incision so that you can see its place of maturation: and make the puncture from the point following below on the body, as we said.
Then after the puncture, apply licor with ointment and similar remedies so that it can heal what remains from the corruption, until you see the wound has already been cleansed. Then take care of it with a healing ointment for skin tissue until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
¶ Concerning the sectioning of the epiglottis in an accident involving strangulation in the throat.
The ancients said that this procedure was done on the epiglottis and no one has performed it here on our land. And this is their word record of what they did.
When there is a balance or equilibrium, it's necessary to perform the section of the epiglottis. If this doesn't provide benefit through that means, because all veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a warm boil in the mouth, or throat, or in both tonsils, when there is no discomfort in the canals, it's necessary to use the section of the epiglottis, for protection against the ruin which comes from pre-facilitation.
Therefore, when we perform that (meaning possibly a surgical procedure), it should be done to cut the epiglottis under three circles of the epiglottis, or four, making a small section across its width, at the point where two circles are between them. And this is the appropriate place for the cut because it's protected from flesh and blood vessels are far from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then it should be that he extends the throat skin with a hook. Then find out the skin until he reaches the canal: if he sees anything from there, properly cut the blood vessel.
Then cut the siphon as we have described: and it is indicated about the canal section from phlegm that escapes from there, with what breaks off, and the removal of voice.
And let the wound open at some time.
When then the time comes when there is fear of pre-facilitation, join two lips to the wound on the skin and that alone without cartilage.
Then administer the medicines that cause flesh to be born, until it is healed.
Albucasis said. The sum of this discourse, which we have narrated, is not an exposition unless when they recognize that some of these aphorisms has already affected the throat of the sick: and then the patient has surpassed death in elevation, and wishes to be cut through by his breathing aspiration: they proceed to the second epiglottis, so that the sick man breathes over the wound with a certain respiration, and is saved from death: for this reason they ordered that the open wound be left open until malice of distress has been consumed, and its malice lasts three days, and it seems like itself. Then therefore they ordered to drain the wound, and take care of it, until it heals.
And that which I have seen by myself is this: one maid took the knife and sent it into her own throat, and it cut off a part of the bronchial canal.
And I was summoned for her treatment, and found her groaning, as if it were the groaning of a dead person.
I therefore examined the wound and found that only a little blood had come out of it. Therefore, I concluded that she had not torn out the vein or artery; and that the air was escaping from the wound.
So I treated it accordingly, and took care of her wound until she was healed. And nothing happens to the maid except a croak in her voice, and she returns after days with better dispositions.
Therefore, I say: there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
¶ Concerning the section of the throat hernia.
Title XLIV.
This is called the Hernia of the Gullet, it is named large pus pocket according to the body's color: and it occurs frequently in women.
And it can occur in two ways: either naturally, or by accident.
Certainly, in the natural case, there is no artifice.
By accident, it occurs in two ways: one of which is similar to large lumps. And the other way is similar to a pus pocket that forms from a lymph node. And there is fear in it. It should not be assumed with iron on it unless the place is small; and you should test it and investigate it with an introduction tool. If you find it similar to a large lump and not suspended by any vein, then cut it like one would cut lumps. And extract it with what it contains if it's within the lump; if not, then thoroughly examine all of it. Then care for the wound with what is necessary from treatment until it heals.
Title XLV.
¶ Concerning the surgery of nodules.
There are many types of nodules, and I have already described all their kinds earlier. Here, however, it will be necessary to describe the difference between a Nodule and an Eruption in case there is any confusion.
I am therefore saying that when an Eruption is characterized by fever and high body temperature, intense pain until the overflow stops and complete decay occurs, then there is no longer any fever or heat.
With respect to a Nodule, it does not have fever, nor body temperature, nor pain and contains them within the pus sacs which is its proper bag and varies according to the color of the body: and their beginning occurs like chickpeas and develops like boil and can be either larger or smaller.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty: or retaining moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Hence, when you come to the treatment of the Node, you must experience it and inquire about it first with the tool that is called Intromissum, according to how its form will be described in the chapter that follows this.
And the method of examining the answers and all nodes is, that you take this tool and introduce it into the wet place you find in the node: and gradually rotate your fingers with it until you know that the tool has already penetrated the skin. Then, place the last part of your hand according to the size of the node.
Then extract the Intromissum, and observe what emerges during its withdrawal.
If moisture is emerging, regardless of its color: then dry it by a superficial cut, as I explained in the other nodes.
And if moisture does not emerge during the withdrawal of the Intromissum, then you will know that it is fatty. Dry it by cutting above with a cross-shaped form, following this shape as I taught you: and suspend it with hooks, scrape the skin off from all sides easily: and try to keep the pincers on top of it so that you can remove both of them along with the Node.
And if the pincers break during surgery and it is impossible to extract the healthy part, as this happens often, then remove it immediately until nothing remains from it.
For if any amount, whether little or much, remains from it, the Node will return most often.
If it defeats you and leaves some in you: then fill the wound at your completion with some corroding and sharp powders. And press the wound, and place over it something which sits an warm敷料, and care for it together with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If therefore it is a large Knot, then tie its two lips, and care for it with what attaches it.
If it is a contrary pulsatile vein to you, or not pulsatile: then press forward, and fill the place with the ground I advised, and release it tightly for two days or three, until the wound putrefies and the blood ebullition ceases: then return to applying that which remains from the Knot.
Chapter XLVI.
¶ Concerning external instruments for cutting and piercing.
There are forms of Intromittents among these, and there are three species.
Among them, there is the large one, among them there is the medium one, and among them there is the small one.
Let them be made from iron with square ends that taper inward, so they can easily enter the incision site.
And these are the forms of Experiments, and not this, namely, piercing tools: and one of them is called "bur," that is, piercing; and there are three species of them.
Among these, there is the large one, there is the medium one, and there is the small one.
They should be examined through the incisions, discharges, and fistulas, as well as swellings from what is between them derived from bones.
And others are made round, smooth, soft, like large needles where there are grooves for them, from citrine stone, or air, or iron, or silver.
And better things are those that happen from citron.
And even experiences happen regarding the black lead, which suit to use them for experiencing fistulas, whose concavity are reflections, so they reflect with their smoothness like those reflections.
And there are again three types once more. Because from them there are those that are long, those that are medium, and those that are short, according to the size of the fistula's width and its constriction.
The form of darts, and there are many types of it.
Because from them there are simples ones, that is to say, where there's only one curvature: and there are three types as you see, the Large, the Middle-sized, and the Small.
And from them there are Blind Darts: and there are three types of it.
And from them there are Darts with two curves, and there are three types of it. And from them there are Darts with three curves, and there are three types of it. All these are necessary in their respective places.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which they cut and scrape the nodes and ulcers. And there are three types of it, because from them is large, medium, and small.
Their ends which are made for cutting are sharp, other ends are not sharp: they are not used like this, unless with them an aid is made in scraping the nodes at the fear of incision on veins or nerves; and it heals through them the sick one, and finds a momentary peace from the warmth he found when scraping ulcers.
They are made from metal and resemble a radiating shape like that used to make alcohol. At the wider end there is an indented point of the spatulum hidden: and it flows both towards the internal organs and externally when needed, as you see.
The form of the spatulum (Spatumilium) which is hidden among the fingers during puncture for smallpox: and the ill do not perceive these. And there are three kinds of it, large, medium, and small.
The forms of the Ventrilagi (Ventosarum) with which the blood flow is cut off: and there are three kinds of them, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made from air or lemon, round in shape, somewhat long as you see fit, and be fine in thickness.
These should be the two kinds of Ventrilagi that you have available - large and small - so that with them you can cut off blood flow at speed when necessary, and then use them when medicine is not present.
However, do not use them for cutting out of blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except on fatty parts: like on thighs, hips, arms, breasts, stomach, groin areas, and similar places from fatty areas.
And sometimes they make small instruments similar to surgical knives out of them, according to their shape; with which blood is cut when it flows from the phlebotomy site or at a cut artery or vein: and sometimes they make them round according to this shape.
Title 47.
Section on the care of human breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some humans swell at the onset of sleep (that is, when they begin to bleed during sleep), until they resemble women's breasts. And they remain disfigured by smallpox.
Therefore, whoever avoids that, they must cut over the nipples at the lunar section, according to this form from line b to line g. Then scrape off the entire fatty deposit. Afterwards fill the wound with ointment from the incised flesh. Then attach both edges of the wound to the stitches and take care of it until it heals.
If however the nipple declines downwards and becomes softer due to its size, as happens with women: then it must be cut in two sides at the top with two similar cuts of the lunar shape, each kept together with the other at their ends until a longer line contains the shorter one, according to this form from line b to line g. Afterwards scrape off the skin which is between the two edges and remove the fatty deposit, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, that is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
If you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the anxiety of the patient or bleeding: then you must fill the wound with a moistened corrosive ointment and let it go until it corrodes what has remained from the fatty deposit. Then take care of it, until it heals.
For the perforation by arrows, which happens under the scrotum.
Chapter 48.
These arrows which occur under the scrotum are of the species of Strophularia and contain seeds, and among them are those that contain moisture.
Those among them that contain moisture must be treated with a cut at the lunar section, according to this form, from line b. to line g. Once the whole of what is in the arrowhead has been washed out by urine, then fill it with an old rag until the following day.
Then, the wound is opened, and it is treated with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If it should be an abscess of the variety of nodes from the Strophula plant, then divide above it as we said in the section on dividing Strophula plants equally.
If it happens that the wound spreads to such an extent as to expel pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what we said in what was previously addressed.
Chapter XLIX.
Section of Abscesses that occurs due to the Artery and Vein.
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes consolidated, it often results in an abscess forming there: similarly, it happens with veins as well, where an abscess may form and inflation occur.
And the signs by which one can recognize that an abscess and inflammation are due to the artery and vein are as follows: because when it is due to the artery, the abscess is long, aggregated deep in the body, and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a sound like scratching.
And that which is due to the vein is round and prominent on the surface of the body.
And cutting this abscess is a mistake, especially if it's under the axilla, groin, neck and many other parts of the body; it is very large. Therefore, its care must be performed with the iron, and that which is also present in the extremities or at the head must also be treated accordingly.
Therefore, with regard to that which comes from the inflammation of the artery's opening, find out the location by making a cut in the skin along its length. Then make an incision with a hook, afterwards the artery: and free it from the tunics until it is revealed.
Then insert the tool under it and make it penetrate up to the other side, and tie the artery with a doubled thread at two places according to what I taught you in removing two arteries which are located within.
Then pierce the place which is between two ligaments and testicles until all the blood within it flows out, and let the abscess be discharged.
Then apply the treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off: afterwards care with suitable ointments applied to it, until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what is possible from the abscess together with the skin. Then insert the needle under the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate. And put a doubled thread into it until you pull it out from the other side. Then tie it with the good incision of the abscess: as I told you about the uterus ligament, from both parts with both ends of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with a different thread under the abscess all around the needle insertion: press and tighten your threads at four places.
Then cut the abscess in its center until when it discharges what is inside. Then remove excess skin, and release what has been tied from it.
Then put the paste that you have been holding under it in wine and oil. Then administer care, which is done with oils and ointments, until it is healed.
Head L.
On what happens due to the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, similarly an abscess can occur in nerves: what happens to them is a blow or occurs from excessive exertion, and such things, and it happens to them mostly in the auxiliary areas, heels, and in any place where joints move: and it is a heavy abscess.
Its color is similar to the rest of the body and it appears in various positions without pain: and when it is tightened with disorientation, one feels a kind of illness within it akin to stupefaction.
And it is not a lumped together abscess within the depth of the body, no, it's beneath the skin, and it moves towards every part, and it doesn't extend to previous ones, or ahead, nor backwards to latter parts.
So what is there between joints should not be invaded with iron. Perhaps, a contraction might happen, however.
In that case, what is there from them in the head or on the forehead, remove the skin with the suture thread. If therefore it is an abscess that's small, then hold it with forceps, and remove it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and scrape it off: afterwards remove it, and apply a dressing with stitches until it heals.
Head LI.
On the excision of abscesses, which occurs in the abdomen.
Some people often experience lumps in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies, which they call mushrooms, similar to them with fungi.
The root of which is fine, and their head is large, and their lips are conversed. And it is scarce from them; and there is a great magnification from them.
And indeed I have seen a man, and in his belly there were two testicles, which resembled mushrooms more than other things; there was no difference between them, white, fine roots, and their lips inverted, and they would stick out, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
I came across this and found that in one of them it weighed as if about X and VIII ounces, and in the other about VI ounces. The operation for the treatment on their incisions is something you should consider then: if a sick person is moist, and the color of the testicles is white, moist, fine-rooted; then cut him off with broad spatulas and have a cauterizing fire ready for your presence.
Indeed, quite a bit of blood is often expelled during the sectioning of it: so if you are overcome by the blood, then apply cauterization to it.
If you see a sick, fearful and timid person reacting to the incision with the iron, then take a lead wire that has been made unevenly, and bind it with it using anathelul technique: this is as we said, and release him after two days.
Then add lead in the wound dressing. So do not cease binding lead as long as it prints on the testicles, until it is cut and falls off by itself without effort.
If the testicles have large roots, then there is something of fear and poverty in the incision: primarily that which is in the belly.
However, it is possible that you may cut halfway through him. Then cauterize him, so that he does not relapse.
Then care for it until the wound is healed.
And beware of perceiving a spot that is yellow in color, with few sensations and an unpleasant appearance: for this is a cancerous boil: and I will cure it with the recollection of Cancer afterwards.
Head 52.
¶ On the care for the prominence of the Navel.
The prominence of the Navel arises from many causes. Or it comes from the fissures of the scrotum, which is above the stomach: and it exits through there into the belly, or the intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or it comes from blood that flows from the vein, or from the artery, according to what has been mentioned. Or it comes from constriction of the stomach in this area.
If it is due to the scrotal fissure and the expulsion of pus: then its color resembles that of the body's color: and it is soft, without pain: and it appears in various locations. And if it is due to the expulsion of the intestine, then its location, together with what we have narrated, exhibits a greater variety. Therefore, when you press it with your fingers, it disappears: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound accompanying it: and it becomes greatly prominent at the entry of the bath, and severe labor.
However, if it is due to moisture, it is soft, then when you press it with your hand, it does not disappear, nor does it tighten, nor is added.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs, the boil appears to be turning towards blackness at the root.
If it is because of flesh grown: then it is a heavy pustule, a lump, hard and forms according to quantity one.
If it's due to windiness, then its touch is soft.
And the operation on it is as you will understand, then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness: then you must refrain from its treatment. For there is fear and panic, as I taught you in the chapter where I said that pustules are due to an artery and vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or grass (possibly referring to some form of plant), then you should advise the patient that they must hold their breath and stand stretched out. Then, with the application of hot wax around the entire circumference of the navel area. Then advise him to lie down between your hands on his back. Then, surround with a broad poultice around the circumference of the navel over the spot you marked with hot wax. Then extend half of the pustule upwards, using a large hook. Then bind it tightly around with strong string or a firm silk ligament: and let the knot of the ligament be well made.
And then open the middle part of the pustule that has been extended above the ligament. If you find it has already been released from the ligament: then extract it carefully, and insert your index finger into it to push the intestines back into the abdomen. And if you find grass (possibly referring to some form of plant), then take it with a hook and cut off any excess.
If however, contrary is against you artery or vein, then surround it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert two strong threads into them: and insert two needles into the surrounding area you made around the pustule in a manner of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
And pull the pustule in four places above the needle: and if you wish, remove the needle, and let the place heal until the flesh is fully putrid: and it falls off by itself: or cut it down when it becomes thinner and rotten.
And then take care of it with what is needed from the ointment until it heals.
And if the protrusion of the navel is from the flesh hole in it, or from dampness: then it must be that you incise the pustule, as we said. And extract the blood, or moisture, which you find inside it.
And then take care of it with what strengthens the area.
Chapter LI.
§ On the care of Cancer.
We have already discussed the division of species of Cancer and how to proceed with its treatment using medicines. We must be careful when dealing with its treatment using iron so as not to cause it to ulcerate. We also mentioned the generated Cancer in the womb, and caution about treating it.
And the ancients said that sometimes Cancer can be found in a place where its removal is possible: such as the Cancer found in breasts or thigh, and others like them, from positions on the body to remove the whole of it. Especially when it starts small and diminutive.
When you decide that it is old, and it is large, do not approach it closely.
I, however, was unable to heal anyone from this: nor did I see anyone before me who had recovered to that extent.
And the operation in this case, when it is localized as we said, is that you should precede and relieve the diseased person from black choler at intervals. Then if you find the bloodletting tool with obvious fullness, proceed.
Next, prepare the patient with preparation that includes instructions for the operation.
Then produce in the jawbone (cancrum) the ones that fit it. Next, hollow out the entire part with skin according to examination until nothing remains from its roots: and allow blood to flow without removing it quickly, but instead squeeze the areas and remove all thick blood using your hands or whatever is possible with tools available there.
If, however, the thick flow of blood impedes you from the incision of an artery or vein, then cauterize the vein until the blood can be removed. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
¶ Concerning the cure of Water Distention (Hydrops).
Title 44. We have now discussed the division of types of Water Distention (Hydrops), and how water accumulation occurs. We've also covered the signs for all types, and the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the Asclitan type alone: and it does not approach the Timpanitic or Hyposacral types with iron, for that would be lethal.
When you have already treated this type of Water Distention (Hydrops) with medicines and the treatment has not alleviated it, then consider. For if she has already become weak, or there is another weakness with her besides hydrophobia: such as if there is a cough with her, or an abdominal issue, and similar conditions; then refrain from treating her with iron: for this does cause alarm.
If you observe a sick person with excessive strength, and there is no other ailment besides hydrophobia: nor is it a child or an old person: then the way to operate on him is that you lift the sick person between your hands while standing, and the assistant pushes his abdomen with their hand towards the lower part of the body, emptying out water with pincers.
Then take the thorny reed, according to this shape. Let there be two sharp parts, it should be long, with the tip being as sharp as a thorny reed. However, there must be some slight limitation in it over time, so that you do not proceed with the operation until the intestines, and harm him.
Then consider. For if hydrophobia arises from the part of the intestines, then you must extend with your section from the navel by a length of three fingers, downwards directly towards his abdomen.
However, if the generation of hydrophobia is due to an illness in the liver: then your section should be three fingers to the left from the navel.
And if its origin is due to the spleen, then the section should be on the right side. And it's also not necessary for the section to be made on the side where the sick person wants to lie down, so that no excesses flow towards this weak place.
Then puncture with your tool the entire skin. Then enter into that division and raise your hand with the spatula between the skin, and do it as if you were scratching yourself: and let the amount to be scratched be the size of a nail or roughly so.
Then pierce and do it until the spatula reaches the empty place: and there is a place for water. Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument of this form. And it is similar to a cannula: made of silver, or metal, or alloyed with tin, smooth and clean. There is a small hole at the lower part of it, and three holes are on its sides, two from one side, and one from the other. The end of it is incised in accordance with the shape of the tip of a reed, as you can see; there is a ring at the upper end of it.
So when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument itself, therefore evacuating a quantity of water that is equal at any given time.
Because if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, at some point the patient might die due to the release of his body's vital spirits: or something that approaches death may happen to him.
However, evacuate from it according to the strength of its nature, and according to what your patients indicate to you based on their pulse strength and health.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water.
That is because it gets retained immediately due to the skin that retains the opening above the spatula: about which I have spoken, in order to pierce it according to that manner.
Then use the same method with the instrument on another day, if you see that the patient can tolerate this. And also extract a small amount of water from it.
Perform this for a few days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until nothing remains of the water but a little.
If you are afraid for the weak one and remove a large amount from the water, then take care of it with burial in hot sand, excessive sweat in a bath and sunlight, and wait until it recovers. And take care of it with dried medicines until it is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, spleen, and appendix after the removal of water: according to what I have described in what preceded this.
¶ On caring for infants born at locations where their urine areas are not pierced.
Head 55.
When someone among infants emerges from their mother's womb, and the head of its hair is not pierced, or there is a narrowed opening, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, it is necessary to assist immediately with the perforation of its skin when it is born, using a thin spatula, according to this manner.
Then place a thin bronze key in the opening and tie it. Hold it for three days or four.
When then desires to urinate, remove the key, and let her urinate. Then put it back in place.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the site will prevent the key from being able to close.
And that one whose opening is narrowed is treated with lead as we said, for many days, until it expands.
And those among them who have the opening not in its proper place are injured. This is because the opening of those born is at the end of the head (i.e., the location where hair grows): therefore, it cannot join with the front parts until their head rises to the higher parts with their own hand. There is no generation for him, therefore, because the semen cannot reach the womb in straightness: and there is a very nasty illness.
And the manner of its performance is such that the sick person is laid upon his own back. Then extend your left hand with the rod and strike its head forcefully. Incise at the place of the penis, using the tip or a sharp edge, like making an incision with a knife, or like you would cut something to obtain the middle part similar to the head of the rod; and let there be a hole in the middle as it should fall.
And beware of blood flow during your operation. Indeed, this happens many times. So oppose him with what is used to stop the bleeding, and take care of the wound until it heals.
¶ Concerning the issues that occur in the foreskin and head of the rod, as well as decay, darkening, and stickiness.
Title 56.
Such events happen to the rod very often, and it is an abominable condition of the flesh that is nasty.
And from this, there is another that is evil, and another that is not evil.
So, for the non-evasive one, you should hang it with a fine hook and cut it off until you cleanse it completely. Then place its tip submerged in Egyptian oil. And then take care of it afterwards with the oil until it heals.
If the disease is evil and has a nasty color, then you should apply cautery to it after making its cut and the reason for its application.
If Albaather is found within the foreskin of a circumcised individual and there are parts of Albaather inside as well as outside between the foreskin and the body; then you should remove the internal part of Albaather until it solidifies. After that, take care of removing the external part: for when you treat them together at once, the foreskin is in danger of tearing.
And accidents also happen in the testicles, and the darkened and corrupted foreskin. Therefore, you must remove everything that has already become discolored, and what intends to corrupt or is already corrupted.
Then place a line over it after that with honey mixed with flour ground by millstones and the grain of grinding mills, and herbs crushed by a sifter.
Then take care of that along with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
If however there is bleeding, then apply the cauterizing tool with the lunar cauterizer, according to this form.
The cauterizer is useful for two simultaneous applications, namely to stop bleeding and to treat a wound when it has become corrupted.
If the tip of the staff becomes corrupted and is destroyed completely by hour: then you should introduce a lead pipe into the prepuce, so that the sick person can bathe over it.
Regarding the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the staff, and indeed this kind of adherence does not occur unless in someone whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required on top of it: sometimes adherence occurs due to a wound or abscess: therefore you should remove that together with an obtuse Spatumili (a medical tool), until the ligament dissolves and the head of the staff becomes free from every part.
If it is difficult to distinguish these things precisely, then it is necessary to scrape out something from the head of the spear and from the prepuce. That is because the prepuce, when it is subtle, may perhaps be pierced due to its subtlety and quickly.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the spear with a fine linen cloth that has already been made wet in cold water so they do not stick together again.
Then it is treated with red wine until it hardens.
Chapter 57.
¶ On the purification of infants and treatment after errors happen to them.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence like other wounds; however, since it comes from our operation, according to our will, and its use is proper for infants, there must be an indication of a better procedure in that operation and a way that leads easier to health.
I say therefore, that the ancients did not declare circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we acquire through experience.
That is because I have found that a larger part of the artisans and phlebotomists use purification through circumcision when they are newborns and with clamps. They also use gauze, tie them with thread, and cut with the hoof.
And indeed, I have tried all these methods and did not find purification to be better with clamps, or tying with thread.
Because during purification with newborns, the skin often escapes. Because the skin of the prepuce has two layers: so perhaps the upper layer is cut and the lower remains. It's forced to make an incision for the other layer which will cause pain in the future. And when the castration performed by emasculating, that is, by using a digital tool as surgeons do, does not secure the cut at the end of the male member: because perhaps it enters through its opening.
And in the case of castration through the use of a hoof, perhaps it allows iron, and corrupts your operation: and indeed, the nature of children's skin is short, and they are often born in such a way that they do not require castration: and I have seen this already.
The results of castration using forceps and ligament with thread have given me good experience: because the forceps are proportional to the cut: therefore, the sharpness above is as the sharpness below. And when you press your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportional, and they intersect simultaneously during one operation: and a compression similar figure is created, containing the rod-like skin from every part, with which no error falls entirely.
And the proper method of operation is such that you should let it be understood by those who are knowledgeable to a certain extent, if they are among them, for which you do not have until you tie the thread in his rod only: and dismiss him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad as much as possible to you that which he receives with his understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and do not let him be sitting: and hide the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the child does not see them at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand to his rod and blow into the skin, and draw it up until the tip of the rod comes out. Then cleanse it from what is attached to it in dirt.
Then join the marked place with double thread. Next, join below it with a ligament of about the same size. Then hold with your index finger and thumb, the place of the lower ligament's retention well, and cut between the two ligaments. Then lift the skin upwards or quickly, and pull out the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow out gradually (which is better), and place the wadding above: and on top of the wadding put a piece of cloth in which the yolk has been spread and cooked in water that has turned red, mixed with rose oil. With the recent good progress: and let him rest on it until another day: and care for himself with the remaining treatment, until he heals.
And this is the form for cutting during cleansing.
Let there be two sharp ends, and they should be parallel: so that no branch of the clamp escapes in them: and let its length be equal to the length of two pencil points each.
However, an error occurs during cleansing: because perhaps the entire inner skin or part of it escapes at the incision.
Therefore, you must extend it from the time of your own hour with your finger before the division point: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with the hook and cut it.
If it goes beyond three days and there remains what is under the rod inflated, divided; then remove that until the scab becomes warm, and scrape it off easily, and cut it according to how you are prepared for it: and beware from above the rod. For that reason, it will not harm him.
Thus treat that along with what hardens the wound from powders as we have described in the chapter on powders. And if it extends beyond the skin up to the measure and spreads upwards, even that will not harm him.
So treat that along with what we said until it is healed.
Head 58.
Chapter on the removal of retained Vrina in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to congestion caused by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh that has grown and similar things from what we have discussed regarding methods of treatment in division.
And if the urine does not relieve itself and he is seen to have a retention due to the stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then it should be expected that he will have been laid out on his knees for the operation. Then his feet should be placed on his back and he should stretch his abdomen from the upper part of his back. The patient should hold his breathing as much as possible. He is therefore forced to move the neck of the bladder in order to expel the stone towards the backside, thus allowing urine to flow.
If it does not relieve itself with what we have said and causes discomfort to the patient, then you should administer its extraction with a tool called a syringe, which has this form - made of silver, is thin, smooth, concave like a small tube as thin as a bird's feather quill in thickness, about as long as a person's palm from the wrist to the end of the fingers and the second joint, and it should have a delicate tube at its tip.
And the manner of the expulsion of urine through it is as follows: you should take a double thread and bind good linen or wool to its end. You will then insert the end of this thread into the lower part of the syringe. If there's any excess wool coming out, you'll remove that using forceps, but when you are ready for expulsion, you will gently push through the narrow canal as if squeezing a sponge.
Then immerse the syringe in oil or with butter, and albugine. And have the patient sit on a seat, and immerse the bladder, and his staff with moist oils, and oil of olive, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the staff with ease until it reaches the root of the staff.
Then double that (the operation or procedure) above at the belly side, near the navel.
Then push the syringe into that (the affected area) until it reaches the bladder, and the patient should feel that the instrument has already reached its target: and this operation is not performed in this order unless the opening through which it goes is in the place where there is curvature.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. Indeed, moisture follows the wool.
Then extract it, and make the moisture run through the urine way: and repeatedly use the syringe, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied, and the patient will experience relief.
¶ Concerning the quality of urinary enemas with Clepshydra.
Chapter LI.
When a wound occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals within it, or pus is obstructed within it, and water and medicines are distilled into it: then this is done with the tool that is called Clepshydra, and this is its form.
Indeed, it is deaf, that is, closed. And within it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you will see.
And the concave place where this pushes is set according to the amount that pushes itself without addition, until when something is drawn with it, moisture is drawn out: and when it is pushed, whatever is pushed out goes far away: just like Clepshydra does, which expels naphtha, that is, Greek fire in military affairs.
When you want to force the moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the hyposmotic into the moisture and draw out with it whatever is being pushed upwards; for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the hyposmotic.
Then insert its end into the rod, as we told you about in the syringe. Next force the moisture with what is being pushed by that; for the moisture immediately reaches the bladder in such a way that the patient feels it.
The shape of the slender catheter through which the bladder is washed out.
Make it of silver or a mixture of gold and ivory; let the head be higher shaped like a small cradle, and under it is to have a sinus where a ligament falls.
Then take the bladder on the reed and place in it the moisture with which you wish to wash out the bladder. Then bind it between two sinuses with a strong knot made of double thread, and heat that moisture moderately over the fire.
Then insert the end of the catheter into the rod, afterwards press your hand on the bladder with the moisture until it is tight, up to when the patient feels that this moisture has already reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it from all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into these holes as they twist. Then gather the circle as one would gather cloth: after you place in it that which you wish from the moisture and oils and water.
Then bind it into an implement: and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand, until moisture reaches the bladder.
Head 60.
¶ On the Extraction of the Stone.
We have spoken about the division of species of stone, and its care with surgeons: and we spoke about the distinction between the stone formed in the kidneys and bladder, and the signs of it as a whole; and we spoke about the stone where an operation is performed by hand and cutting. The stone that forms specifically in the bladder is called such: and that which is formed into a rod. And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say then that the stone formed in the bladder happens to many children.
And from its signs, it appears that urine comes out of the bladder like water in its fineness: and white sand is seen in it; and an invalid man wields his stick upon it, and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it is raised up and comes out along with them in many of their cases.
And the healing of children is easy until they reach fourteen years of age. And it becomes difficult for the elderly. In young people however, it is of medium difficulty, which lies between that. And the healing is easier for one who has a larger stone: and if it's small, it's the opposite care.
So when we come to healing, it is necessary first of all, to cleanse the invalid with a cataplasma, which will remove all the feces that are in his intestines: for sometimes this prevents discovery of the stone during examination.
Then the patient should be taken with his feet and shaken, and moved downwards: so that the stone may descend to the depth of the bladder, or be discharged from a high place several times.
Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be under his elbows, so that the whole bladder may incline downwards towards the lower parts.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel the stone in its place, then proceed immediately with your operation above it.
But if it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must wash the index finger with oil of the left hand, if the patient is a child. Or use the middle finger if he is an adult and complete. Then insert it into his anus and examine for the stone until it lies under your finger: and gradually turn him to the neck of the bladder.
Then apply pressure with your finger on it and push it towards the outside against the place of its section: and instruct your assistant to press the bladder with his hand. And tell another assistant to extend his right hand's testicles up to the top, and have him use his other hand to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where there is a cut.
Then insert the incising spatula, which has this shape. And find what is between the anus and testicles within him, not in the middle, towards the left side: and let the cut be above the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and make a transverse cut so that the external cut is wide and the internal cut tight, according to the possibility of allowing ejection of the stone from there without being larger.
Perhaps indeed, if the finger that is in the anus compresses the stone at the cut and it comes out without difficulty.
And you will know that from a stone which has angles and margins, it becomes difficult for its release because of this.
And from that, it is soft, similar to a gland, and round: and its release becomes easy.
Therefore, for him who has angles and margins, add into the crack.
If it does not exit like this, then you must contrive something over it: or tie something over it as you pull away from the center, where one end is like the Moon which ties over the stone and does not come out of it. Or you can insert a subtle instrument under it, with its curved end.
If however you cannot do it over with, then enlarge the opening slightly. And if something is tied to you by some blood, cut it off while saying this.
If however the stone is more than one, then push the largest first into the mouth of the vesicle. Then fall upon it. Next, push in something smaller after that: and similarly do if there are more than two.
And if the large one is very much, then it is ignorance to cut over it with a large section. Because it happens to the weak one of two things, either he will die, or he suffers from constant urine distillation: for that reason, because the place is not thoroughly consolidated.
But administer its expulsion until it exits: or contrive in its fracture with forceps until you extract him suddenly.
And when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with thyme, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and tie it, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil rose-scented, and cold water: so that the sore heals from the warm pus.
Then supine the patient on his neck, and do not only ligature the band until the third day. And when you have freed him, bathe the place with water and much oil.
Then treat the person with dyaphanic ointment and basil ointment until they heal.
If however an abscess occurs in the wound with heat added and corrosive substances, or anything similar: as if blood becomes congealed in a bladder and urine is prevented from coming out: and it is known by the discharge of blood mixed with urine. Therefore, insert your finger into the wound, and draw out the blood. For if it remains, it provokes decay of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then cleanse the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply to it whatever is suitable from the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to consider the hours of the entire treatment period; you should bind two thighs and bundles, because of the medicines that are placed on the site.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urinary canal, and becomes stuck in it, preventing urine from passing through: then treat him with what I will instruct you before you reach cutting. Indeed, many times by this treatment after the cut, we have already proven this method to be effective.
And it is that you should take the perforating tool from iron, which has this shape: with triangular ends and pointed, fixed into wood.
Then take a thread, and bind it with the rod under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert a piercing iron into the rod with ease until the Perforator reaches the stone: and rotate the Perforator with your hand within the stone gradually: and narrow the perforation, until you cause it to penetrate from another part.
The urine is cleaned immediately.
Then press your hand onto what remains of the stone from the outer part of the rod. For it breaks itself, and comes out with urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that prevents it from him: then tie a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut through the stone in the rod between the two bindings. Then extract it. Afterwards untie the bandage and cleanse the frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone, unless so that it does not return to the blister: and another thread above, unless so that when the thread is untied after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place and cooperates with the wound: for this reason, you need this when you tie the thread above, in order to lift the skin upwards, so that it returns at your completion and cooperates with the wound, as we said.
Title LXI.
¶ On the removal of the stone in women.
The stone is formed less in women.
But if a stone occurs in any of them, then treatment is difficult and prohibited because of many methods.
One of them is: that a woman perhaps is a virgin.
And the second is, because you do not find a woman who will show herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or from those with husbands.
The third is, because you do not find a woman who knows this art well, particularly the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the distance from the stone's place: which requires deep cutting, and there is fear involved.
Which, if necessity prompts you to do that, then it is necessary that you take a female doctor, well known for her skills: and she is not often found.
But if you remove her, then seek out a chaste doctor, subtle, and present her to the experienced female obstetrician who is well versed in matters of women's health, or a woman who has taken up part of this art. Therefore, make her present herself, and especially instruct her that she should do everything you have instructed her according to the examination about the stone.
Firstly, that she should inspect whether the woman is a virgin: then it must be that she inserts her finger into the woman's anus and seeks out the stone.
And if she has found it, bind him under her own finger, and then instruct the obstetrician to insert his finger into the weak woman's womb, and inquire about the stone after placing his left hand on the bladder, and compresses it with a good grip.
And if she has found the stone, then it must be that she moves it gradually from the urethral opening to below with her greatest strength, until she reaches it with him to the root of the thigh.
Then cut over it at the midpoint of the womb near the root of the thigh, from any preparation side to him and feels the stone in that part; and his finger does not move away from the stone, binding under it: and let the first section be small. Then insert the rod onto that section.
Then insert the rod onto that section. If therefore he feels a stone, then according to the quantity in proportion to which the stone comes out of it, he shall add to that section.
And know that the appearance of stones is many. From these, it is slender and large, soft and rough, long and round having branches.
And know its appearance so that you can understand it through this regarding what you wish.
If therefore blood overcomes you, then add to the place of zinc, ground, and keep it for an hour until the blood is expelled.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and do so that you prepare with you from tools, which I said in the removal of stones in men, so that you assist with those during your operation.
But if the flow of blood overcomes you and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which has been cut: then put the powder on the place and tie it with a bandage suitable for powders: and do not remove this; and release the stone, but do not extract it. Perhaps indeed, the frail woman will die. Then attend to the wound.
And when the sharpness of blood subsides after days and the place decays, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Head LXII.
¶ Regarding sectioning above the aqueous hernia.
The aqueous ramus is not present, unless it is an aggregation of moisture within the white sifacum, which is beneath the skin containing the oum: and this is called sifacum.
And sometimes there is a natural appendage to it for itself within the scrotum, which nature prepared in its place until it appears: which is another thing of the testis and is the skin of the testicles between the white sac that we said about; and this does not happen except rarely.
And indeed the generation of this branch is from weakness which happens to the testicles: therefore this material flows towards them. And sometimes it happens due to impact upon the testicles.
This moisture has many colors. Or indeed its color declines to a yellowish tone, or it is blood-red, or feculent, black, or it is watery white, and this latter thing is more so.
And the signs by which one knows where there is an accumulation of water are these. For if it is the white sac that we said about, then the pustule is round approximately as long as the size of a testicle: and there appears no testicle, because the moisture contains him from every part.
And if the moisture is within its own scrotal sac, then the pustule is round with a portion of a testicle, and because of this, man judges that it is another thing of the testis.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, then it falls under perception.
Therefore, when you wish to know the color of moisture, then experience the color of moisture within the pustule with an inserted square, whose shape precedes it. Accordingly, judging what is between them according to the one that emerges into investigation with insertion.
When we come to treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you give the sick a bloodletting if possible, and you see his body full.
Then it is inflated over its back on top of a slight higher surface, and place many cloths under it.
Then sit beside its left side, and instruct your attendant to sit on the right side of it, who will extend the rod towards one or both sides of the scrotal skin, and towards a part below the belly.
Then take the spatula and cut through the skin of the testicles from the middle longitudinally, almost to the pubic hair. Make a cut according to the line which divides the testicle skin equally until you reach the white part containing the sperm ducts. Scrap out and inspect it, or if there is pus present, remove that portion: and let your scraping be in the area where the scrap is done when hanging with the egg more. Carefully examine the scraping according to what is possible for you.
Then puncture the white part full of fluid with an opening large enough to pass water through, and remove all the water.
Then separate the two parts of the scrotum with scissors and extend it upwards, without touching the skin that covers the testicles. And cut the white part as much as you can or even completely, especially the thin side. For if you do not carefully examine it, there will be no certainty that the water has been removed from the cut.
But if the sperm duct extends outside its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the cut of the testicle, bring it back. Then join together the two parts of the scrotal skin with stitches.
Then care for it like any other wound until it heals.
If you find a diseased sperm duct due to another cause, then you must tie the threads which are used for suspension, fearing blood flow.
Then cut out the testicle with its suspension and remove the prostate gland: afterwards take care of that along with what we said.
If water is aggregated into two parts, then you will know that there are two branches. Therefore, cut off another part as you did in the other one equally.
And if it matches for you, like there is an operation as one whole, then do: afterwards clean off the blood. And insert it into a piece of cloth submerged in oil, or in rose-scented oil. Then place another piece of cloth below the one you submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over the two testicles, and cover with a cloth bundle: then place above them doubled cloths, which are to be called 'pulleys': and bind these above with the ligament, which has six parts according to this form.
Then take two cloths, soak them, and fill each with red dyed yarn according to this likeness: then make the ends which are pressed from the stomach or wet wool. They should be bound together with a bandage at the level of the buttocks. One end shall cover the anus up to the back, and the other end will cover the pubic area. The two remaining ends go over the lower thighs, and the other two go over the inguinal regions; the whole binding is made tight at the level of the buttocks.
And at times this branch is treated artificially with a cautery in place of the section with iron. And it should be that you take the surgical knife and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and it is lit as we have described: until when the white membrane containing water is revealed, then take the cautery according to this form.
The Greek letters are assimilated.
Then puncture together with that siphon, and let it be ignited until all moisture has escaped.
Then extend the siphon with hooks and scrape it off with a fine heated cautery tool. Cut it down as much as possible for you until you have removed all of it.
And draw from the egg, let the fire not touch it.
And you will know that this operation is safer, lasts longer without bleeding, and is better than an operation with cutting.
But if contrary effects are caused to you during the hour of cutting or the application of heat after cutting, or bleeding, or any other issue: then it is necessary that you treat what causes the contrary effect with the appropriate treatment for it, according to what has been prescribed.
But if the patient is timid and does not anticipate this operation because of its horror, then administer the puncture as I have instructed: and it will be done.
When you are informed by you about the meaning of what we said regarding signs, that the rod is watery: then it is necessary to make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then puncture the abscess from the lower part with a broad spoon-like instrument: and make the puncture along the length of the body, and let it be an open wound until all water has drained.
Then place a pad over the area and bind it, then let him go so that the rest of the water can drain out: then take care of it until the wound is healed.
But if contrary effects are caused by the ejection of water during the puncturing of it: and that is not due to any other reason, because a white cloth causes contrary effects at the wound opening and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary for you to insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument used to drain excess water from hydroptics which has a similar shape beforehand: or add this temporarily during the operation on the wound.
And you will know that water returns and aggregates around six months, or about then. And when it aggregates, then the sick will be cured in the same manner, and the patient will pass their diseased days.
Head 63.
Section: Care for the affected flesh.
And you will understand that in this section about the ram, there is a loss through fear leading to danger in various dispositions. Therefore, it seems to me beneficial for its release from that.
And I recall the operation performed on it and the kind of sheep.
I say that many conditions occur in sheep bodies, from which the testicles are formed: and this happens due to various causes, namely.
Or from acute overproduction, or intensity, which is discharged towards the testicles. Or from impact.
And the color of sheep's scabs corresponds to the color of their body, and no pain is found for it: and a sheep scab is heavy.
And perhaps it is a stone scab with a dark brown color and no sensation for it.
And sometimes it occurs due to the knotting of arteries and their dilation; as has already been recalled in this case: or from the dilation of veins.
And what is caused by dilation of arteries can be recognized by the arrangement of sheep's scabs when you press it with your fingers. And you should not touch it completely.
However, that which occurs due to the dilation of veins does not get dispersed when compressed with fingers.
And it is possible that on this kind of structure a section may be made, and on other muscles; and there exists the separation of the skin of the testicles. Next extend the penis upwards and pull out the whole including its white layer; and release the suspensory ligament from the scrotum, then tie it back onto the scrotum. And cut through the suspensory ligament after you have freed the whole structure from all parts of the body.
If therefore the penis is hardened together with those born muscles, then it must be held back and cut through the penis.
And if adhesion is present between some of the ligaments, or within what exists among the ligaments: then it must be that you free the entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
And if birth of the flesh is in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it must be that you cut through all of it, and pull out the penis as we said.
And when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with gauze soaked in rose oil and wine. Next care for it along with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter LIV.
¶ Care of Rhabdies, which is related to Vitis.
It refers to a pus pocket that has withdrawn due to a certain withdrawal process, resembling a lump, when the testicles are softened: and it results in difficulty with the patient's movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the treatment of this ailment is from caution, due to that which preceded it and is recalled.
However, we should say the operation for this according to what the first ones did.
I therefore say that you should make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then push down the testicle suspension towards below. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the means which are close to the staff: and another servant should hold them and extend them forcefully.
Then cut with a broad, sharp incision across diagonally through the veins until the veins are exposed.
Next, scrape off from all sides as we have instructed you in the removal of arteries which are in the cavities.
Then, insert the tip of your needle with a double thread and tie it at the first places where you encounter wires: then re-tie it at the last of those. Then cut them in the middle with a straight longitudinal section and remove what accumulates from the decomposing feculent humors.
Next, take care of the wound with the same care as for other wounds where it is necessary to prevent infection, so that the veins nourishing one testicle may fall away. For there is no harm in this.
But if the veins are in all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove them for this reason: so that no organ lacks nourishment due to the cut and becomes diseased, or gets worse, and does not benefit with them.
Chapter LXV.
### On the care of the intestinal loops.
The result of this is an event that occurs with the extension, which happens above the abdomen in the part behind the groin from below the belly.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture can either be from a suture, or from its stretching.
And these two kinds happen due to many causes. Or by percussion. Or by jumping. Or by crying out. Or by lifting heavy objects, and similar actions.
And the sign is when it occurs from stretching of stitches. It is when something happens gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly; there will be an equal amount of pus towards the depth: because stitches are compressing the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it occurs due to the cutting of stitches because it causes a severe sudden pain at the beginning: and there will be a different pus, appearing beneath the skin closely: and that is because of the exit of the intestine and its movement towards the external stitches.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine bubble: and this is called Intestinal Ramus, and the bubble: and sometimes it happens with wind.
And sometimes it flows into the intestine with feces and is retained there: and this occurs together with weakness in sick people: because it causes a dull pain to occur, especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of symptoms of this illness with iron there is fear: therefore it must be avoided in that situation.
And the method of operation is to guide the sick person, so that they can use their hand to bring the intestine back inside their concave body if it has responded to return. Then you should cover his neck with your hands: and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin which follows the skin above, and cut the skin of the testicles entirely along the length. Then fix in two cutting edges like hooks, according to what you need for opening the cut with them: and make the cut according to as much as is possible, so that it may come out from there cleanly.
Then scrape the scrotum, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white siphak fat is exposed, hard all over: then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, into that which is between the white siphak fat, which is under the skin, and the latter siphak; and completely adhere to it, with respect to the posterior part of the testicles.
Then with your right hand draw out to the inner skin of the testicles: and when this is done expand the white siphak upwards with your left hand: and lift up the scrotum together with the siphak; and instruct the assistant to pull the scrotum upwards: and you then resolve the adhesion which is behind completely.
And search with your fingers to ensure that there is nothing from the intestine entwined in the white hard siphak. If however you find something from there: then push it downwards towards the belly.
Then take a hook in which there is a thick thread made from a ligament of ten threads, and insert it at the last siphak, that is, the membrane which follows the cut under the testicle skin: then cut off the protruding ends of the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over the others with a shape in the manner of a cross: and tie it to that siphak which we mentioned, because it is a ligament very strongly under the testicle skin, until no amount from below can send anything upwards to them: so as not to happen any pus swelling there. And again place the second ligature after the first one, extending two fingers away from it. And after these two ligatures cut out the one that is under the scrotal skin, in the size of a finger: and cut the rest all along roundness, and remove it from there.
Next, cut in the lower part of the scrotal skin at the point from which blood flows out, and stitch it smoothly as we have explained in what was mentioned earlier.
Next, apply wadding that has been soaked in oil and place it in the wound: and apply the ligament as we have described. And sometimes what we said about that white part is cauterized after the cut, fearing blood flow. Indeed, this happens many times. And remove the ligature until it falls by itself.
If however the situation doesn't progress, then it should be treated with warm water: and place that which we mentioned above upon it until it falls.
Then take care of the wound with the rest of the treatments for wounds until it heals.
Title LXVI.
Chapter on windy rash.
In this windy rash, I have not heard of anyone who has been brave enough to use iron in its treatment.
And first they said that it happens as we have described for the windy rash that is with Vine syndrome. That is, you bind the bandage after cutting over it with ease below: then cut in the middle, and finally take care of the wound according to what we opened up until the bandages fall off: and take care of the wound as described until it heals.
Title LXVII.
On the dissection that occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins as we have said, and a place protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is insufficient and returns at all times. However, if the process extends with that time, an opening is added into the sifach until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And this happens with the extension of the sifach that is located in the groins as we have said. That happens because the sifach is extended; afterwards, the place softens and becomes inflamed, and it protrudes.
And its treatment is with cautery, as was previously described.
And sometimes it is treated with iron according to this method: and it happens that the patient lies on his back between your hands. Then, cut the site of the rupture, including the softened and protruding area, making a cut across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then tighten the saphenous vein and the ones beneath the skin until you expose the white saphenous artery which is located underneath the skin that follows it.
Then take the artery and place it over the protruding part from the saphenous vein, and press it down to the depth of the abdomen.
Then place two protruding areas over the end of the artery from the saphenous vein, and connect one of them with a stitch to the other: then remove the end of the artery.
And do not cut the saphenous vein entirely, nor stretch it or anything else as I instructed you in the treatment of intestinal worms.
Then concern yourself with this treatment for wounds. And when you have hit the string, cleanse that, and restore the wound until it hardens.
Therefore, it is contracted, and not added to, the eminence of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
¶ On softening of the scrotal skin.
The scrotal skin of some individuals is softened frequently for this reason, which also softens the flesh that lies between them, and spoils its appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is requested to treat this, that he make the patient lie on his back, and apply the entire softened skin over the natural skin.
Then gather the two lips with stitches: and if you wish, begin by removing any excess of the softened skin with three stitches, or four, and secure the stitches firmly.
Then make your cuts between the stitches.
And then continue with the treatment of the remaining wounds until they heal completely, and remove the stitches when necessary.
Chapter LXIX.
¶ On Castration.
You know that castration is condemned in our law and for that reason it was permissible for me not to mention it in my book, and there is no need to recall it unless for two reasons.
One of which is that it should be knowledge for the doctor when he is asked about it, and that he knows how to treat those who may encounter this.
And another method is that we often need the castration of certain animals for our benefits such as oxen, goats, cats and similar from beasts.
I therefore say that castration is done according to two methods. Or through attrition. Or through making a crack and a section.
In the case where castration is performed through attrition, the procedure goes as follows: we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles soften and become more relaxed and hang down. Then with your hand, you scrape them off until they dissolve and no longer appear upon touch.
In the case of castration through making a crack and a section, you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then bind the hanging ligature and cut across all sections once, until when two eggs start to develop. Then perform it after you have shaved both sides, but do not leave anything above except for a thin cut, which is on the skin.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done through attrition because possibly some part may remain from the testicles after the attrition process, which could make the animal desire copulation.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
¶ Concerning the care of Hermaphrodites in two ways.
Hermaphrodite can be formed from males in two ways. One of these is that it appears within him as follows: either there's a space visible or where the scrotum skin is, between two testicles, he bears a shape like a woman having hair: and sometimes urine flows out of what's inside the scrotum skin.
In women however there is one type of feature, and resembles a woman's pubis like the small testicles of men, protruding to the external: one of which is like the penis of men, and two resemble two testicles.
And the treatment for three types, two from men and one from women, is: because it must happen that you hit the added flesh until their impression escapes. Then care for these injuries with the remaining treatment of wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine emerges, which is inside the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, and there is no complete treatment for it.
Title 71.
¶ Concerning incisions to the Tentigine (or scrotum) and protruding flesh in the women's vulva.
The Tentigine might be added over the natural condition until it is severed and its appearance becomes unpleasant. And sometimes it is magnified in certain women to such an extent that it expands like in men, reaching up to intercourse.
Therefore, you should hold the excess of the Tentigine with your hand or using a small tool and cut it. And do not stop at the cutting point particularly deep within the root to prevent bleeding.
Then treat that wound according to the treatment of wounds until it heals.
Flesh arising is flesh that grows in the opening of the womb until it fills it. And perhaps protrudes to the outside like a tail according to its resemblance, hence some call the first condition 'tailish ailment'. Therefore, you should treat it like you would the Tentigine and heal it until it is cured.
On the care of the Alarica, which is an unperforated woman's wound.
Title 72.
Alratica refers to an unperforated woman's wound or one with a small opening. And it can be either natural or accidental.
An accidental Alratica is due to illness that preceded it: and indeed, it happens either from flesh naturally added, or from a thin one, or a thick one: and it occurs either deeply in the womb, or on its sides, or above it, or below it: and it prevents intercourse and fertilization, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation.
The knowledge of that happens through the appearance of obstetrical symptoms, if pregnancy seems to be close by.
But if it is not apparent, then seek for it with your fingers, or with the aid of a tool.
But if pregnancy is due to the thin one and it is close between two lips; then approach, and break it.
And do as if you were placing them over two small lips.
Then place the tips of both hands together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread. Then stretch both lips with strength until the thin one is broken and pregnancy opens.
Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the spot. And let the woman copulate every day to prevent the spot from hardening instead of other things.
But if the thin one is thick and dense; then it must be removed together with the secretions using a broad leaf similar to that of the laurel.
If the amputation is natural from flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it. And have with you medicine that stops blood flow without cauterization, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and when mixed with alum.
Then apply a large leaden pipette so that the wound does not clot or heal too quickly, hold it for several days. Then administer linseed oil, and afterwards treat the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes births occur that are of other flesh within the mother's womb. Therefore, according to this method they must be cut open: it should not form a pustule for one would not apply metal to cancerous matter, which is in contrast with applying iron altogether.
Title 73.
¶ On the care of hemorrhoids, Atsilhelil, and both of the red [conditions] in women's wounds.
Indeed, hemorrhoids are the opening of blood vessels, until much blood flows from them continuously.
When therefore hemorrhoids occur, they become Atsilhelil: and I have already said about them in the division of their types and signs. And here I will say which receive treatment from them, and which do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and do not appear by touch: then there is no treatment with iron for her.
And those which are from them that appear on the opening of the womb when touch can perceive them, are those that receive treatment.
Therefore, you must make the woman enter into a cold house. Then apply Atsilhelil with forceps or with rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then crush over them at the blood flow with one of the powder instruments without causing necrosis: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and myrrh, and similar to these.
Then push his feet against the wall for one hour. Then place it in cold water.
If the bleeding persisted: then make her sit in a concoction of sumac, and coriander seeds, and gall stones, and similar remedies.
Then take the flour of barley, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with it to be placed on her back.
If therefore blood is drawn with it, it is good: and if not, make suction cups stick to her back and breasts without incisions.
Then take wool, and immerse it in the juice of tamarisk, or in the juice of ox舌头, or in the sap of alaulat branches, that is, aglanter, Pontic wine, and make it stick to a pessary.
When therefore the blistering ceases, then care for the place with ointment until it is healed.
Albarth is reddish in color and resembles an onion, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you should cut what is visible from it as I said for thyme equally: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
For perforation of the uterus that occurs in pregnancy.
Various types of blisters can occur in the womb, such as cancer, and blister of stones, and ulcers, and reddening, and hardening, that is, herpes, and heat rash, and abscesses, and hemorrhoids, and varicose veins, and thyme, and warm blister.
And indeed I have already spoken about all these illnesses and their types, and the symptoms of them, and their treatments in this division. It is necessary to say that concerning this subject matter, there arises a hot pus when it is from pus discharges which gather disease, and one must know how its incision occurs with iron.
Therefore, you should consider this. Then if the pain in a pus pocket at its inception is sharp with its impact, and heat, and fever: and you see it turn red; if sensation falls upon it, then do not press hard with puncturing it: and treat it with what helps in maturation until when the intensity of incidents subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat which supports two seats underneath her buttocks, and reclines, or ties her over her back, and places her feet below her lower abdomen: and let her knees be spread out, and she should place her arms under her thighs, and tie both with the ligaments to this.
Then, the midwife sits on the right side, and prepares the tool by which she opens the opening of the womb.
And it is necessary that when you wish to use this tool, you press against the deep part of the womb's woman: so that what comes out from the tool does not exceed the depth of the womb and harms the sick.
If however the tool is larger than the depth, then you should place small stones on the cover of the deep part of the womb: so that the entry of the whole tool into the deep part of the womb is prohibited. It is necessary to place a whirlwind which runs in the tool from the top side and to hold the tool while rotating this whirlwind until the depth of the womb opens.
When then, the incision appears and is touched by hand and feels soft and fleshy, it then becomes necessary to remove that incision at his head with a broad scalpel.
When therefore the incision is healed properly, then it becomes necessary to place a submerged lump in an oil bath of rose oil: or olive oil, where there is some medicinal quality: and insert the lump, and extract the section deeply into the matrix.
And place externally over the matrix, and over clean woolen cloth submerged in water, into which the walnuts have been boiled.
Then cleanse with an appropriate ointment for this purpose after two days, until it is healed.
And sometimes the matrix and the wound are washed so that they are cleansed with water and honey: then afterwards with water in which the root of the lily or long aristolochia has been boiled. Then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden within the matrix internally, then it becomes necessary to refrain from treating it with iron or rather treat it together with what we have mentioned about division.
Head 70.
The doctrine of obstetrics, how they treat living embryos according to the figure that is not natural.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to first know the natural figure of childbirth.
Thus, the signs are as follows: when you see a woman pressing herself downwards, and desiring to smell the air, and finds comfort with what is over her about childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then you will know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is his exit upon his own head, and alongside him: or suspended, or hanging from the umbilicus.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary that the abdomen be pressed, so that the embryo may descend quickly.
For when it lowers its head, it also lowers the cord with it, and is purified from those excesses by a good process of purification.
And anyone other than this birth is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For sometimes the fetus emerges on its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet, and one hand of it, or one foot of it; or its head and one hand come out; or only the abdomen emerges: and perhaps turns over its neck, and similar disgraceful figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be prudent and subtle in all these matters, and to guard against error and deception: and I am showing every figure from them, and how the intellect operates in that area, and this is illustrated by it being placed above him.
When the fetus emerges above its head in its natural ejection, and somewhat lies on the woman, making childbirth difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened: then make her sit on a chair, or women hold her up. And let her breathe fumes of steam with cooked thyme, and with humid oils.
Then the midwife should insert the Spatumile (a tool) between her fingers, and guide it along with the cord, and cleanse it with her finger until all that is inside comes out from the humidity: and press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman should be irrigated with a mixture of thyme mucus and safflower oil.
Then instruct her after irrigating, to be compressed: and have her sneeze with the herbs, and hold her mouth and nose all at once. The fetus would emerge immediately.
If two hands of the fetus emerge first, you should then reduce them with ease and gradually. If it does not comply at the entrance, then put a woman on a seat, and lift her feet upwards: then strike the seat against the ground: and let the woman be held so she doesn't fall during the冲击.
If the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them and remove the rest of the fetus: and tie its hand with cloth and pull it out evenly; for he will come out.
The exit of the embryo is above its feet. When the fetus emerges above its feet, then it should push them upwards: then convert the fetus gradually: afterwards balance it.
Then take one of its feet and extend it gradually.
When they emerge until the hips, then instruct her to squeeze and have her sneeze when she is ready: it will come out if God wishes.
And if it does not come out as we have described, then reduce the fetus gradually until you place it according to the natural figure. Then it will emerge then with ease.
If it is opposed with all that we have described: then take from the aqueous mucus and safflower oil, and dissolved gum: and crush it in good mortar crushing; then give her to cry out while she is above her stomach, and below her belly. Then have her sit in warm water until the womb descends.
When you see that her lower parts have warmed up, then make her drink a myrrh decoction: and place him on her. When therefore she holds the sieve for an hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and pinch her mouth and nose: and apply pressure to the lower part of the stomach with ease. The fire will immediately emerge.
The baby will exit over the knees and hands. When it exits according to this shape, then place his hands inside gradually during the insertion. Then the woman is turned over on her neck, and her feet hang downwards: and she herself lies on the bed, and joins her hands. Then apply pressure gradually to his abdomen. Then extract what is under his feet from the uterine cavity, until it is prepared in the lower part. But if the baby doesn't exit, then take his feet, and move them with a strong motion. Then apply pressure to what is above the womb gradually until the baby ascends to the upper part. Then insert his hands and gradually adjust the position of the baby: and instruct the woman to compress herself until the baby exits.
The baby will exit hanging longitudinally from the hands. His hands will be placed inside during the maneuver. But if she cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed and shake her legs violently.
Then apply the preparation you made from mucus.
If it receives that birth, then make her sit on a seat. Then practice in reducing the hand, and equally free the fetus according to its natural form. And make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to compress herself until the birth is complete.
The exit of the fetus over its own neck, with its hands spread out, and its face is towards the mother's back. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually rotate it, and equally ease it with facilitation.
When then he is equalized, then place on the oil and mucus mixture which we described over its buttocks.
Then instruct her to move gradually. When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to lean towards the right side. Then instruct her to compress herself: and make her sneeze when she is positioned.
The exit of the fetus, prepared on the side. When it descends through the mother's opening according to this method with a thread, then split the thread with your nail until it is cleared by moisture.
If therefore it is suspended over the face of the fetus and its neck, then strike her from the navel: so that she does not be held back and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the insides until you place her as it should be: and instruct the woman to compress herself occasionally: for he will come out with a gentle birth.
The birth of twins, or multiple fetuses. You should know that twins are born frequently: and sometimes three, and four are born. However, that is foreign and it rarely occurs.
But there are five things outside nature, and they do not live completely: and it contains them even though they multiply, a single second part; and they separate through the siphon, distinguishing those bound in each of their abdomens.
And sometimes they come out as one does when the fetus comes out through a natural opening, easily. And they come out through an unimaginable opening, as we have told you.
And if some of them prove difficult during delivery and resort to what we said about unnatural figures, then care for them as we have instructed: and let there be a subtle incision, and do what needs to be done with ease and deliberation, and adapt it according to every figure using whatever is being prepared for him by an ingenious mind aimed at healing.
Remember that which forms in the womb from embryos, and is aborted.
Sometimes, in the womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed: and it has been confirmed to me that a woman who miscarries emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
This was done through the measurement of the glorious sage.
Therefore, this should be fully understood in the knowledge of Obstetrics. Perhaps it will come to something similar; so compare it with what is required.
Chapter 76.
¶ On the extraction of dead fetuses.
When you care for a dead fetus along with what I said about dividing through medication, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to use the procedure with your hands, then you must consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue, and not in any of those accidents by which her loss is feared, then it should be that the woman lies on the bed on her back, and her head is bent downwards, and her legs are raised: and the attendants should hold her from both sides, or she should be bound to the bed, so that her body does not come out at the time of the delivery of the fetus.
Then moisten the womb's mouth with oils that are moist and mixed with slippery elm, and fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife should moisten her hand with these oils and mucus, then insert it into the womb with ease. Then she should seek out where within the fetus the claws (uncinas) are located, and find the appropriate places for them.
So consider this: if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then fix the claws (uncinas) on its eyes, or around its neck, or into its mouth, or onto the palate of itself, or under its beard, or in its throat, or in close locations near the ribs, and beneath the pubis.
If the descent is upon its feet, then it should be on his metatarsus and midribs of his side.
And it should hold the claw with his right hand and give curvature to that which is between the left hand's fingers. And insert it with ease using his hand, fixing the claw in one of those locations we have mentioned until he reaches an empty place.
Then fix another claw opposite to the first one, or a third if needed, so that the contraction is equal and does not lean towards any side.
Then stretch it with an equal stretching, and do not make the extension only according to a straight line, but move it towards every part so that the ease of its escape is facilitated: just as it happens when pulling out a tooth during its extraction.
And it should be such that what is between this allows for softening of extension. If a part is retained from it, then the midwife should anoint certain fingers with oil and insert them from that side in order to manipulate what is being retained with them.
If therefore, part of the fetus emerges, then change the hooks to another position which is higher. Do this until the entire fetus has emerged.
If therefore the hand emerges before another part and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constraint; then it is necessary that a cloth be manipulated over it. Then extract it until when it has emerged completely, strike it either at the joint of the sole or in the wrist; and one must do this with the other hand, and on both feet.
If the fetus' head is large, or if it is constrained during delivery, or there is water accumulated in its head; then one must insert between his fingers the sharp spatula, and guide it with him to find and extract the head, and remove the water. Or he may break it with the tool that is called Almisdac: which has a shape similar to the other tools, in the chapter that comes after this.
Similarly if the fetus has a nature of large head, then one should take off the algengamatu (perhaps referring to a type of tool): or extract it with the misda (another surgical instrument), as we said. Then grasp the bones with forceps.
And if the head emerges and gets constrained at the sternum: then guide it until moisture which is in the chest spills out.
If it does not get tangled and does not yield to delivery: then strike the head quickly according to what is possible for you.
If it is below the belly where pus has formed, or there is hydrocele within it: then one must puncture it until moisture drains out of it.
If indeed the fetus is above its own feet, then its pull is easy and its direction towards the birth canal is gentle.
If it is constricted at the belly or chest area, then you must remove him with the cloth that you had wrapped around your hand. And expand the belly or chest until what is within them has drained out.
If in turn, the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If therefore the birth canal is open, then she should insert her hand deep into the birth canal, and search for it with her hand, and pull it with her fingers until it reaches the birth canal: then she should insert one hook or two hooks into it, and pull it out with them.
If the birth canal is constricted due to hot pus that occurs to it, then one should not exert effort upon it directly. Rather, it is necessary to administer an effusion of wet substances and oily ones at that time. And apply a poultice. And sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is above its own side, then it might be possible to balance it: then give what we said about balancing a live fetus.
If it is not possible for that, then one should proceed roughly and remove it.
And it must be that you do not let anything from the afterbirth leave completely inside at all.
When you have completed your task, then administer what we said about the hot blisters that occur in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, then proceed with a bath of styptic waters, and apply the remaining treatment.
And indeed, I have already seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus. Afterwards, she was pregnant with another one, but then even that fetus died. Therefore, after a long period of time, an abscess occurs at her navel, and it swells until it opens; and she began to expel pus.
I was therefore summoned for her treatment, and I treated her over a long period of time: and the wound did not heal.
So I placed on it with some strong plasters of attraction: and an opening emerged from the place. Then, after passing some days for her, another opening emerged. I was therefore surprised, because there is no mouth inside the womb.
So I thought that it might be because of the bones of the dead fetus.
I investigated the wound, and I extracted many bones from it while she was in better positions for herself. And she has been living like this for a long time now, expelling only slightly some pus from the place.
And I did not attach this foreign object here, unless it is because of the knowledge and assistance that it provides for what the physician-craftsman, using his skill with his hands, administers during treatment.
Chapter 77.
### About the Shapes of Necessary Tools in the Extraction of the Fetus.
The form of a vertigo by which the matrix is opened.
Below is the form of the Tourniquet, with which the books are adjusted, having two ridges equally on both ends of the two sticks. However, for vertigo, this needs to be more refined with a stricture: and in order for it to be done, either from ebony or from boxwood.
And let the width of all the wood be as if it were two fingers: and the edge of each pair is as one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two reinforcements made from the same type of wood which have been firmly attached to both; their length is half a palm plus or minus: and the width of each is like two fingers, either more or less.
And those two reinforcements are inserted into the maternal mouth, so that it opens when you rotate them with your two vertiges.
Another form, similar to that one but more refined and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of scissors. However, at its extremity there should be two reinforcements as you see above: and the length of all the reinforcements from them is as if it were a palm. And the width of each of them is two fingers.
So when you wish to open the matrix with it, then let the woman sit on the bed with her legs hanging down, and have that which is between her thighs open. Then insert those two reinforcements together into the matrix: and you are holding the lower end of the tool between her thighs. Then open your hand with the tool as you would with tongs, evenly according to how much force you wish from the opening of the matrix, until the midwife wishes what she wants.
The form of the whirlpool, as the ancients described it, is the form of that which propels, by which the fetus is propelled.
The form of Almisdac, by which the large head is reduced: and it is likened to forceps, which have teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is oblong, like forceps according to this shape, as you see, which have teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it is struck and reduced.
The form of someone holding one spine.
The form of someone holding two spines.
The form of Spatumilis having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two Spatumilii, even those that are larger.
All these instruments are used in action. And the more they multiply and their species get refined by artisans, it makes the execution of their task faster for them, and they gain higher esteem among people due to their quantity.
So you should not disdain any of these instruments that might be prepared for you. The need for them is undeniable.
Chapter 78: Head
¶ On the extraction of the Secondina.
When the Secondina is retained during labor, then you must use a weak one to retain its suckling. Then make her sneeze while you're blowing on her: and hold your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If it emerges through this, it is good.
If not: then take a cauldron and pierce the cover with a hole. And put into it opening herbs for the womb, like the reed, the date fruit, and the flax, and chamomile, and cumin, and cinnamon wood, and centaurium. Take all these herbs or some of them, and immerse them in water, then place them over the fire.
Then place a bundle of reed over the hole on the cauldron cover and put the other end into the opening of the womb. Keep it until steam reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze as we have said. Therefore, it will emerge with ease the second time.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not emerge, then instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in safflower oil or in the juice of alaea. Then introduce it into the uterus, and let her take out the Secondina with it. When she has found it, then take it and gradually extend it little by little.
But if it is attached deeply within the womb, then insert the hand as we have described until she finds the Secondina and extracts it gradually according to its straightness, so that it does not fall out of the womb due to a strong pull. Indeed, it must be extracted with ease alternating between the right and left sides, and then added in accordance with the amount of attraction. She will then obey, take care, and be adjusted from sticking.
And if the womb's opening is constricted, as we have already described: take care of her with sneezing and from the treatment using herbs from the cauldron.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware not to tire on it in the repetition of the extraction.
However, you must bind what emerges to the woman's hipbone as it exits from the maternal canal. Then, treat her with a suppository using the tetrapharmaceutical ointment. For after one or two days, it will corrupt her and dissolve, and come out.
However, when it corrupts, a bad smell rises to the stomach and head, and this afflicts the weakened one. Therefore, suitable fumigations should be administered for that purpose.
Some of the old experts have already tried using fumigation with watercress and dried rue.
The shape of the tool used for fumigation by women at retention after Childbirth and during menstruation is described.
Make it like a large calamus or from wood; and place the broad end over the flame: and have the fumigation placed above the plums: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat another one.
Chapter 79.
¶ On the care of unperforated ears.
Many boys are born and their ears have not been pierced, which he has already treated with delicate cautery. Therefore, the midwife must pierce that with her finger: and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp tool: and beware of burns, do not let them touch.
Then place upon it wool that has been soaked in wine and oil. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If you fear that it will heal inwardly, then place a lead cannula in the opening for many days, and it is removed when the child wishes to defecate.
And now, healing occurs in Anus as well, either due to the strengthening of wounds or apoplexy. Therefore, that consolidation should be cut, and then it should be treated with what we said previously about treatment and lead.
Title 80.
¶ On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower region are: Nodation and Enlargement near the anus of the defecation orifice: or within a space of one part: and there is one fistula, or multiple ones.
And when that nodulation heals, it is opened, and moisture or thin pus runs out from there.
And sometimes these fistulas have penetrating ones. Therefore, penetrating ones are recognized by what emerges during defecation and wind when the patient is expelling food. And perhaps worms emerge from them.
And these fistulas occur when they penetrate into the blister and up to the muscle of the sword. And there are penetrating ones that go up to the junction of the thigh and up to the tail node.
From this, it can be recognized that a fistula penetrating up to the anus is distinguishable even from one that does not penetrate. This is done by inserting your finger into the anus and then introducing a delicate probe into the fistula through air or metal: when there is no curvature.
If there is curvature within it, then insert into her a delicate lead wire or a pin from the horsehair, until you feel the wire or pin in your finger.
If you do not feel it completely inside, and no discharge is produced from the hole, nor any windiness, nor a worm as I said: then you will know that it's non-penetrating. Therefore proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to a blister or to the bladder of urine: then its meaning is the discharge of urine from there, and prevention of it by this so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If it is penetrating up to the junction of the thigh, or up to its opening: then its indication is that a probe will reach there if there's no curvature up to the opening; and finding pain around the part, and pus constantly coming out from it, and medicine not being effective, nor consolidating with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure: and the treatment for them is labor and futility, to be formed by foolish physicians.
In those though that are not penetrating, and not old, there is expected healing with the application of serro. According to what I am telling you, and which I have already proven: and it happens that they lie weak between your hands on their back, and raise their legs up to above their hips, and their thighs incline towards their belly. Then insert the lead rod or air into the fistula until you know where the probe has reached.
If the sick person feels it around the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel that the needle has penetrated through itself which you have detected, beyond what you feel between your finger and it, or flesh: then you will certainly know that it is penetrating. Do not then trouble about her (referring to a patient), because there is no cure for it, as we said.
However, it was said that the flesh is healed in certain individuals, and by means of medication through which one hopes for improvement, is as follows: use a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, just like before, insert the burning part into the fistula until it reaches close to the anus. Then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the added flesh, which is similar to bird's feathers, has become sufficiently cooked.
Then treat that with the enclosed wax until those cooked flesh parts emerge: then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
And if the needle comes out and does not go all the way to your finger which is at the anus, or there's a thick skin of flesh between it and the needle, then you see that the fistula follows the surface of the skin. Then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and when you follow cutting with the needle within the fistula until the cut reaches where the needle tip arrives, then free the needle and it falls out.
Then cleanse those flesh parts that resemble bird's feather tubes, so that nothing remains from them.
If however blood overcomes you and separates between you and your work, then it is better to quickly aid with either cauterizing that with fire or using an acute medicine.
Because when cautery is combined with fire, it adds the heating of these flesh parts, and the removal of blood, and drying of moisture.
Then care about this with the clothes soaked in butter or ground dough until the place releases pus and those flesh parts that are heated in pus come out.
Then care at this point with gauzes soaked in hardening ointments that generate tough flesh: and are medicines where there is coagulation and drying.
For when it heals, then it is healed already: and you do not know any repetition.
But if the fistula has reached down to the depth of the anus and extends due to excess of body: then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with it.
But if you feel it touched, and there is a film or flesh between you and her, and she is close to penetration: then there is no operation in that place, unless according to the way of hope and expectation.
Which means that one of the three methods is applied to it: or you cauterize her, as we said; or you remove her until you find the concavity of her, so that you can be able to insert a forceps, and heal with something nearby. And do not proceed much with the cut, so as not to enter a canal containing the anus, and happen upon unintended discharge of waste without desire. Then care about this with what we have said.
Perhaps it will heal: or you might lengthen the film itself and cleanse it after cutting it close to the anus, as we said, or when touched, or with another sharp tool of a different kind. Then cleanse those meats that are filtered and are in the section until you can clean with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of all with the whole section and at the upper opening where it gets established: and there will remain an Fissure open in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter for the sick person.
And sometimes the Fissure is sewn according to this manner: and it is when you introduce the probe into the Fissure: and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus: then take the probe at the perforated extremity, which is like a needle head, that is, prepared strips, according to this form. And introduce into it a thread wound from five threads, and roughly that area. Then introduce the probe with the thread into the Fissure until you reach its curvature.
If it penetrates into the edge of the anus internally near to that place, then withdraw the thread from that hole: so as you can insert your finger into the anus, and extract the end of the thread, and unite both ends at once: and tighten both, and let them off for one or two days: and the longer the thread penetrates in the flesh, the better tighten it until those meats are between the two ends of the thread and fall off: then care for the wound until it gets established and heals.
And if the Fissure's opening is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in any way that has been prepared for you, unless it be deeply. For you should not do this because of the wound, so as not to hit it.
Then proceed with that as we said until it heals.
The form of the spine-shaped spatulum used to make a fistula; whose edge is sharply acute on one part and the other part is not so acute in order that it might not touch what is unnecessary as you see.
Title 81.
On the suture of hemorrhoids from which blood flows after their incision: and care for fissures.
There are two ways of having hemorrhoids. Or indeed, they occur inside the anus, resembling bladders of charcoal, or of almonds: or as if they were grains of sand. And there are paired ones, and large ones: blood flows from them always, it may be one, or many. And they occur outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus have very little moisture; from them water of a yellowish color flows out, or there is a somewhat continuous flow of blood; they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for those inside the anus is to advise the sick person to wash with it: and squeeze until the anus comes out and you see the whitish substance to your eye. Therefore, hang them with hooks therefore: or hold them with your finger nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If they do not stay in them with the hooks because of their and their own softness: then seize them with a rough cloth or with a thong made from doubled thread, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them and apply some warm powders over the cuts after the operation, so that they serve as a substitute for cauterization. They should be cauterized according to what was prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. Then attend to them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not respond to expulsion, then treat the patient with a mild enema containing a small amount of anodyne. This will allow what is inside the anus to be expelled quickly when the patient pushes during bowel movement.
If the athletes are expelled from outside the anus, then their condition is light and easy; it is possible that you can catch them with your finger or with a hook, and insert them. Then attend to them in the manner we have described until they heal.
And for those who abstain from iron cutting operation, then it is necessary to apply their stitches according to this method. Take the thread that has been wound up, and insert it into the point. Then pull the athlete out upwards and make it pierce with its point at the root from another side: and wind the two ends of the thread on the lower part of the needle, making them transversely: and tighten the stitch of the athlete firmly. Then tie knots in the thread, and pull out the point.
Perform this with all the athletes and release one from them: do not leave him as he is to prevent excess bleeding.
Then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or plaster, and put it on top of the anus. And instruct the patient to rest. Then release him until he falls off.
When the athletes then fall off, attend to them with the use of ointment and other treatments until they heal.
On the Care of Wounds. Indeed, many times it happens from the drying out of feces, and the constriction of nature.
And when they become dry and medicine no longer benefits them: then it is necessary to use threads with a Spatumilis point or with your nail until they become moist and the upper layer of skin that prevents their consolidation is removed. Then care for them until they consolidate as necessary.
If they do not consolidate though: then repeat them with a more severe reason than the first until they bleed much and are scraped afterward, care for them until they heal.
On the treatment of Almirmar inverted wounds, and non-inverted ones, and Athelil dryings, and those caused by ants.
Chapter 82.
Know that Almirmar is nothing else but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the entire body, especially in the lower parts of the feet, and fingers: and pain occurs from them during walking.
Therefore it must be cut where there is the circumference of a nail, and held with tweezers or with a hook, and removed from its root.
Then care for that: and if necessary, cauterize it according to what preceded it in its chapter.
From Athelil dryings, one is a small, rough, filtered, round elevation above the body's surface. And it often happens on children's hands.
The treatment for this is to stretch the Athelil and pierce it: or to tie it with a silk thread: or with hair until it falls. And if you have to treat a urinary disorder, cauterize it according to what has been previously stated with fire or with sharp medicine: and now inverted meconiums are eradicated both those that are inverted and those that are not, using the tool that I am about to say.
The ant is also a small eminent thing filtered and fat, located on the surface of the body, piercing deeply inside. And when it finds coldness, it feels like an ants bite in that area, and this happens throughout the body. A great deal of it forms in the hands.
The treatment for this is to take a tube from a goose feather or from the feathers of strong birds. Place that tube over the ant until it fills the circle made by parts of its body. Then turn your hand with the tube until you have removed what is within the circle around the ant. Place it deeply into the flesh and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an air or iron tube according to this form.
Place the tube of the cannula above its lowest part, drawing out a dull roll so that it can be easily removed from the finger and its rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization of Athelil.
Title LXXXIII.
§ On the forms of instruments used for enemas in digestive illnesses, and bowel adjustments, and colic.
Sometimes an enema is made from silver, or from bronze, or from blown or hammered air.
And sometimes it is made with these small and large instruments according to how they are used.
Therefore, that which is administered for the care of small children, let it be small, and as to those whose ages are weak or painful, thus also rectal washes for them.
A large enema.
Its cannula, that is the upper part where it is tied to the uterus, should be broad according to this measure: and there should be a distinction so that the uterus is tied as you see it being tied, and its lower end which is introduced into the anus should be closed, that is not open, soft, very much, pulling towards thinness: and on one of its sides there should be two apertures, and on the other side of the side there should be one aperture.
And let the size of the aperture be according to the thickness of the radii, and slightly thicker, and let the uterus in which medicines are placed from the animal bladder: or from parchment ear, which should have a form like that of half an egg: whose root is one hand.
And it should be pierced through many apertures as it is twisted, and there should be a space which is the thickness of a finger between each aperture. Then insert a strong thread made from raw wool into these apertures, which should be made from ten threads or roughly that number, and tie it with the uterus like an egg. When then the uterus is placed inside, it should be tightened at the head with a strong constriction between two distinguishing contractions for the clister. Then perform the enema with it.
And this is the form of the circle depicted here and the apertures.
The quality of the enema to be used with it is as follows: fill either the uterus or the bladder from medicine, which should be heated according to the amount that the sick can tolerate. And beware not to make it excessively hot or excessively cold.
Then the patient is made to lie on his back and raise his legs to the higher position. And place beneath him a skin or piece of cloth where people are lying down.
Then immerse the extremity in a mixture of Clister oil or with tallow, or with snot of eel, or with fennel mucus, or similar. Then introduce it into the anus with ease. Then receive the attendant slave with both his hands simultaneously, and express him until he evacuates completely what is inside the Clisteri in the intestines.
Then remove the Clister, and raise the patient's legs to the wall.
If the medicine considers him fit for release, then hold him as much as possible. And if he sleeps through that entire night, it is more beneficial towards recovery.
If you give him Clister in the discomforts of the body's solution and hastens his release: then repeatedly use Clister until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or wounds in the anus, then use Clister very subtly and gently, using those Clisters that are used to prepare for children.
And this form of subtle Clister should be placed on what is tightly skin.
Title: 84th Chapter
Now I have spoken about the division of treating wounds in the book and here I will explain their treatment both with hands and medicines as per the remainder.
I say then that wounds are distinguished according to how they are made and according to where the wound falls.
Therefore, as for which wounds are made repeatedly, they are like the impact of a stone: or cut by a sword, or by a knife: or struck with a spear, or with wood, or an arrow: and similarly through many other objects.
Wounds which occur according to the location of the body are like a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or buttocks, and similarly through other parts of the body.
And I am recounting treatments for certain wounds, so as to establish this reasoning and guide in the treatment of other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the composition of remedies will be recalled at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no fracture of bone: then consider if it was due to the impact of a stone or something similar, and has only scratched the skin; and it's a large wound and you fear for an ill outcome with bleeding from hot plants. Then apply, and immediately perform bloodletting to the head: and do not delay this action: and remove from his blood according to its effectiveness quantity: if nothing prohibits bloodletting, especially if the blood that flows out of the wound is little. And let the bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
And let the bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded area. And let the sick person beware of overindulgence, and wine, and heavy foods.
And if there is something that prohibits the reduction, then it should be reduced by diet alone, and not approach meats or wines.
And place a hot poultice on the wound if it happens to him, soaked in undiluted rose oil or wine with some restorative properties.
If you are assured by the hot bleedings, then place upon the wound, if it is fresh with its blood and has not changed into air, a little of the powder I will tell you afterwards: and if it has already changed into air, then place upon it some unguents until it heals.
If the wound is large or comes from a cut with a blade and is similar to others: and its edges do not adhere together by poultices, then you should join them with stitches, according to what I will tell you about wounds in the abdomen regarding their stitching.
If the wound has already been detected from bone and hangs down, and there is no retention of it except in a small suspension band: then cut it. Next, care for the wound with medicines, and restore bone tissue instead of skin. Instruct the patient to eat food that is rich in nourishment, such as heads (of cattle) and cooked wheat, until they feel fullness, and similar foods.
If you find decomposition in the skin and it does not adhere to bone: then cut out the decomposed part completely and remove it. Then take care of that area.
If there is an artery or vein in these wounds from which blood flows and cannot be removed by medicines, then investigate the artery. If you find that it is not followed, then cut and bind it with the help of woolen thread, or ligate it. If necessity prompts you when it doesn't allow for what we said, then apply cautery until blood is discharged.
If these wounds are small and simple, then their treatment is easy, light: so apply this powder over them because it hardens them before they change into air.
The Method for Cutting on an Incarnate Wound. Recipe one part of olibanum, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of the unextinguished ashes: it should be thoroughly ground together, and sifted through a sieve: and it is to be filled into the wound, and bound with a good bandage until it adheres well to the inside and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind him from above with powders, and release him, do not break him while he remains there, so that he does not slip away. For the medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes it does this with a plaster alone, when olibanum and dragon's blood are not available to you. And they perform the same operation in many large wounds when it is necessary to put it over them and bind them tightly, and the wounds are fresh with their own blood which has not been disturbed by air.
And if that blood has been disturbed by some change, especially when it is in the season of summer, then this powder's purpose is not in position: therefore take care with what we said earlier, so you apply over them some prepared ointment: or place over them plasters made from wheat flour mixed with water and honey until pus is released. Then take care of the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
And if a fracture occurs with the wound in bone, and it is small, then extract that with Gastrum: and I will already have spoken of the treatment for skull fractures in what follows.
The Treatment for Wounds on the Neck.
If indeed a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
If the cervical nerve or artery has already been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no instrument for its treatment other than with due attention to its care along with severe compression, like zinnia and ziggy, and those similar. Because they harm nerves and constrict them.
And do not place anything cold absolutely over the wound: for the substance of nerves is cold and their continuance is with the brain which is superior to the members; and let this be treated with medicine in a mild way, like calx mixed with sweet water occasionally infused with oil or with rose oil, and turmeric when it is washed even with sweet water: and other mineral stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then apply sutures: or constrict its edges with powder. Then care for it until it heals.
If the depth of the wound is great, or if a sinus occurs in its lower part where pus has already accumulated, then pierce it at a more depressed place in that.
And if an artery has already been cut in the wound and a flow of blood follows, then separate it or dry it out and ligate it; or cauterize it if necessity calls for that.
And if the pharynx or all of it has been cut and the alar muscles have been injured, then gather together the edges of the skin with sutures over the thread of the throat, and do not touch the throat but rather smooth it out and return it to its natural shape. And then tighten the incision with an appropriate bandage, and release it after some days. Then care about the application of ointments with cautery and desiccation until it heals.
If a wound has already made an impression in the bone, then examine it. If there are fragments of bone within it, extract them all or as many as you can from them: and when something is not yet ready for removal, leave that alone until the wound rots away, and its exit is separated and cleaned out.
If the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I have described. If it seems that there is an opening into the wound and a fistula forms, then treat it along with what comes to mind from its description, which you will find in the corresponding chapter.
¶ On the Wound in spatulas (a medical tool).
If it is the impact of a spear or a knife, and you perceive its depth, then consider it carefully. If therefore, from the wound, there comes out a whistling sound when the sick person pants from it, then you will know that the wound is mortal.
But if it is not deep and there is only recent bleeding from his own blood: then do not put any powder on it for the first hour, nor squeeze it, lest he retain the blood at its depth and it returns to the heart and kills him. Instead, apply an attractive ointment to it, and wash it off twice a day.
But if indeed an ointment is not available to you, then put a used wick into the wound's hole so that it draws out what comes out of it from moisture. And have him sleep over the wound, so that what accumulates within it may heal.
If three days or more have already passed since the wound and no illness has occurred, nor any adverse heartbeat trembling, nor constriction during breathing, and you see all other his conditions are good: then you will know that the wound is healing. Therefore, treat him with care and according to regulations, and all other treatments, until he heals.
If the wound is healing properly and constantly opens, then you will know that already a fistula has formed. Therefore, treat that [fistula] according to its chapter (or section).
And if the wound is from a cut by a scalpel or sword and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat that [wound] along with what came before from stitching, if there is much: or with dust, if there is little.
And if it has already made an imprint in the bone and things are falling out from there: then examine the wound, and properly proceed to extract those pieces, if they are separate. If they are not separated, then leave them alone until the wound begins to rot, for their extraction would indeed cause harm.
The judgment for the rest of wound accidents on other limbs is in the treatment, as we said.
§ On Wounds of the Belly, and Egress of Intestines, and Their Discharge.
The disruption that happens to the belly is great, medium, and small.
From the great ones, sometimes there egresses intestines, or the number of intestines.
Therefore, an insertion of them and their stitching is more severe and difficult.
And even a small division becomes difficult from another method. Therefore, it follows that reducing them becomes more difficult, if you do not promptly insert them into their place upon application: since they expand, open, and thicken; hence their entry becomes difficult.
Therefore, it follows that the better division is achieved using a medium method: because when this does not cause difficulty in reducing the intestine, as occurs in these two categories.
You should know that the suturing of veins is according to four methods.
Two common sutures are compatible for suture of the abdomen, and for suture of other body wounds; and two other specific sutures are properly applied to other wounds. However, they are more appropriate for the suture of the abdomen: and I will tell you each one with explanation and description.
Therefore, I say that when the wound is small, and something from the intestine protrudes through it, making its reduction difficult; then this corresponds to one of the two methods. Or due to the difficulty in division as we said: Or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
So when this is the case, then you must warm it up so that you immerse a sponge or wet cloth alone in lukewarm water. Or boil it in water with ginger, reed, and herbs, and mix it with the intestine until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it does this in one where there is stiffness; and it's better than just water for resolving the inflammation.
So when you see that the inflammation has already resolved, then soak the intestine with water that has been boiled with it, or with malt. For that reason, it is diminished the entry of him with a small thing.
And if the return is relieved after this treatment, then in the case of anemia, find a little bit with the tool used to cut the hemorrhoids.
The first treatment is better when it is prepared than the cut: and there is no forced action to cut again after need and lack of equipment.
Let there be a part of it which is twisted and pointed, and another part which is not pointed, and the tip shall not be fine like Spatumilis, indeed it should be more obtuse slightly: and that is what resembles a spur, as you see.
And when the ulcer then enters the intestines, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural shape in its own place, if possible over that: because this is better.
But when the disruption is large in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary to make the sick lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place its head and its chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your intention and your consideration always on this, so that the part where the ulcer is should be higher than the other part.
And thus it must be that you administer this in large ulcers and in medium-sized ulcers.
In very small ulcers, place that according to what has been prepared for you.
Then have a worthy minister present between your hands who will hold the entire disruption with his hand and gather its lips. Then take from her who follows the stitch something after something, and this is the common method of stitching for one.
And it is like taking the point, or the number of points according to the size of the wounds. Then remove from the edge of the rupture a length equal to that of an annular finger, which is the size that doctors use. And hold one point of your needle over where you are going to introduce the thread into the skin at both ends; when you have done this with both ends and prepared what lies under the skin on the inside, do so until it penetrates from another part. At this point you will have joined together two ends of skin, and two ends of the other material: and there are four layers formed.
Then tie with a doubled thread around the tip of your needle several times from both parts at once, until you have joined together two parts of the wound in a manner fitting to them.
Then release the thickness of an annular finger, and hold another point of your needle in them: afterwards guide this with the thread as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not stop doing that with it from which you need, until you complete the constriction around all of the wound.
And let the needle be of medium size between thickness and fineness: for needles that are very fine pierce the flesh quickly; and those that are thick are difficult to enter into the skin: therefore it should have a medium size both in fineness and thickness.
And it should not happen that the needle becomes entangled in two nearby skin ends greatly: so as not to pierce the flesh quickly and open the wound before its healing, and also not to extend during the stitching, lest the wound be prevented from healing.
Then penetrate the end of the needle so as not to injure the patient during their sleep: and place small cushions made from cloths on all sides for the ends of the needles: and release them until you know that the wound has already healed.
And indeed, this kind of stitch with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For it is sufficient for the stitches of them to use one needle, or two, or around those.
The second kind of stitch is common, as it joins together with the stitches at each end: the ends, two layers of skin, and the ends are placed in a vice-like grip together with one needle, in which there is a thread rolled inside equal in thickness and size.
Then when you penetrate with the four ends of these needles from where you began, move the needle back to that part so that the thread wound on from the upper part of the wound falls: like sewing a piece of cloth together they would be sewn, and place between every stitch the thickness equivalent to a smaller finger.
This kind of stitch is known by men.
And with this stitch I myself sutured his wound that had occurred within his abdomen, which had been cut by a knife and there was a rupture of the wounds greater than one palm: and it protruded from the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and there was a rupture in the middle of the abdomen.
So I returned that back after it stood out twenty-four hours outside his wound.
The wound was thus consolidated in the space of about fifteen days: and I attended to him, he recovered, and he lived many years after that, changed in his ways.
And the doctors judged that it would not be healed.
And it was by miracle rather than through my treatment with ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor anything from the doctors. I therefore applied a fresh poultice of honey three times a day to the affected bone, and washed it regularly with honey water until it healed.
I will now describe two types of suture that are appropriate according to the narrative of speech.
And here is how you start with a sharp suture: and you will insert the tip from the outer part to the inner part.
And when the needle has penetrated through the skin and into the wound, making its way according to the length and width of the entire body: cut off the end of it, then direct one side of this end onto where you have inserted the needle, and make that other end penetrate from the inner part to the outer part at the opposite end.
And when you have made it penetrate as described at this end of the same side towards the outer part to the inner: then cut off the other end from here which is on this side and make the needle penetrate into another end from the inner part to the outer at the opposite end. And make it penetrate with the direction in which you are making it penetrate in this latter end which is a part of it, until it penetrates fully into it.
Then begin from this side as well, and pull the thread that comes out from where it penetrated through the skin.
Then bring it back into that skin, and with the end of this thread which is on the other side take hold of its counterpart: and pull this from the skin which is on his part. And do the opposite too, taking alternately one way then another, until you have pulled out all around in accordance with that example.
And the sum of this suturing method is like that used in suturing skin where there are layers: such that you take the thread alternately from one end of each layer of skin and pull it out alternately from another end. Continue until you complete the process.
Second type of proper suture, as Galenus named it.
This speech tells about his manner of recounting it, such that he joins every part with another compatible one according to its nature when speaking of these certain ones amongst physicians. And they apply the end of one to the other's end and the inner end to the inner end of the other. And this is done according to what I tell you.
You must fix the point of the needle near the inner part from the outer side to the proximal end of mirach, and make it penetrate only to the inner surface within that. And you release both ends of the thread. Then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner one through both ends of the thread, that is, on both sides.
Then turn both of them, and also make each one penetrate from the inner part to the outer one up to the other ends of mirach, which are on the opposite side.
This method of stitching is a better common suture than the usual one and it's the suture that precedes its recall.
This, therefore, is the speech of Galen.
And some people said. The rectification of the abdominal suture is done with two needles. Which means you introduce both threads into each of them: and begin with the introduction of the needle from what is at your side, and make it penetrate up to the other side, according to their suture method which are equal in strength.
And you will know that when a disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen: then its suture is harder than those of other parts of the abdomen.
The judgement of treatment for wounds is the judgement of other wounds.
What is this, that when you take up a recent wound with its blood, before it dries and hardens, and return the intestine to its place, and fit all things together properly: then put on top of the powder of cooked flesh.
If the air has already altered the wound: then put something on top of it that are your present remedies, until pus forms; and let the threads fall out, and let them heal well, and marvel. Then care for it as you would do with the treatment of other wounds, until it is healed.
If however the remedies are not present for you, then immediately put something on top of it as soon as pus begins to come out, old wadding: and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other remedies when wounds are simple in various dispositions.
If however you fear that the wound communicates with the main limbs in injury, then it is necessary for you to immerse fine wadding into oil of tempered warmth, or into rose oil: and place that within the surrounding areas which are between the groin and under the armpits.
If there is pain, or punctures, or putrefaction within the intestines (for this happens many times), then cleanse it with a wine enema, stiptic, black, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already entered into the intestine and caused a passage through its cavity.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal and that which comes from them from the thin one is harder to heal.
However, the肠 called the Jejunum does not receive healing from the wound that happens in it entirely: and this is because of its abundance, which comes from veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and proximity itself of the nature of nerves.
However, if that which proceeds from the wound is hair, and you have obtained it fresh: follow it according to your reduction method, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if the time has passed and it is already green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place that became darker from it, in order that no blood flow occurs. Indeed, in hair there are veins and arteries.
Then cut the ligament that comes after this one, and place two hanging ends of thread from the lower part of the wound outside it. So that when you pull on it, there will be a pull above you, and an extraction at the time of hair, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Remember that which happens to wounds that occur in the Intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible for some individuals to heal. Therefore, as I witnessed someone who was injured in his abdomen with a lance strike, and there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and a fistula was formed, and the expulsion of food and gas occurred from it.
So I applied the treatment, until I was not satisfied with its healing. I did not stop refining it until it had healed and the site had consolidated.
After I observed the site had consolidated, I feared for the frail, lest something harmful happen to him inside his abdomen: and indeed, no harm befell him from that. And he remained in his better arranged conditions, eating and drinking, and defecating, and entered the bath, and exercised in his diets.
And some of the experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and there is little: then it must be tied according to this manner. And you will receive as many ants as the heads of great ones. Next, place two lips over the wound and put one ant from those that have an open mouth on top of the two lips. And when it reaches over them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head; for it adheres and does not come loose.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with an ant after an ant according to the quantity of the wound.
Then restore it, and let its wound heal. For the heads remain attached inside the intestine until it eats its food and heals, and no harm will occur entirely to a weak person.
And it is now possible to tie the intestine even with a thin thread: which is extracted from an animal's intestine and attached to it after being introduced into the tip.
And you will receive this thread's end from the intestine, and much flesh will be removed. Then tie the thin, rolled linen thread at its end. Then introduce that thread into the tip, and let it heal with the intestine. Then restore it to its disruption.
And this method of suture with ants and the intestine is nothing else than according to the way of trust and hope.
You should know which is the large one, broad, especially if it's in one of the thin intestines: then there isn't a skill except for refinement, nor is its healing complete.
Regarding the care of Zuchemen and Fistulas.
You should know that every wound, or pustule when it hardens and becomes old, and turns into a ulcer, and does not heal up, and constantly exudes pus, and is never resolved: then it is called universally wherever it may be in any member, and we call it a Fistula. And we name it Zuchemen.
And indeed, a Fistula according to truth is a drained lump, tough, white; it has no pain and has the shape of a bird's feather. Because of this, some people call it 'Risati', that is, feather.
And sometimes they become moist, which emit pus. And perhaps the moisture splits at certain times. And this moisture can be abundant, and scarce: it can be thick, or thin.
And I have already explained this in the division where I said that every ulcer that does not heal is not born within the flesh, and it is due to only one of nine causes.
Which is due to one of nine causes. These are: either because there is scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its wickedness; or because flesh is hard between it and above its lips, preventing the birth of flesh; or because there is much dirt and filthiness; or because the ulcer itself is putrid and what is sent to it has bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient for treating it; or because decay is falling in that region which makes pestilence, like in Caesarea Augusta, where digestion of ailments becomes difficult and healing of pustules is delayed through nature: or because there is one opening, or the number of bones.
And I have already shown you all these causes and signs of them, and the treatments thereof with medicines, in division; it is necessary here that you should know the treatment of Fistula and Zuckem which occurs through a way of operation using hands.
Therefore, you should know that Fistula can occur in all parts of the body. Therefore, there are Fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or sinuses: or to the intestines, or bladder, or some of the ribs: or some of the lumbar regions, or to a combination of joints in their formation: such as hands, and feet. And among them are those that flow towards the vicinity of the main member, and similar ones.
So among these Fistulas, according to this manner, is one resulting from illnesses that are difficult to cure, and do not receive treatment, and the occupation with it is hard work and ignorance.
But if it is from any of the Fistulas whose depth does not reach the places I mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its treatment, and desire to attain knowledge about it, then take a trial by air, or iron, if the Fistula extends according to rectitude, and inquire after it together with itself.
But if there is a twisting in the Fistula, then investigate it together with testing by a subtle lead. Because lead, when combined with its own body, will be repelled and curved around the twisting (of the Fistula).
If the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to describe it with lead. Therefore, irrigate from them, the opening through their openings.
For the moisture by which you irrigate it, directs the flow of other openings and runs out from them.
Then carefully inquire according to the manner that is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is an opening or a nerve there, and whether it is a hollow of a fistula far away or near by. Or whether there is one fistula with many openings, and stands over all this, using your utmost strength: with your questioning which you use to ask the patient, and in the detection of pain upon compression at the site by your hand, and through similar symptoms and causes of events.
And when you stand upon that true station, then proceed to treatment according to your confidence: and it is that you should consider this at that moment if there appears a fistula nearby, or in a place save long distant from the junction, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of those places which I told you about: then cut the fistula as was instructed from my account, and remove what is inside it by filtration, and corruption in flesh, that which is born in its opening from flesh, or pus, and similar things: and care for that until it heals.
If however the fistula is deep and extends straight: then it must be cut deeply as possible for you. Then cleanse that from all rotten flesh of its.
Then administer licorice which is wrapped in medicines for acute conditions: and insert it up to the hollow of the fistula that you comprehended with iron: do this with it as many times, until the medicine for acute conditions has corroded completely what remained in the hollow of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal through this, then burn it according to what we have narrated.
If thus the cause of Fistula is the anus and you confirm this: then inquire about it and cut it according to what I have told you: if nothing prevents you from cutting anywhere in the vein, nerve or main member, as we said.
If indeed it is discovered to you that there is an opening, and within it there is some corruption, and darkness: then shave it until the entire corruption is removed. Then care for it with what makes it flesh grow again, until it heals.
And if it does not heal and discharges pus as before: then you will know that you have not achieved complete removal of the corruption.
Therefore, detect it again above that one, and carefully consider its nature, and the purification of it with your last strength.
Then restore it. If indeed it heals, that is good: and if not, then you will know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached. Therefore, there is no talent for you in it, except to dismiss nature itself.
And if the defected one is small and you can do it, draw it with fine forceps that suit this.
And if there are many bones, then carefully make the extraction of them all, and do not let you release anything from them with your strength.
And if something from the humidity opposes you, and there is no fear or mistake in their cuttings: then cut out those humors and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
And if indeed you do not have the preparation to remove bones at your time, then place over the wound that will rot it: and remove it until what is rotten from around those bones within flesh and humors has degraded.
And guard the wound so that it does not harden. And tighten (secure) the section you cut during your surgery. Indeed, place upon it, if you fear, the sulfur-caked portion immersed in ground and cooked oil: or the sulfur-caked portion immersed in an Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments.
For when these wettings decompose and the bones separate from them, then the removal of those is favored, and their attraction occurs.
But if there is a large single mouth like the thigh bone or the acetabulum, and similar ones, and what has rotted from it is a large part: then shave it until the last reason, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then heal the wound.
But if what is in it has rotted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw through it, and to cut it entirely until the place where the corruption reaches. Then take care of it until it heals and hardens.
And I tell you, this happens to the thigh bone: use it as an example and assistance for your surgery.
There was a young man around thirty years old, who experienced pain in his thigh bone due to an event that caused movement on him inside his body, which is from the internal parts, until the materials reached the knee, and there was a large hematoma: and it wasn't because of any external cause.
So the period was extended with medical errors until the abscess is opened and many materials have gathered together. And after the treatment until a sinus is formed at the knee and many openings are made within it; all of these were emitting pus and body fluids.
He therefore subjected himself to the care of a multitude of doctors for about two years, and was not skillful in the art until I was called upon him and saw his legs, and the materials flowing out of those openings at a great rate: moreover, his entire male body had become discolored, and his color was yellow.
I then introduced the probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the mouth of it.
Then I thoroughly examined all the openings: and I found them to be communicating with each other from all parts of the leg.
I proceeded then, and followed through one of those openings until I found a part of the bone: and I discovered him to be corrupted: which was already corroded, and deteriorated, and rotten, and perforated, until it penetrated down to the marrow.
I therefore incised what was found by me, and prepared from the decayed bone.
And I treated it, which was not in the bone except that corruption, which I incised and opened. And I had already eradicated it.
Then, I laid the restoration in with healing ointments for a long period of time. And it has not been consolidated.
Then I tried it again, and found a second opening above the first detection: and I discovered continuous corruption with the bone: and I opened what appeared to me even from that corruption.
Then I attempted to restore it. And it has not been restored.
I therefore detected it again upon him, and I did not cease to enter his mouth in detail, and try to restore it: and until I entered the bone about one手掌's width, and extracted that together with its marrow.
Then restore him with medicines, and he is quickly strengthened and healed. There was no need for this repetition of the operation and cutting on him, except due to the debilitation of the sick person, his low tolerance, and my fear for his death: because all sorts of bad things befall him continuously from excessive discharge through paroxysms.
So he is fully healed: and a hard, durable flesh grows in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement has been made within his body, and his strength returns: and he adapts to his circumstances: and it did him no harm at all during walking.
And if there is an elevated opening in the body already broken: then it must be sewn, according to this manner: and thus: take the tendon, and tighten it at the end of the projecting bone: and instruct someone to extend it upwards: and put another thicker piece of linen cord over the first. Then join it over the flesh which is at the bone: and extend its end so that you take flesh downwards: and give flesh above the place where you want to sew, so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
Place wood or a slab under the bone lower down in the middle: because when you do this, it does not prevent that the flesh of the decayed part will be cut.
And it must be that the saw is over the decayed place somewhat evenly, so there will not be a concavity of the bone in the decayed part: and it should not appear in its appearance to the sense, nor provoke him through his own sawing.
If the bone is decayed and there is no elevated part, rather continue with its portion together. And decay is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then take flesh from all parts completely. Then place a piece of wood below.
Then saw it from the first part where decay exists, until the sawing continues on the other side: and let the sawing be according to the length of the decay somewhat closely, as we said.
If decay is found at the joint, cut the joint that is decaying and saw on the part where it continues on the other side.
If indeed decay is found at the continuation of two joints, then it is not an ingenuity except for wear and tear.
If decay is found in the hand cuff or in the foot cuff: then it is very difficult to address within. However, you must inquire about the decay as it appears to you. And wear it down, and cleanse it according to whatever possible arrangement you can, and correct it with whatever skill is agreeable to you when there is no contradiction with a vein or nerve.
And you should know that many files and saws are used for this kind of cutting on bones according to the positioning of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness, their size, their smoothness, their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare the appropriate tool suitable for that operation for every type of surgical procedure.
And you should know that these operations indicate to you the species of tool you need for it when you have a study of length. And the knowledge of the methods of this art serves as testimony to the symptoms of illness: then you will indeed find through yourself what is suitable for it from the instruments needed for every ailment.
And I will stand by you at the end of this chapter to give you a numbered list of tools that you place examples on which you cut into, and the test through which you experience others.
The form of another serration.
The form of the razor junctions. Let the head of this razor be according to the form of the star-headed clapper: and let its points be according to the form of the tips of the elishafi.
And it is not suitable unless they are rubbed against its heads when they are being damaged or the mouth is wide and large.
The form of the larger razor.
The form of the wider razor.
The form of the razor that has a concavity.
The form of another (smaller) razor.
The form of the other razor with curved ends.
The form of the feather-like razor, with a slender test.
This is similar to a rod, and its end is like a saw: it is exhibited in many places according to the reason of bones.
The form of the razor that conforms to the bone which has been pierced.
The end of it is triangular, sharp-pointed is the ends.
It is from India. And similarly, it must be that all things we have said about Rasories, Cutters, and Files are done.
Section 4: On the incision of extremities, and Sealing of bones.
The extremities decay, either due to an external cause, or an internal one.
So then, when you have treated that decay with medical remedies and the treatment does not work: and you see the decay affecting the body part, which is not being affected by anything: then it is necessary to cut that body part until you reach where the decay follows up, so that the diseased person can be saved through this means from death, or from harm that is greater than the defect of a body part.
And the sign that happens is this: that the affected member diminishes until it's thought that: which fire has burned it down, or has turned it black before it putrefies: until that decay spreads to what follows that body part and seeps into the entire body.
Therefore, when you have made the cut, and similarly if the cause of decay is from the impact by some venomous creatures: such as sea scorpions, snakes, vipers, and similar.
If therefore the decay or impact is on the end of a finger, then cut the finger and do not leave space for the decay to spread until it reaches the other part of the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then cut it from the base of the wrist bone and do not leave space for decay until it reaches into the ulna.
And if it invades him, then strike the arm at the elbow at its joint.
And if corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow region: then there is death among the weak. And to administer more than that from treatment, is the quantity of strength.
And similarly do it for the foot, when corruption invades a finger, then strike at one of its nodes: and if it reaches the instep of the foot, then strike the whole foot. And if it rises to the knee, then strike the shank at the knee joint.
Now if corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill in that, unless dismissal and leaving the weak to death.
And the manner of striking the limb, or binding it is, to tighten the ligament below where you wish to strike: and tighten another ligament above that place. And let the attendant stretch one ligament downwards: and let the attendant stretch another ligament upwards. And you should separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a broad spatula, until all the flesh is revealed. Then strike it or bind it.
And it should be that you lay linen bandages from all sides, and the spatula does not touch the healthy area: and there is damage added to the sick person, and a hot pus forms.
And if there is an internal bleeding while you are working, then quickly cauterize the area: or place some blood-absorbing powders on it. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then attach the injured member with a suitable ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happens to a man in his foot, this is the same event that I tell you.
What happens is that a blackness occurs in his foot, akin to the smoulder which resembles combustion from fire: and this corruption first happens in his finger until it began to affect the whole foot.
Therefore the man treated himself after he saw the corruption invade his limb with his own illness, which he discovered due to his pain and its smoulder: and it occurred at the operation, and he was healed.
And after a long time has passed for him, the same corruption happens to him in his index finger of his hand.
He comes to me, and I tried to restore that excess with what I had placed on his hand from the medicines after cleansing his body: and the excess was not restored, it began spreading to another finger until it started affecting his whole hand.
He therefore called upon me to cut off his hand: and I did not agree with that, hoping for the return of that excess from my part: and I was also afraid he might die at the operation on his hand. Because the strength of the man was above the situation.
Afterwards, when he had lost hope in me, he returned to his own land. And news reached me about him because of what happened, and his whole hand was affected. He was then healed.
And I did not omit this recounting, only for it to be an aid on what falls within this kind of illness's category: and as a representation through which it is expressed and according to how it is handled.
On the care of Sinuses, and the quality of cathartics with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fatty parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged until a collection of pus forms; then it is punctured or cut, and what is inside comes out from the pus, leaving a vacuous place as if it were a cavity: and the skin above it behaves like a thin fabric that has been stretched. And it does not reach its end in its corruption, nor does it spread into the mouth, nor into the nerve, nor into the ligament; it deserves to be called a sinus: but is not called a fistula. However, if the space of this prolongs until the corruption spreads into one of these parts, then it is called a fistula or zuken.
And the care in such cases is to completely incise that skin as if it has been rolled out: and especially when it has been stretched thin like a fabric. And you can trust that it will not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
However, if you fear that the skin might adhere and not allow the final corruption to spread outwards, then take care with a cathartic: and it's like considering for a sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that comes out of it has an unpleasant odor, then cathartically treat it with the Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and zinnia, using equal parts. Mix them in a container and heat them over fire until the medicine turns red. Then it should thicken like honey.
Then take what you need from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, then cathartically use it on the sinus: and tighten its opening and pour the medicine into it to the amount of two hours.
Then extract it with exposure: perform this for days until the sinus is cleansed and the smell is removed.
And sometimes it is enemas with ashes' water that are used when this medicine is not available to you. And there's a way for you to take the wood ash of vine trees or ash from holly wood and pour that water over it. Then apply her to it and use this for enemas until you're convinced that the sinus has been cleansed.
And if the weak cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ashes' water, then use enemas with water and honey, to which a bit of powdered zinc has already been mixed. Or use enemas with honey and wine mixed together, as honey has the property of cleansing and washing away. Wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess of coagulation and drying properties in wine.
And when you perform this several times and are convinced that the corruption within the sinus is gone, then use it with what causes flesh to regenerate in it.
And you should take from the plaster of yafinicon: dissolve it with rose oil and stinging nettle wine. Or use it with certain medicines and other ointments; their properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus opening is tight and does not accept the cannula for enemas, then widen it with iron slightly. Or place inside it, wrapped in ointment, either Egyptian or basil ointment until it widens.
And similarly, if there is even an enlarged opening, then gather its edges with stitches and take the quantity that can accept enemas without any addition.
And similarly if the opening through which the pus runs is elevated above, then cut it down into the lower area within him, so that the pus can flow from there to below until under: because when the pus is constrained deep inside a sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around below him as you wish: then try to prepare the member with a preparation that allows the pus to flow out of it with ease according to what is prepared for you. Try so that nothing remains of the pus within it entirely: and take strengthening medicines which are put on signs, suitable for what you wish. And spread them over a piece of linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such size that it can accommodate (cover) the entire sinus. Then cut with scissors through the central opening of the sinus, somewhat wider than the sinus opening. Then spread another piece of ointment cloth over the cloth, according to the size of the opening: and place it on top of it in a position far from the sinus opening, so that the exit of pus from there is facilitated: and do not remove a large piece of cloth until after a few days once.
That which is above the sinus opening, that which you remove at all times, so that what accumulates in it from pus can go out: and to know whether the thing that flows out of it is much or little: or well digested or indigestible.
And after this again consider the location of the sinus itself, does the owner feel pain there or is there no pain? And is there a boil in it or is there no boil.
When your treatment thus extends and you see the material that comes out over the sinus opening, then you will know that the sinus is already adhering or closely approaching adherence. Therefore, then divide it in the morning or on the third day: and when you divide the wound, then change another cloth and renew the ointment.
If it emerges from the sinus after a long span of the subtle poison, then do not despair about its adhesion, for its healing is approaching. For there are humans who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and from them are those who act contrary to him.
If instead it emerges from the sinus after many days of undigested pus, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged: then add to the drying medicines, but let the doctors do this, so that they are medicines in their substance wet, and in their action dry: such as the unguentum dyafinicon, when it has been added to him an excess addition from zegi.
And from the very end of treatment, it is that you receive the unguentum dyafinicon and it is dissolved with rose oil, and it is fomented over it an old wine of equal substance.
Then mix it with it, and use it.
And it performs an action similar to this when the unguentum dyafinicon is not present, use honey, when you decoct it until it thickens and then use it. Or take myrrh, and aloen, and olibanum: grind the whole of it, and crush that with honey while it is still on the fire. Then spread it over the surface of the wound, and bind it to the sinus: and spread with honey that you have decocted until it has thickened, and crush a mixture over it, and place it on top of the cloth, and bind it.
And occasionally it is administered with long aristolochia and roots of the heavenly lily, and there is lily: and herb flour, and centaurium. Use these simples, or combined, cleanse them and sieve itself: and grind it over the honey I have described, and use it.
If the Sinus lasts and does not heal with this treatment, then you will know that there is a deep corruption within it. Or perhaps it is already making an impression in the bones, or in other hard parts, or ligaments. Then treat it with Fistular cure as provided beforehand.
¶ On the treatment of gangrene and worn nails, along with additional cuts to the finger, and severance.
Gangrene is an abscess that arises under the thumb nail of the hand or foot, and perhaps also in other fingers.
And when thus it lasts and the treatment is neglected, and the abscess is treated with hot application: or if corruption occurs and pus is emitted until it rots the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrupted it all, and perhaps the corruption reached to the gum until it produces a foul smell; then the end of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns to dark.
When then you treat it, following what we said about division, and if your treatment does not heal completely; then you must cut all the remaining excess from the nail with a blade. Then cauterize the wound after that. Indeed, an application of the cautery is very useful.
But if the gum is healthy and even the nail itself is also healthy, and holes vacuous in the nail have already squeezed flesh towards the inside, and begin to prick it themselves and damage it: then you should place a fine piece of the cautery under the corner of the nail which pricks the flesh, and push it upwards. And cut that flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh that is from medicaments causing burning and corrosion until everything has been removed. Then care that when the ointment is applied until it heals.
And if corruption has already spread into the mouth, then you must open that mouth and remove it: for the diseased mouth never heals while it remains there.
And if you see corrosion and decay spreading into a finger, then cut it off at the joint, according to what was previously mentioned in this reminder. Then care for it until it heals.
And if it happens through friction of the nail or impact: and there is intermittent pain in that area, then it is necessary to use a bloodletting on the affected part first. Then cut off the nail with an acute, sharp spathili (surgical knife) cutting across from above to downwards.
And be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for that would result in severe pain on the affected part and be a cause of the growth of added flesh at the location.
Then care for the site with what soothes the pains.
The finger that grows in some human hands might be entirely fleshly. There may also be bones in others of them; and perhaps there is a nail in it. Some of them grow from the joint's root, or its birthplace could be in certain joints of the finger. The one that grows at the joints of the finger does not move. And the one that grows near the joint of the finger may perhaps move.
Therefore, for the one among them that is entirely fleshly, its cutting is easy. That means you should cut it at its root with a broad spathili (a type of surgical knife).
The treatment for him whose birth is at the junction's root is difficult. Therefore, refrain from operating on him.
In the case where he is born at the last node near the tip of the finger, then you must make an incision into his flesh with a round cut up to the mouth. Next, place the opening of this tool in accordance with these other tools that fit together with it. Then take care of him until he is healed.
A consolidation that occurs between digits very often happens either due to the person's birth, that is, he is born with it, or from the consolidation of wounds, or from burns and similar incidents.
Therefore, one must remove that consolidation until the digits return to their natural shape. Then place between them a ligature, or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate them: or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the area consolidates according to what is needed.
And similarly, if there happens to be a consolidation among some fingers with the palm, then remove that consolidation according to how the preparation and fitting of the member's figure is done.
Section on Incision: An Error.
The veins are rolled up, large, filled with superfluous melancholic substances which happen in many parts of the body: and for the most part their occurrences are in the legs, particularly in the legs that walk, labor, and carry.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer bloodletting from the body with black bile at intervals by strong bleeding.
Then, for the bloodletting of the patient, use the basilica vein.
However, their treatment with iron is according to two methods. The first of them is that they should take baths and bleed out black blood. And the second method is to remove the vein itself and bleed it completely out.
As for cutting it, it is done according to this method. Firstly immerse the leg up to the ankle in warm water for quite some time, until the thick and fatty blood is dissolved. Then bind the leg of the sick person from the upper part of the thigh to the lower part of the knee with an application. Then cut the vein at one, or two, or three wide sections.
Then raise it, that is, draw the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and at the top it must be done by the phlebotomist for the sick person. Then cut the nail down to where it is possible: until an amount of blood flows out that you see sufficient, and that which the strength of the sick person can bear.
Then bind it up and instruct him to avoid foods that generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are filled and it harms the sick person.
However, the raising (or bleeding) of this is according to this method. Shave the leg of the sick person if there are many hairs on it. Then immerse him/her into the bath: or soak his/ her leg in warm water until it turns red and the veins swell: or exercise vigorously if there is no bath available, until the limb warms up.
Then cut the skin directly through the length of the artery section: or at its end near the knee joint, or in the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and scrape the vein from all sides until you see it with your senses: and there appears what you see going from red to black. And when it flows out of the skin, you will see it white as if it were a chord.
Then insert the rod under it until when it rises and exits through the skin: hang it with a blind hook gently.
Then cut another section near that section with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until you see it. Then lift it with the Radiums as you did before and hang it with another hook as you did first.
Then cut another section or multiple sections if needed. Then lift it up and perform the final operation at the heel.
Then extract it to the section that is above it.
And do that until you extract it from the higher section, or with all upper sections until when it exits completely: then cut it.
If however it does not obey you to extract or lift: then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it, then extract it. Or insert the rod under it: and turn your hand around all parts until it exits. And be careful not to cut too deeply. For if you cut too deep, it will be very difficult for you to lift her up and it may cause harm to the frail one above.
When you have extracted it all, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil or oil on the wound site, and attend to it until it heals.
If Vine (the plant) is contracted, having a curvature leading to rolling towards parts, and it is not as we said according to the straightness: then it must be that you bind over it across all parts of its curvature, and places of rolling of itself.
Then suspend it with hooks until you lift it all; and be cautious at your cut above it not to hit a vein or wounds: for it will be difficult for you to lift it off, or extract it. So keep your caution, therefore.
The form of the incident, according to how it heals Vine.
The form of the blind knot.
It is not healed in the same way as with other knots, nor does it have a sharp tip so as not to pierce a vein: and it has a large degree of bending that is soft. For if it were subtle, it would cut the subtlety of its point: indeed, there is an excess of size for it, as we said.
On the extraction of the femoral vein.
This vein is generated in the legs on hot lands, such as Alizay, and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot, thinly fertile lands, that is, those where no grass or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And indeed its generation is from the decay that occurs under the skin, just as it happens within bodies of snakes and roundworms, and worms generated between skin and flesh.
The sign of occurrence for this vein's outcome is that inflammation happens urgently in the arm. Then the area is vesicated. Then the vein begins to emerge from that vesiculated area, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore an end of it appears from there, then you must cover over the part of it that is as long as a piece of lead, which weighs up to one and a half drachms, until it reaches two drachms: and suspend the hanging weight from the arm.
Whenever therefore something emerges from there towards the outside, cover that with lead and mark it with a node. If it extends greatly, then take out its portion, and cover the remainder. And do not cut it to its root until it has completely emerged. Because if you cut it, it constricts and penetrates into the flesh: and it causes a pustule to occur, and pus in the area, and an evil ulcer.
Therefore it must be handled gently and extracted gradually until the very end of it emerges, so that nothing remains from there within the body: and thus this vein extends to a length of five palms and ten in some people. And now it reaches me, because it has emerged from twenty palms.
If however you come across it during your treatment time: then insert the root into its opening and puncture it from that opening long, with the body, until all that is inside of it in the material comes out: and administer putrefaction to the site with medicines for several days. Then care for it during the treatment of pustules.
This indeed refers to a vein which sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint, or within the foot itself. And multiple openings occur with it, and each branch exits through every opening.
Therefore treat her (the patient) as we advised in the division [of treatment], and along with what was previously mentioned.
Section 4: Concerning worms generated under the skin, it is called Bovine Brevity (or perhaps Bovine Distress).
This condition is named Bovine Distress in a certain land among us: hence, because it often happens to cows, and there is a single thin worm which is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it traverses the entire body, moving up and down: and during its movement one can perceive it by touch while walking from limb to limb, until wherever it breaks, it emerges into the skin.
And its production is from the corruption of certain body fluids. Just like other worms and snakes, that is to say, roundworms and hookworms, within the intestines.
And it is feared because of its malevolence. For when it moves within the body and rises to the head, and arrives at a spot, then perhaps it opens there and emerges, and destroys an eye: this happens often.
So when you intend to treat and extract it, then this does not occur unless during its movement and revelation by touch.
Therefore, one must bind what is above it, and that which is below along with the constricting ligament. Then cut above it, and extract him.
If it penetrates deeply into the flesh and you do not find him: then place a cautery with fire on the spot until he dies.
And what is feared more is its decay, which corrupts the eye, as we said.
If however you see that it has already reached near the head towards the eye, then bind under it a good forehead band. Then cut above it, and extract him.
And it is necessary that the sick person uses the purification of their body with medicines that dissolve bad pus and mucus.
And let him beware of foods that cause corruption.
¶ On cutting above the sickness Nakir.
This sickness is called Nakir in our land: it is pain that occurs in certain limbs, and then shifts from one limb to another.
And indeed I have already seen it myself, as I am telling you. I was summoned to attend a woman who is sick in some parts of her body. And she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after I stayed for one hour, I saw another swelling move like a little flame, as if it were a worm ascending to the shoulder faster than possible: let it be like silver in motion when it runs from place to place.
Therefore, the pain left that place and settled in the shoulder.
Then sit for an hour, and it will run through the rest of the body until it reaches another arm.
Then he told me that it was circulating throughout his entire body, as I had seen.
I was therefore amazed by the speed of its exchange from member to member. And indeed, before this, I had not seen this illness with my eyes to such an extent according to this manner. However, I have seen many who find the pain changing from member to member: and I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not consider that to be so, but because it was from those who were among the discoveries of dry body veins found in women: thus it is evident to the senses that that windiness has changed.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delightful and have moist bodies, of the veins that are hidden.
And when you wish to apply treatment to this, and the patient senses that pain: then if it appears to you as we said, then bind above it and below it quickly. And cut above it, until that confined windiness can escape: and burn the place.
And if you do not see it with your own eyes: then take care of it with the removal of the body and what drives out winds, and treat those winds with stinking pills, and pills from poppy seeds, and similar remedies.
¶ On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to their types and where they fall from the body.
Their variety is as follows: for among them there are those with large and small points; and concave ones, and flat ones. And among them are those that have three corners. And among them, which have tongues. And among them which have stars.
But those that are according to limbs in which they fall, are according to two modes. Or indeed the limbs are from the main limbs being concave, such as the brain, and heart, and lungs, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar to them. So when it falls into any of these limbs, and you see the signs of death that I told you about, then you must know how to extract that arrow from them, for death follows it wherever it is, in various dispositions. And when you do not see these bad signs and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it, and attend to the wound.
For signs when an arrow falls into the brain and penetrates the mouth, and comes out from the siphon above the brain: because things happen from it such as sweat constantly, and blindness, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and red tongue, and spasms, and confusion of intellect, and vomiting of choler. And perhaps blood may come out through the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is lost and the voice is destroyed. And it comes out from the wound area, a white moisture resembling putty. And it exits from there like bodily fluid.
If therefore you see these signs, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
However, the signs when an arrow falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple: and one feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in a hollow. And perhaps the movement of an arrow is similar to the beat of a pulse, and it runs from the wound with black blood. And this is followed by coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and convulsions. Know then that death is certainly descending.
And the sign of an arrow when it pierces the lung is the efflux of foamy blood from the wound. And the veins which follow the neck, are constricted, and the color of the sick changes. And he exhales the great breath, deeply, and seeks the attraction of cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the diaphragm, which is in the chest, then it's near thin ribs: and a great breath with intense pain, with sighing, occurs; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested will come out of the wound from food.
And if the arrow falls into the belly and lodges there, something of feces will come out from the wound, or fat, or an intestine that has already been torn. There is therefore no hope for its treatment, nor for the removal of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder and urine is discharged; and something proceeds from it to the external parts, and the pain becomes stronger than the sick person's condition: then you will know that it is fatal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, spatula, helper bone, vertebral process, sternal angle, thigh, and similar parts are diagnosed according to various positions based on whether the arrow does not find an artery or nerve: and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will tell you what I have seen about these arrows so that you may understand through this regarding your treatment.
What is this, because some eagle has fallen an arrow into the lacrimal sac of its eye, at the root of the nose. So I removed it myself from the other part, under the fat of its ear: and he was healed, and no harm befalls him in his eye.
And I removed another arrow of a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not get it out except for its thin end, with which it adheres to its own wood: and it was a large arrow from the arrows of the Turkish bow, made of soft iron, in which there are no ears.
So the Jew was healed, and no harm befalls him in his eye.
And I removed another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arab arrow, and that is what has ears. So I followed it between two guide wires: and it was already submerged in his throat. I managed to remove it carefully until I took it out: and the Christian was healed.
And I removed another arrow from the bird which had fallen into its belly: and we thought it would die from that.
Afterwards, thirty days passed for him and nothing had changed in his condition regarding it, so I followed the arrow. And I devised a plan to remove it, and I removed it: and he was healed, and no harm befalls him anymore.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen on his back and the wound had healed over it. Afterwards, when it had been seven years, an arrow came out from the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen into her abdomen, and a scar was formed over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and she did not experience any change in her usual condition at all, and the woman did not find him harmful in any way from her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen into his face: and a scar was formed, and remained, not finding him much pain: and many things like these.
And an arrow was extracted from the king's officials by me, which had struck him in the middle of his nose, and it was now slightly moving towards the right side: and the arrow was completely hidden.
So I was summoned for his treatment after the case of the arrow up to three days. I found the scar of the arrow very tight.
I examined her with delicate probing and did not feel it: indeed, he himself was experiencing a puncture and pain under his right side. I hoped that the said puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
I treated the area with a plaster containing an adhesive and digestive properties, believing that it would harden and show me a sign of the arrow, allowing me to cut over it. And there was no occurrence at the location that indicated the arrow had followed through the area.
I treated him with the plaster over it for many days: and there were no occurrences, and the scar hardened in the meantime: and he remained weak due to its removal until he felt an arrow within his nose on a certain day. And he told me this.
And he told me this. Therefore I placed a sharp medicinal ointment, a corrosive, for many days on it, until the wound opened. And having tried and probed myself, and felt the fine point of the arrow adhering to the wood.
Then I added through that sharp medicinal ointment in the wound opening until we could clearly see the end of the arrow: and it took me about four months with this.
Then, after the wound had expanded, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move them around without yielding, I would continue working on it with ingenuity and various tools until one day I began using forceps of proper size. According to their shape at the tip of the tool, I finally managed to extract it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed physicians say that the nasal cartilage does not get restored. Therefore I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the sick person was healed with complete health; nothing harmed her at all.
And I will tell you the quality of this type of arrow extraction: so that you may take this as a rule and understanding beyond what I did not mention.
Because the parts of this craft and their distinctions are not covered by the narration. Neither does this book cover it, nor does a wise artisan compare with little for much: and when there is what is present in front of him, he considers beyond that which is absent: and he finds a new operation, and a new tool at the descent of matters needing to be extraneous to this art when they occur.
I say that arrows do not leave the parts to which they are attached unless according to two methods. By means of its own force from the place where it entered. Or conversely from the other side.
And that which emerges from where it entered, or is the arrow proceeding into a fleshly place: and it is drawn out, and emerges.
And if it does not yield to exit at the hour when it falls: then you should release it for a few days until the flesh around it decays: and its attraction will weaken and its departure will occur.
And similarly if it becomes stuck in bone and does not yield to you for exiting, then release it as well for a few days: and each day apply the force and motion along with its attraction until it exits.
And if it does not yield to you for exiting after days, then you should bore around the area of the arrow in the bone from all sides with a fine tool until the arrows expand. Then draw it, and extract it.
If indeed the arrow is already removed from the body location, and hidden and concealed from perception: then seek it out with testing. If you sense it, then draw it out with certain tools that suit its extraction.
If you cannot get to it above it, due to the constriction of the wound and due to the length of the arrow deep within: and there is no opening, nor nerve, nor vein there: then press down on it until the wound widens and making it possible to extract the arrow.
But if there are ears around which it is held, then free the attached flesh in them from all sides, with every means you can use to do that, and try tools as well if not possible through persuasion of flesh in fracturing the ears and twisting them until they fit.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use the twisting motion of your hand with forceps on all parts until you make it come out: and use the most delicate technique possible so that the arrow is not broken, and making its extraction difficult for you and itself.
If you cannot remove it all at once, then let it go for a few days until the surroundings are rotten due to it. Then continue with it: indeed, the needle will be of help. If however, the blood flow opposes you, then administer what we said about treatment in its chapter: and guard your strength from the cut of a vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer the technique in every way that is possible for you to extract the arrow: and let this be with ease, and calmness, or slowly, and firmly, as I have told you.
And you must do it when you pull the arrow, so that it becomes weak according to the figure, according to how it was with the case of the arrow within itself. Because it is more beneficial. If however, it is not possible for you to do this, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
But the arrow that leaves from the opposite part of another, or now proceeds from it something to the outside: or makes a protuberance on the tip of the arrow due to sensation through the upper part of the adjacent skin and you see it protruding: therefore cut over it, and let the section be according to the amount that they take in such instruments.
Then pull her (towards you): indeed she becomes easy for removal.
But if she is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness, until the arrow imprints itself in the bone and expands herself: then pull her (the arrow) out.
And if not: let her go for a few days, then try again until she leaves (or exits).
But if the arrowwood of the arrow is there, then push it with her (the arrow).
But if the arrowwood fell and you are unable to administer a thrust: then insert that instrument concave into her, so that the concavity of it enters into the tail of the arrow: then push her with him.
But if the Arrow is concave, then push it with the instrument entering into it. The arrow is moved by that.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then you must make the entire flesh concave, in which there is poison: if it is possible for you. And then take care of her (the patient) with what is suitable for that matter.
But if the arrow falls in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side: and is close to what you touch with your finger because it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut, and be careful not to damage the vein, or nerve, and extract her.
Then examine the wound, if you see one, and attend to it until it heals.
And this is the form of the pincers used for extracting arrows.
They have ends similar to the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they catch onto an arrow, they do not let it go.
Many kinds of them are made from these, large ones and small ones, as well as medium-sized ones, according to the size of the arrow, its quality, the extent of the wound, and how it is constricted.
The form of the impelling instrument is concave.
And the form of the impelling device for the deaf.
This is how it is with the end of the device for the deaf like a radius, so that its entry into the concave arrow may be facilitated and pushed along with it.
¶ Concerning venepuncture.
The veins for venepuncture, which flow customarily through the body, amount to thirty.
Among which, sixteen are found in the head: two pulse veins, which are behind the ears and called 'the twos'; and two arteries that appear in both temples: and two veins that are located in the tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called 'looking veins': and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead: and the vein found at the end of the nose. And two guide veins, which are located in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins that are used for bloodletting in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it comes from the side of the sunflower: and the common name for this is the head vein. And the Black one. And the Middle vein, and it is composed of the branch of the Basilica and the branch of the cephalic: and they call this commonly the body vein. And the Basilica vein, and it is located on the domestic side: it is also named Titillicaris. And they call this commonly the belly vein. And the Brachial cord, and it is placed above the ulnar region: that is the one where bloodletting is performed, and that is the one which appears above the thumb in a clear manifestation.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger: and there are two branches for it.
And in the knee and in the foot, there are three veins. One of them is the vein which is under the curvature of the thumb on the domestic side. And the second one is the Saphenous vein: its location is at the heel on the domestic side. And the Nesse vein: its location is at the heel on the sunflower side.
And there are three other veins similar to those in the groin.
On bloodletting with two veins after the ears.
Bloodletting with two veins that are located after the ears is beneficial for old coughs, and headache, and earache, and bad head wounds.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I describe it. And this is done by cutting the head of the sick person: and the back of their head is rubbed with a coarse cloth at the place where the two veins are, using good rubbing action. Then the sick person should tighten their neck with a bandage until two veins appear. And the sites of these (two) veins are behind the ears at two depressed spots on the head. So search for these veins with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, there mark them with a hot rod.
Then take the bloodletting instrument, it is called the 'Incident'. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the bloodletting tool reaches the mouth of the wound. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein with the bloodletting tool at that location. And let the length of the cut be approximately two fingers joined together, or about that measure: and make as much blood flow out as you can.
Then bind it with the ashes, and release it until it is healed.
And now at the beginning of this book, there follows an incision into them and their cauterization.
Two arteries though, which are in the two times of bloodletting, contribute to benefit, for the ancient headache: and the weak, and the watering eyes frequently: and the discharge of excessive flowing liquids to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I tell you. Tie the weak person's neck tightly until two veins become clearly visible: and show that their pulse can be felt under your finger. Then, with these signs, apply a heated instrument.
Then lift the skin over the vein with your index finger and introduce a bloodletting tool below it, lifting the vein upwards. And cut it as you did with the other two veins: and make to flow from the blood according to the quantity needed for your need.
Then relieve the constriction of the patient and place your finger on the vein at one hour. Then place a cloth and small clothes over it, and tie them tightly above the constriction: and remove it until healed.
And now we refer back to those, and their incision, and removal at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of forehead bloodletting is after cephalic bloodletting, for the old complaints of the face: and for headaches, redness: and foul sores.
And the quality of this bloodletting is as I tell you. Amputate the sick person's neck along with the skin, until a vein becomes visible. Then take the tool that is called the Fossilium.
Place the prominent point which is at the head of the Fossilium over the vein and strike it with the tibia or with another tool in a similar manner, and let the blood flow according to the amount of force you use. Then widen the puncture in the patient, and tighten it until healing occurs.
And sometimes an opening is made with a broad bloodletting tool. However, it is not necessary that the bloodletting tool has a sharp end, like other bloodletting tools. Instead, it should have a broad end. And the bloodletting tool should be aligned according to the curvature: because there is a proximity of an opening: and perhaps when it is thin, the bloodletting tool may break within it.
The benefit of the two veins that are in the two lacrimal areas, each for one eye, is for scabies and redness on both eyes: and irritation in the eye, and discomforts on the face.
And the quality of bloodletting from these is for the patient to tighten their neck with the skin. Then perform bloodletting on them: and you should stand above his head.
And bloodletting should be done according to the curvature, somewhat along the length, with a small but broad tool, because there is no flesh in that area. If indeed the bloodletter is delicate at the extremity, perhaps it breaks.
Then let as much blood run out from your wound as necessary for you. And place them over the wounds, and tie them at night once, and release them.
Nasir's venous bloodletting procedure is aimed at acute fevers and severe weakness, as well as facial discomforts such as migraine headaches and redness that occur on the face: especially when it is recurrent.
And the quality of his bloodletting treatment is such that the patient should tighten their weak neck. Then hold the nose of the one with your left hand, and take a delicate and long bloodletting tool. Place it in the middle of the rabbit, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness. Because the vein does not appear to touch there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold your hand with the bloodletting tool slightly apart: and let the blood run out according to your need. Then tie that [the bloodletting] at night once. For it restores itself quickly.
Two of Guidegi's bloodletting treatments are helpful for constriction of breath, and the onset of leprosy, as well as melancholic discomforts, and impetigo and bad sores, and those that eat away, that is, herpes-like conditions.
And what quality of bloodletting is this that a sick person should be tightened under both his neck with the bandage: and the surgeon stands above the sick's head, and the sick sits on a chair.
Then for bloodletting take one tube that is approximately as long as the bloodletting procedure requires, slightly wider. Then remove from the blood an appropriate amount, or according to that which you see fit due to the necessity of the situation. Next, do likewise with another tube.
Then release the bandage and bind two tubes halfway around each other: so that the sick person is not burned. And let it be until noon. For the wound is healed.
¶ Concerning the bloodletting tubes of Alghabr. As for Alghabr's bloodletting method, it is helpful with respect to alcohol and gum decay, bad sores, and even cuts of the lips and mouth. It can also be used effectively on ulcers found within the nose and around the nostrils.
And the quality of these bloodletting procedures is such that you should have the sick person sit before you: and bind their neck with a bandage. Next, turn his lips and look at the two tubes: one is from the right lip, and the other from the left side of him. And each demonstration is shown through the stain on the vessel. And this is true: because there are small, dark veins around them. Therefore, make both cuts in an opposing direction of the incisions.
If however there is doubt upon you and you do not know which one it is: then aim towards the larger cut and the more obvious of them.
And similarly do with two (wounds) which are in the upper lip: and there is considerable custom with it; and strike down the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Regarding phlebotomy, venipuncture under the tongue follows head phlebotomy. Two veins that are under the tongue contribute to phlebotomy: it is useful that the head phlebotomy is for preparations in the throat, and nausea of the stomach, and the ills of the mouth.
And the quality of the one performing phlebotomy is that the sick person should sit between your hands in front of the sun: and lift his/her tongue, and look under the tongue from the side of him/her one vein, and from the other side of him/her another vein: and each color goes towards blackness.
Therefore perform both phlebotomies: and guard against touching your last hand upon the veins during the procedure. For there are arteries under it, and perhaps blood flow may occur from these arteries.
The three veins that undergo phlebotomy in the elbow are those in which custom dictates a procedure in all humans.
And phlebotomy of these occurs according to two methods. Or by piercing with a myrtle-stick phlebotome: or by applying oil for gentle descent: or by cutting with a surgical knife, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these there are forms that are broad and subtle according to the width of the veins and their tension. The form of a myrtle-stick phlebotome is broad as you see. And it is appropriate for veins, being full, proceeding, visible, thick ones, as well as those containing thick, turbid blood.
And this phlebotomy instrument is of lesser width and more slender in its extremities.
And it is suitable for performing bloodletting on small veins which contain subtle yellow blood.
But the basilica is one of these three types of vein for phlebotomy that proves useful. Because it extracts blood from the illnesses which are under the throat and neck, following the breast and belly: and it is appropriate for the phlebotomy instrument with the phlebotomat to be cautious about it, as it should be above fear of that place because there is an artery beneath. So if it goes wrong and adds to the phlebotomy point, it will hit that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore, it is necessary for the phlebotomist to use him with the pricking phlebotomy tool: indeed, let him be sliding against Alnisil.
If the basilica does not appear with a clear manifestation then it is necessary to remove that one and try another or search for another branch. Or use a phlebotomy tool in place of it, like the biceps vein. She is indeed clear and can be cut with the phlebotomy tool Anesil, as we said.
If you are performing phlebotomy from this one himself, then it is necessary before the constriction of the biceps that you touch the site until you recognize the pulse point. Then mark the site above with a hot iron, afterwards the biceps, and cut the vein in a concave section with the phlebotomy tool Alnisil, as we said. And let the blow not fall in the space where the artery is located.
And when you see that upon tightening the band, there is an expansion at the place you marked with the cautery, then that expansion is the pulse. Therefore, it must be treated accordingly.
And if you see blood rising at the time of bloodletting, like urine in a child, and it is thin, red: then you will know that it comes from arterial blood. Therefore, proceed quickly, and place your finger on it for a while, then remove your finger. If blood is therefore withdrawn (since it's withdrawn multiple times), then tighten the arm and release it: and beware that the patient doesn't move from this position due to fear, and let him be comfortable.
And let him not move for several days until he is healed.
And if no blood is withdrawn and you are unable to do so, and there's no medicine available at the moment for you, then cut into the artery if it appears to you. Its extremities contract and blood is withdrawn.
Or take a slice of the fijnut tree and grind it. Take half a piece and bind it over the place where the vein is to be bound, with bandage and wadding until another day.
Then if blood is withdrawn, it is good. And if not, then take care of it with him who was reminded before about the location where powders for bloodletting are used: and the removal of his blood is not difficult in many situations because of the scarcity of wounds and the possibility of bandaging from the arm.
The veins for bloodletting are useful, which draw blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body. Therefore, since it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalic vein, as we said.
And it is suitable for the bloodletting procedure that the phlebotomy be above the fear, because there is a nerve under it. If therefore he adds to the site of the bloodletting, and finds a nerve, it happens in that area of stupefaction, and his healing becomes difficult, and perhaps he may not be fully healed.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. But in some people it may be hidden, and it is subtle, and not visible: then you must put your bloodletting where you can find the vein, cut with an Alnus knife, and guide the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
On the Cephalic Vein. The phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein is useful because it draws blood from the head and helps alleviate eye ailments.
And it is necessary in this vein properly, if you wish, to puncture the Cephalic vein with an oil-based phlebotome or with a myrtle-based phlebotome: because it is healthier than all veins, as it does not have a buried artery nor a nerve.
However, when you are doing the bloodletting procedure, it is fitting that you aim with the phlebotome just above the head of the insect and look for a softer area: and it does not harm him if there was no discovery upon the first impact, so that he can be repeatedly pricked with the phlebotome.
However, perhaps there are some individuals who might develop an abscess when not treated with bloodletting during the initial percussion, but this does not harm them in any way.
The Utility of Bloodletting and Precautions to be Taken in its Application. The quality of bloodletting and the events associated with it come down to your consideration in its correction.
Firstly, you need to understand for what reason bloodletting should be done - it is administered only with the preservation of health and perseverance in its use, and caution against the onset of illness.
And for the bloodletting to be done through one of the three veins found at the bend of the arm, namely the cephalic vein, the femoral vein, and the basilic vein. And bloodletting should be done at the beginning of Spring on an empty stomach, truly, and in Summer: and Autumn, and Winter after digestion, when signs of fullness are evident.
And bloodletting should be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed from dawn each day.
However, bloodletting that is administered during illness does not have a set time; but when it is appropriate and necessary for that purpose, it can be done at night, or day, and at any hour, and at all times.
And it is not necessary to perform bloodletting on children until they reach fourteen years of age. And pregnancy does not require bloodletting unless from the fourth to the seventh day after menstruation. And old men do not undergo bloodletting, who have already passed sixty years of age.
And when anyone wishes to be bled for any reason: they should cleanse their intestines before bloodletting with a gentle enema, if there is much retained feces in them: so that noxious excesses from the intestines do not attract veins during bloodletting towards harmful limbs.
The patient is not subjected to bloodletting, that is, the nausea-inducing satiety: nor after drinking or recovering from drunkenness, until they are rid of this by them. The sick person with hydrocele.
And let bloodletting be avoided after a bout of colic, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and after sexual activity, labor, exercise, vigils, fasting, and anything that dissipates strength from bodily or animal vigor.
Then consider the subtlety of fluids beforehand, if blood is thick with food and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for this to be done.
Then, if something does not prohibit it, take a bath, or engage in some exercise to thicken the blood.
And place the bloodletting in his chest on the third day, as we said, and try to allow all bodily maladies out of him that day: such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily ills like labor, punishment, overindulgence, and similar issues.
And let his seat be surrounded by present things with which the habit of men runs in use from their aroma, fragrance, delight, and similar items through the possibility of quantity.
Then the bloodletter should sit above the blood basin which is higher than the point of bloodletting. Afterwards, he will extend his arm and the bloodletter will rub his hand on it twice or three times. Then he should tie the bandage with correction, and wrap it around twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, because when an unevenness or excess causes a constriction, then it prevents the flow of blood. Or if there is laxity, then too it prevents the flow of blood.
Then after ligation, it is necessary that the blood抽出者 rubs his own hands simultaneously together until the veins swell and become evident to the sense.
Then the blood抽出者 should cleanse the blood抽出部位 with a little oil, in an old-fashioned manner.
Then place his index finger of his left hand on the vein at the site where he wishes to perform bloodletting, slightly: so that the vein does not escape and percussion is set. For with veins you find what you discover like a fleeing chord at bloodletting: and from them is that which is full of wind. And when you place the blood抽出者 over it, it contracts under the blood抽出者, and the blood抽出者 gets carried away, and the blood抽出者 does not open the vein: and if he opens it, it is ligatured. Therefore, for this reason, it must be that the blood抽出者 is firmly held, and attentive to all these matters.
Then place down the blood抽出者. If therefore the vein is opened by one incision, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that incision in another place below that spot, or above it with a slight angle: if the spot is not reached.
And if it is reached or the patient becomes lax, then dismiss him for a day, or two days: and do not tighten the ligature. Perhaps it will attract a hot abscess. Nor should he enter the bath.
Then repeat bloodletting if he wishes it.
And if the opening is small, or blood flows subtly; and you measure to ensure not more quantity of blood escapes than desired: then repeat the bloodletting in the same hole according to its orientation, and add a little in the procedure.
And perform this with urgency before the site is closed, for the site closes in many people during surgery.
If you see it already closed though, then don't proceed over it at all, for nothing is excused in regard to you. And place something from the oil of fat on it: because it promotes the flow of blood. And this is better in this place than the oil itself, and than any other oils.
And similarly administer the oil fat in every bloodletting of yours, where phlebotomies involve needles at the prohibition of blood flow: and they do that with the tyrian alfarach and the sagzenea, when placed from one of them on the site.
Blood thickens and dissolves when it is coarse.
And if a large abscess should occur at the site of bloodletting, for this happens many times, especially to those who are not bled except that way or have a small incision in the vein, then hurry and place on the site a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated moderately: and tighten it for an hour because it dissolves.
And you should do that after the blood has flowed out from the same vein, with its full amount, or from another vein.
And if there remains any darkening or greenishness in the site after some days, it does no harm. And if you wish, place on it something from aloe or myrrh that dissolves: or something from the mint juice, that is, of cloves or similar substances.
And it happens quite often for abscesses and swellings to occur near bloodletting in the Basilica.
Therefore place your hand upon it, then if you find softness at your compression upon it, then that prominence is bad. Therefore, be cautious, as you place upon it something from what we said. For perhaps blood of the artery may flow from it.
But make a plaster with it where there is coagulation, so that the spot may harden. Then take care of it along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And you must take out from every person in their blood according to the strength of their health. And what becomes apparent from the color increasing over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it be expelled until it turns red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick: then expel it until it becomes finer; and similarly, if it is sharp, remove its sharpness until it disappears.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, needing extraction of blood with one method, that the phlebotomy should be widened on the vein, and be a lateral phlebotomist: and in the one who is weak, have it opposite to his condition.
And it is necessary that he extracts through tubes and makes the opening tight: better still than what is administered in vein phlebotomy is a cross section method rather than piercing.
And this method of phlebotomy is beneficial from the flow of blood and from cutting nerves: and it is more commendable and safer than phlebotomy through width and length.
And to whom it has been customary to come about through phlebotomy with syncopics, it is necessary that he eats before phlebotomy a moderate amount of bread soaked in water flavored with guaiac: or cayenne pepper if it's cooked; and from his blood extract him in three tubes, or four.
And if the patient's complexion has been cooled, then before bloodletting he should take bread infused with honey syrup or an aromatic honey syrup, or an aromatic syrup.
And if there should occur bloodletting among the gouty, and its cause is the outflow of much blood: then it must take broth water and a subtle aromatic syrup; and use aromatization with herbs, and coat his chest with that; and use what we said about division in chapter on gout from evacuation.
And if someone wants to empty his arm and release his blood again: it should be for the person whose bloodletting is due to abundant evacuation, and their strength is weak, that they should release the blood gradually according to the amount of strength over continuous days.
And if someone wants to empty their arm and release their blood again, and their body is strong: then that should be done seven hours later, or nine after the first bloodletting.
And if someone wants to draw blood from their body towards the opposite side than which it leans: it should be done on the second day or on the third day.
And in whose body there is already heated and increasing blood, causing fever to occur: it should be that one blood leaves from him once through the vessel, and a large amount of blood is removed from him. And extend the opening until gout occurs. After you have maintained all the conditions for bloodletting, and place your hand on his pulse at the flow of blood, so that death does not occur in place of gout. Indeed, this happens many times when the bloodletter is unaware and falls into negligence.
And it is not necessary when you are trying to relieve the arm and relieve blood a second time, when the vein's opening has already been closed, and there makes difficult the exit of the blood, that one presses upon it with congestion, and the ligature is extended quickly. And that thing is very bad indeed, even dismiss it until the second blood-letting takes place.
Or remove that which has coagulated from the blood with the sharpness of the phlebotomy tool in the opening of the vein, and place something of salt dissolved in water over it. And place something from tarry asphalt or zinc over it, and apply it with gentle compression until the blood comes out.
If indeed there is already an abscess in the vein, then remove it, and do not hold it until the abscess settles.
If necessity prompts a second blood-letting and there is no excuse, then either use the phlebotomy tool over that place, or elsewhere on the arm in another vein.
Then the cord of the arm is used for blood-letting at the location of the Fossa and Basilica, when they are not found and are hidden, because it consists of them.
And the quality of this blood-letting is that a sick person inserts his hand into warm water until it turns red and the vein appears distinctly.
Then, when it is inserted, apply it with a ligature with moderate constriction. Then the phlebotomy tool should be used gradually across it, not lengthwise, nor in a straight line, and there should be an ample opening so that your blood-letting method can operate effectively over the connection of the hand.
If blood flow is obstructed, then repeatedly submerge your hand in warm water, and allow the blood to flow into the water until you achieve what you require.
If however you find yourself in days of summer, then refrain from repeatedly immersing your hand in warm water. A great deal of blood flow is indeed put into the warm water during winter time.
This particular type of bloodletting is healthier than all veins, because there is neither a pulsating vein nor a nerve under it.
Bloodletting using the method of Salutation's hand on the right is effective in relieving ailments of the liver.
And the quality of this method of bloodletting is such that you would grip the hand with the ligament or your own hand after introducing it into warm water until the vein inflates and its sensation becomes very evident. Then, perform bloodletting by passing over it. And if you hit it completely, that will not harm it in any way.
And conserve, do not withdraw your hand with the bloodletting tool. For there are nerves of the fingers exposed under it from the flesh.
Then repeatedly immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow within it. For if you do not immerse it repeatedly in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's opening and obstruct its flow.
So when you have extracted the required amount from the blood, then place oil and salt over the vein so that it does not quickly harden or coagulate.
And similarly, you should do this with every tightened branch.
The reduction for his bloodletting is from his left hand, because it corresponds to spleen disorders: and similarly perform the bloodletting on him like you did in the second part equally.
The reduction for saphenous bloodletting is useful against illnesses which occur in the lower part of the body, such as symptoms related to the uterus and retention of menstrual flow, kidney issues, old sores on thighs and legs, and similar complaints.
And the quality of his bloodletting is such that the sick should immerse their foot into warm water and do rubbing until the veins overflow; then tie above the wound on the foot with a bandage. The site of the veins is indeed located at the heel, facing towards the big toe, and branches out from there into many branches on the face of the foot.
Therefore, the bloodletting should be performed on that larger branch of the veins or where they gather at the heel as it is better for health.
If you perform bloodletting on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And suppose your bloodletting is like crossing over the area you intend to bleed from, as if you are about to hit it. Let the person performing the bloodletting be named Nesil.
If the flow of blood is being obstructed though, then immerse his foot into warm water. And let the blood flow into that area until it is drained.
If the bloodletting practitioner goes wrong in the first attempt, then continue with the bloodletting upwards for some distance, because it is safe there, and you do not fear any harm when you avoid nerves as we said.
And similarly when the saphenous vein of the other foot is equal.
The location of the Sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel from the lateral side of the foot.
And the beneficial aspect of this bloodletting is, for alleviating ankle pain, when it's due to warm blood.
And the nature of this bloodletting is such that it should have access to the patient's bath and cool down; and encircle the ankle bone from the side to above the heel by four fingers, with a long slim tool: for it does not appear otherwise.
So when it becomes visible, then for the bloodletting you should perform as much as your skill allows, or according to the inversion: and it is better if you make an incision into her or cut through with a section. The location of this is for the benefit and it is extremely hidden in many people.
The location of this is for the benefit and it is extremely hidden in many people. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the senses: then for bloodletting choose one of its branches, and that which appears in the heel and towards the earlobe will be it. And beware of nerves, and make flow from the blood as much as you can wish.
Then release the constriction and place a piece of leather over the bloodletting site, and tighten the area. Indeed, it heals quickly.
¶ About Ventilation, and the nature of its use.
Ventilation can be caused by horns, and by air, and by wind.
And indeed, Ventilation occurs in two ways. Concerning incision and bloodletting: one method is ventosa without incision.
And this type of ventosa which is performed without an incision, can be done in two ways. Or it could be done with fire. Or it can be done without fire.
And the places on the body where bloodletting is performed with incision and bloodletting are fourteen. And there are fourteen places on the body where bloodletting is performed with incision and bleeding. One of these is Alnocrati's ventosa, which is at the very back of the head: another is Alkehel, which is in the middle of the neck; there are two Alhagdahim ventosas, being the two layers of the neck from both sides simultaneously: a ventosa on the chin, under the jawbone at the lower part of the mouth; a ventosa of two scapulae; one ventosa above the end of the tail for Alachosos; two ventosas of the forearms, they are in the middle of the two arms; there are two ventosas of thighs: and two ventosas of kidneys.
And indeed the ventosa does not draw blood from small holes scattered in the flesh. Henceforth, its power does not fall from them as it is with bloodletting by phlebotomy. Nor should the ventosa be administered with fire or without it for any illness that arises from excessive fullness until the entire body is relieved.
If necessity prompts to use the ventosa for illness or due to habit at any time during the beginning of a month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time may be.
This is because there are people who when their blood increases in him, until it needs to be extracted through ventosa, they find heaviness and soreness on his head.
And among them is he who finds fullness and redness on his face, head, and neck. And among them is he who finds itching on his face and forehead, and darkness, and confusion of vision in his eyes.
And among them is the person who trembles at the place of their windpipe. And among them is he whose laughter increases. And among them is the person who finds the taste of blood in their mouth: or the tongue swells and ejects blood. And among them is he whose sleep increases. And among them is he who sees blood and redness, and dead bodies, and wounds, and things similar to those in his sleep.
So when we see something from these [conditions], and especially if it occurs on the third day of a month: then we predict that there will be wind starting after passing two or three hours from the end of the day.
The discomfort of the wind in the neck is: because it tends towards heaviness in the head, and what is released goes to the eyes. But it should be that this occurs after a full body evacuation.
And this is indeed what is known as the cephalic bloodletting wind.
And it is not allowed to use this (therapy) for those with cold constitutions or where there's phlegm. For it brings great harm to her.
And because of that, it is not allowed to use these for old people and those with cold ailments on their head.
Those who are constantly with her (medicine), she generates forgetfulness for him.
And for that reason, it is necessary to instruct the Venerable one (Ventosator), so that he abstains from his hand with the vomiting potion only in short intervals, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Venerisatio or Alkehel is akin to the bloodletting of Fucus and the bloodletting from Basilica. And due to this it brings on asthma-like conditions, constriction during inspiration, tearing of instruments during inspiration, coughing, and fullness after use.
And it is necessary to apply the Venerisator (Alkehel) only locally, because if it's placed lower down, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
Venerisatio or Alhagdahim, however, causes pain in the head and eye affections, and headache, perforation, and toothache pains: it is akin to bloodletting from the Basilica.
And it is necessary to instruct the Venerable one (Ventosator), not to press his hand with scarification: so as not to hit a blood vessel and cause bleeding.
Venerisatio at the chin leads to alcohol accumulation in the mouth, and gum decay, and similar issues that occur inside the mouth: it corresponds to bloodletting from Alieherich which is situated on both cheeks.
Venerisatio using spatulas results in the formation of Alkafa (a kind of heat rash), due to twisting and warmth.
Venerisatio of the interior parts of the two alburnum (a kind of vessel), results in a restorative effect similar to bloodletting from three veins: Fucus, Basilica, and Cephalic. Since it draws blood from all those fine vessels present within the flesh: and these small veins draw from other larger veins until the pull reaches the three main veins.
And it is necessary that you instruct the Windicator not to proceed excessively in incisions: because there is a flesh-free area, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The suction apparatus that is used for evacuation, when applied to the anal hemorrhoids and lower ulcers, produces bleeding.
And it is necessary that you instruct the Windicator to use a large suction device and one made of air; because a strong suction is required in this area, and possibly delicate suction devices might break, leading to incisions during treatment.
The suction devices for the legs reduce their symptoms by causing a clear diminution; as they draw blood from the entire body and bring old pains to the kidneys, uterus, and bladder: they provoke menstruation and cause thirst, loss of appetite. They stand in place of phlebotomy involving the two saphenous veins and other leg veins.
However, they greatly weaken the body and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the improvement of the Windicator for the thigh is akin to the improvement of two Windicators applied to each leg.
The quality of the position for the Windicator is to place the suction in the first vacuum and apply a moderately heated suction; do not prolong the position of the Windicator but instead place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that fluids come to the site at an equal pace: do not stop the process until you see the area turn red and swell, and a sign of blood appears: then, make incisions, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider the arrangement of the body parts.
For those who have tender flesh, rare and few hairs, it should be incised only once, not more; to prevent the area from becoming infected.
And instruct the practitioner of ventous treatment, to extend the incision and go slightly deeper. And regulate the suction with ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is a thickening in the blood, then you should incise it twice. Indeed, the first incision is made to allow for thinning of the blood and its liquidity. And in the second, it's to thoroughly investigate and meticulously extract thickened blood.
If the blood is extremely feculent (thick), then a third incision should be made in the ventous treatment: so that the final stage can be achieved.
And for the final stage, when we wish to extract blood gradually or in parts, it is sufficient for us to make a single incision. If we intend multiple extractions of blood, then we perform several incisions through the ventous treatment process.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it becomes necessary to perform deep incisions. And an equal point of conclusion for such incisions is the depth of the skin.
¶ What is that which must be administered from oils when in the position of Ventosarum, and what should the ventous practitioner beware of.
Indeed, for skin that is thick, tough, dark, and the pores are tight, one should grease the areas to be treated with opening, soothing, resolving oils. If it's in summer time, then use oil of almond, or oil of vinegar, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from the seeds of cucurbits.
And if it's in winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or chamomile oil, or sassafras oil: similar preparations are to be used.
If there is a need for warmth and it is excessive, make it cold: then let the oil be bitter almond oil, or oil from myrrh, or white oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
If fever is caused by many porridges, it affects the flesh: then it must be prohibited from oil and those who washed their Venter's areas after food with rose water or with cold water or with warmed water or with water of cucumber or with water of portulaca, and similarly with these.
That is, for someone whose blood is filled with much moisture, wash the Venter's areas with vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similarly with these.
For those who have excessive affections, wash their Venter's areas with old wine, or with water of Samsu, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similarly with these.
And it must be that Venter washing is done in a bath or in its shadow. Or it should be given after leaving the bath for an hour, or two hours.
And it must not be that anyone sleeps after Venter washing.
What is the measure that should be taken for regulating Venter sand (an ancient term possibly referring to 'venters' or 'glands') or bloodletting before Venter washing.
AND after this, you should consider firstly: then if the Venter or bloodletting is choleric and binds to his blood's sharpness and inflammation, then it must receive cooling measures, like the pomegranate's flesh. And also eat endive with vinegar and lettuce, and garlic, and parsley: and similarly with these.
And impose his diet on chickens and fowls' flesh stirring activities, as well as cooked food mixed with herbs. Like this for him.
And for those who have a cold constitution, they must take syrup from honey, or almond syrup, or an infusion made from the seeds; and they should drink fragrant medium wine that is between old and new. And it should be advised that they consume small quantities of food. And impose his diet on chickens and rabbits: and birds such as sparrows, that is, small fowls: and the young of wood pigeons he should eat.
And it is necessary that the amount of liquid in a person's diet be greater than the amount of food: and certain individuals should take drinks such as carot and salicylic medicine or musk, that is, muscat or allisilite before wind treatment. Before bloodletting, or after it: this will strengthen the main limbs and refine the blood. And it is not necessary for them to take that in heated liquid.
¶ On Wind Treatment withoutScarification. Wind treatments that are performed without scarification involve placing them over the kidney, spleen, ankle joints, and above the belly button, navel point, kidneys, and buttocks. This is because these body parts do not tolerate scarification on themselves.
And there is no concern for these treatments unless there's an attack from the blood within to the body part; as we place Wind treatment over the nipples during the sickness of flow. We use them to alleviate the cold wind that infiltrates within a limb: as we place Wind treatment over the belly and navel. For indeed it dries out the member, and warms it up, and removes pain because it resolves that wind.
It is also placed over the kidneys when there is excess moisture or a stone occurring in them. For through its force of attraction perhaps it opens the excess moisture, or removes the stone from its place.
Similarly, it is done when it is placed over the spleen and liver where there is wind to be soothed within both.
And these winds are administered with water during only sectioning. And they are sometimes administered with fire as well.
And they are sometimes administered with warm full water in pleuritic illnesses: and this is so that the Winda (or wind) is filled up, and there is a large amount of hot water alone, or water to which herbs suited for this have been decocted.
The form of Winda (wind) administered with fire.
Let its aperture's size be two fingers opened wide according to how we have formed it. And the depth of it should be half a palm. And let its width on the side be near the middle, a small hole as large as what enters into itself with the needle: made from air alone, or citrus peel, broad edges, soft, equal, smooth ones such that it doesn't injure the body at its position above it, and there should be a rod in the middle of it made from air or iron where a candle is placed with fire.
And now this wind is made large, larger than we have described, and that other one somewhat smaller, according to the severity of his illness and his age.
Winds for children and weakened individuals are different from those for adults and larger-bodied individuals.
The quality of placing this fumigatory with fire on the member is as follows: light a wick made from linen in an appropriate manner or a small candle from beeswax and place it above the middle rod that is crossed in the middle of the fumigatory. Ensure the fire's heat is focused around the lower part of the fumigatory to prevent the body of the sick person from being burned.
Next, place it on the member: and let a finger be placed over the hole that I mentioned until when holding the fumigatory. While we are in need of it, remove the finger, allowing vapor to rise over this hole, and immediately the fumigatory will clear.
Then light the flax oil according to its manner and repeatedly use it if you need it.
In the case of a Ventosa (a type of fumigatory) that is used in pleurisy illness with water, there is no cross rod or hole, and it is not applied unless filled with water and placed solely on the member.
And this is its form.
And the larger the Ventosa, the more water it can hold, which makes it better.
¶ Concerning the hanging of Blood sugars.
Blood sugars are not administered in many cases, except where there is no possible position for fumigators due to their size like the lips, gums, and similar parts. Or on a bare member from the flesh, such as a finger, nose, and similar parts.
And the quality to use them is: using the sponges from the Blood sugar which are in sweet waters, cleanse them of putrefaction.
Then they should be bathed daily both in day and night in sweet water until there is no longer any hunger in them and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body should be cleansed first with bloodletting, and with emetics. Then cleanse the diseased part until it turns red. Then place something over it.
And when they grow, and fall off, and it becomes possible to induce suction with an emetic at the site, then this is the final stage in treatment: and if not, then cleanse the area with vinegar. Then wash it thoroughly with water, rubbing and squeezing it.
If the course of blood extends after the case of Blood sugar, and there is this remaining: then immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it over it until the remaining thing subsides.
If the blood increases, then sprinkle it with ground wheat or gall and similar things from styptics until the blood stops.
Or place on the site halves of boiled bones: and remove them, until the beans adhere to the place, for then blood is stopped.
And it must be that if Blood sugar is necessary, when possible, one should change these.
If however Blood sugars are prohibited by suspension, then cleanse the area with fresh blood. Or bind the point at places until something comes out from the blood. Then place them, for they stick immediately when they sense something coming out of the blood.
When you wish them to fall, sprinkle something from ground aloes, or salt, or ashes over them: and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures, and dislocations, accidents in bones.
Know, my children, that many doctors and the crowd boast about this chapter, and those who have never inspected an old book or read a single word from it.
And for this reason, the moderation of knowledge in our land has been deprived. And I have never profited from it in any truly good way, and I have not acquired what I can only acquire through the length of reading old books and studying above understanding them, until I have extracted knowledge from them.
Then by adherence, experience, and study over the longevity of my life.
And now I have described to you everything contained in that which is encompassed by my knowledge within this chapter: and beyond what remains from my experience after abbreviating it for you, freeing it from the occupation of elongation, abbreviating it at the end of abbreviation, showing it at the end of declination: and I have shaped it into many forms derived from the forms of instruments used in it, as with addition to declination, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Head II.
It is necessary that we say in the introduction of this chapter, the main points of discussion and chapters, to which understanding leads at first, the artisan towards the station of their truth: namely, let those who are with you, and ready to learn, know or start learning this noble art, and others from you.
I say that when someone experiences a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or any other case, then one must first proceed to perform bloodletting on him and relieve himself, or both at the same time: if there is nothing forbidding this, such as weakness of the body's strength; or it is he who has experienced something from those things that happened to a young person, or an old decrepit person: or it is time for intense heat, or intense cold for a long period.
Then let him be content with his food, cold spices and fowl meats, as well as thin soups: abstain from wine, and fatty meats, and be filled up from foods and any food that fills the blood veins. Until when you are free from the heat of sweating and do not feel any discharge of pus to the member: then the invalid returns to his first regimen according to his accustomed routine.
When then the broken mouth begins to restore itself, it is necessary that the invalid consume foods rich in nutrients, heavy, large ones which contain thickness. Such as food made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, feet, guts of fowl, eggs, and fresh fish: also thick wine, and similar items. For with this regimen the healing of the fracture occurs more quickly and better.
And you will know that broken bones in men who are at the start of old age, and decrepit ones, cannot always continue and strengthen according to their nature due to drying out of their members. They only continue and consolidate what is within them from the end of tenderness like those in young boys.
However, nature joins over the broken mouth from every part something similar to glue, in which there is thickness, to which it adheres and tightens itself until it sticks together, and binds together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, as it was initially, until it does not prevent anything from its operations: for this reason, it becomes necessary to place nourishment for the sick food, in which there is weight, and viscosity, and thickness, as we said.
And you will know that the species of fractures are various, according to the diversity of the members: because a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull bone: and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone: and similarly all other limbs exist differently among themselves: and I came with the recollection that in his chapter he presented in detail, he distinguished every species of fractures from each other. And the species of bone fractures are also differentiated among themselves.
Because there is a curved fracture, and beyond that, stones may occur. And sometimes a fracture occurs along the length of the bone: and there are fractures where stones appear, that is, stones, and additions proceeding from them, as occur in a reed when it is fitted with a knife for writing. And not proceeding: there is a fracture with a wound and rupture at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And for every species there is skill or an appropriate tool for its restoration, as the recollection will bring to mind separately in their respective places.
And from it, the kind of bone fracture is recognized, which includes its curvature and its height. It becomes visible to your senses, and you can hear it when you press it with your hand.
When therefore there is no twistiness visible in the place, nor sound upon touch when you are touching the mouth with movement, nor did the inexperienced find great pain; then there is not there fracture, indeed it is possible that there may be a twist or small crack: so one does not need to move it with your hand and total compression, indeed place it under the remedies above which were recalled, after that moment which fits the location: then the constriction is tightened finely.
And know that when the place is curved and divided into two parts, beyond which there may be tears at it, but nonetheless all the part moves away from its own comparison: then you must start from your own time for the correction of it, leveling it before an inflammation hot occurs to him.
And if an inflammation hot should occur to it, then let him abstain for some days until the inflammation has ceased. Then, level the affected part according to any method that can be found by its gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of him and leveling him is easier than in bone where tears occur.
Then tighten it according to how you remember it.
And if there are tears in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts if there is a hand or leg. Or with your hand if the member is few. Or with two ropes, or with rope and hand.
And let your position be to place the member over an equal place according to its natural figure until when the parts of the broken member are extended. Then try to make those additions with all ingenuity and according to any method possible in their places: and beware according to your strength, that no pain or injury occurs due to your operation on the weak one, nor should you try too hard; instead try according to your strength to apply one of two bones together with its partner, according to better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour, that you test and touch him with your own hand. And if you see anything different there, correct it, and adjust that by the measure of your power.
And beware of severe stretching and strong compression, as many fools do. Indeed, many times this happens due to their operation, resulting in pus-filled hot spots or constriction in the limb: as we have already seen from their numerous operations.
Then attach after equalization and suitable operation, and the tightening of that limb, and peace, and tranquility: and warn the patient about it. And make him beware not to move himself during his waking hours and his dreams during his turning, shaking, and evacuation, as well as all his movements with his last strength. And make him aware not to place the limb in the position that follows pain. Which is that when he feels pain or injury in the position of his limb, then it is necessary to change its position from that one to another where he does not feel pain.
And when dealing with him, make sure his position is equal and straight, so that there won't be any curvature in the limb during its recovery.
And the quality of the tightening of a broken limb is as I describe.
Know that limbs fractured vary in their thickness, size, and shape.
Those that are small among them, like the arm, finger, and knife edge, then it should be a soft, fine bandage. Those among them that are large, such as the thigh and leg, must have a broad, thick wrapping within them.
Because the broad band connects the large member and constrains it equally from every part, so that it does not penetrate itself into the mark.
Then, after your evacuation, start by placing the appropriate ointment for that on it from an equation, on the soft pad over the site of the fracture itself. Next, start to envelop the band over the site of the fracture three times or four times, according to the size of the limb: and hold your hand firmly with the band.
Then proceed with it to the upper part from the site of the fracture, and hold less firmly than you did when constraining the fractured site. Then extend yourself with the enveloping at the site of the fracture slightly, and gradually alleviate the constriction until you achieve a large recovery from the healthy area.
Then take another dressing, and envelop it again over the fractured site in turns. Then proceed with the envelopment to the lower part from the fracture. And let your procedure be in the constriction of the envelopment and its alleviation, as we described in the first upper envelopment.
Then place between the envelopments a soft pad or cloth with which to even out the curvature of the fracture if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything in that area.
Then envelop over that other dressing. Then level over these envelopments star-shaped bandages immediately, if there is no inflation or pus at the site, and do not apply a warm compress.
If there is an inflation or abscess within it, then place over the affected area that which holds the abscess and removes the inflammation, and release it after a few days. Then, when you have treated her in this manner, tie (secure) over it then stars.
And let the stars be made from the middle parts of a reed that is cut, shaved and formed wisely. Alternatively, they may be made from wood used to create sieves, which are made from pine or geraid (which refers to palm fronds), or calingi (a type of material). The width of all stars should match this form and have the same figure.
However, it must be ensured that the star which is placed over her allows for a slightly larger and wider weave than the other stars. And the length of the stars should match whatever size or suitability fits to member from magnitude.
Then, bind over the stars with another strip, according to the first tightness of the binding. Then, bind it from above with threads in an orderly manner, as we have instructed about the binding. And make sure that your binding is tighter than the fracture location: and the more extended it becomes from the breakage point, the less tight should be the binding.
And you must have threads that are medium in thickness and fineness, made from soft flax.
Because if the threads are thick, as I've seen in operations of tying stones, there is a great mistake: because the binding falls outside its quality with them.
And again, very fine threads do not fit: because you cannot obtain through the binding with them what you want.
And it must not be less than a finger's width between one star and another.
If a sick person is wounded through the extremities after tightening in healthy places: then place under them a soft padding or processed wool until nothing is harmed from that.
When however there is a fracture with displacement, and a disruption occurs in the skin, I treat it with reminiscence of the matter in chapter two distinctly.
And know that not every broken member needs to be bound with braces from the first day. That is because a large member does not need to have pins inserted into it right away, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the event of being attacked by cold.
And this is the method of bandages, which the ancients used to restore, that they apply over a fracture and dislocation.
A simplified method of bandaging, commonly used for restoration after a fracture, is suitable for various constitutions, particularly for women and children: because it acts on what is not overcome by heat or cold.
And the way is to take from the mill powder and the wheat bran which hangs on the walls of the mill during grinding: make it just like that, except筛it with a sieve through the flour: and apply its preparation not thick nor thin. Then use this.
Another method of bandaging, restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists. Recipe: Myrrh, lavender, acacia, wormwood, and mugwort; the juice of all is mixed with three minims of myrrh, and five minims of aloes from each kind, and twenty minims of alethil. All are ground together and mixed with alethil water or with wheat bran if the constitution is weak. Then use this plaster. Indeed, it is a good compound, healing broken bones quickly and benefiting many people.
A method of plastering, which also heals fractures and twists. Recipe for mixture, and measure, and white alum, of each a quarter of myrrh, and an ounce and a half of frankincense. All are ground in large quantities and sifted, then made into a solution with water or starch until it can be applied.
The method for applying the plaster in cases of dislocations and bones that have been removed from their place: it alleviates pain associated with them, as well as the tearing and breaking of bones. Wool is taken, it is made succulent, and it is immersed in vinegar, and cooked in oil: it is placed over the site.
And indeed, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, but it is good for soothing hot pains, and it expels pains specifically.
The method for applying the plaster that heals broken bones. Take the leaves of dumb figs and the leaves of wild apple trees: grind all of them, and make a plaster from both.
The shortened method for applying the plaster during bone fracture healing: and when you wish to resolve the remaining pain. Recipe for the root of almond, and chamomile, and flowers of calendula, and herb flour, all in one part: everything is ground and made into a mixture with wine if there is no heated member.
If it is heated, then mix that with water that has been boiled with coriander or just use water, and use it.
The method of applying a stronger dressing during healing than this initial one, when a hard scab occurs during the restoration of a limb. Recipe for the root of altea, seeds of linseed, balsam, meadow saffron, samson's lousewort, and the flower of violet, as well as chamomile, all in equal parts. Each is finely ground and mixed with willow water, or sweet water, or wine. This entire process is done according to the heat of the member and the calmness of its heat.
However, Hippocrates did not say in his book that something should be placed over a broken member during its restoration, unless it is made from snail slime and oil: nothing else; he instructed that it should be of medium thickness between the dimensions (grossitude) and fineness (subtility).
However, Galen recommends using things to be placed over a broken member during its restoration, which have the property of dissipating heat, such as myrrh, aloes and frankincense, and similar substances among those we described.
The method of dressing that promotes healing and alleviates injury and pain. Recipe for the mixture of mugwort, chickpeas, human hair roots (incisors), or bird feathers, and altea, in equal parts. They are ground finely and sifted, then made into a mixture which becomes the dressing.
The quantity required is that which ensures the bandage remains in place. Then, you should observe whether if there is no weak pain or itching, and the broken mouth does not move from its place: then do not dissolve it for many days. If itching occurs there instead, or an annoying pain, or swelling: then proceed and dissolve it immediately, and remove the dressing from him. And take a soft cloth, or a moistened sea sponge: immerse it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching stops and the pain is soothed.
If itching occurs there instead, or an annoying pain, or swelling: then proceed and dissolve it immediately, and remove the dressing from him. And take a soft cloth, or a moistened sea sponge: immerse it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. Then cut off the member and let it rest for one hour. Then place a woolen cloth that has been soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose-scented oil, over it. Secure it with the cloth overnight until you are relieved of the warmth from inflammation, allowing for the relief of the member's swelling and easing of its pain, then remove it.
Then apply the dressing to the wound in a fine manner and use a small plaster. Do not tie it too tightly with your own force initially, nor while using something soft together with it, until it heals.
If you see pus, redness, pain, swelling, and all other symptoms have been completely removed, and if you no longer need any dressing or compression, then apply the same procedure as you did initially evenly.
If none of the things we said happens to the member, then do not release it until after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when twenty days have passed and you see from the solution of the member as it appears to you, according to what we said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh over it: add more than your initial compression in the bandage. Also, add more in the thickening of food for the sick person according to their previous remembrance.
If you see that the fracture area is now drying out and thinning more than necessary: then you will know that the nutrition is being prevented from reaching it. Therefore immerse it with warm water everywhere where you have immersed it, and let this be done for all three days, and ease the compression moderately.
Through this procedure, nutrition flows to the member, and it heals quickly.
That which the foolish restorers do with a fracture of a limb by other means, when it does not get restored first as it should and gets restored according to its twistiness, is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were straight, they would have said that in their books, and operated on it with it.
And I did not see any trace of them there at all, and it would be better if this was not done.
¶ On the matter of accidents in the head.
The species of fractures are various and its figures many; and the causes of it are distinguished.
For a fracture is one that occurs due to impact with an instrument: and the impact removes all of the bone up until it reaches the sinus, which is under the bone, just as an axe cuts through wood. And because of this, this type of fracture is called the Axial species of fracture.
Or a tool hits part of the bone and hits its face, but does not penetrate to its end through cutting: and this type of fracture is called the Kalaan species of fracture, that is, total avulsion.
And there is a wound from two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture from rubbing or grinding, and the cause of it is impact with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar events.
And this kind of fracture is also penetrating, which already approaches the periosteum, which is under the bone; or it's within the surface of the bone. And there is a wound from these two fractures as well, either small or large.
And there is a fracture that occurs within the bone like the thickness of a hair: and it's a small crack, for this reason it is called the Capillary species of fracture.
And from them is the fracture which happens due to chance or stone打击 and similar ones that cause the plate of bone to enter the insides, and it makes a concavity: as happens with air bellows when they are struck, and part of it goes into the insides.
And indeed quite much happens to the heads of bone cavities as with the heads of children.
And all these kinds of fractures are separated into parts, and I will mention them with the reminder of that whole thing in its place.
And we know all these types of fractures through their identification upon them, and investigation with probes, and removal of putrefied flesh which is above them.
The Capillary species is recognized by this: it appears above the mouth, is scraped away, and greased with a wax preparation: for indeed, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, first consider the patient's condition. Then, if you see through these circumstances signs that indicate a clear manifestation on fear, such as vomiting cholera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of voice, convulsions, acute fever, ejection of eyes and redness in them, and similar occurrences due to various circumstances - without doubt, they are not healed. And if you see non-fearful circumstances and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
This means, if you receive a wounded person first who is getting worse: and this happens during the winter days, then it is necessary that you strive for the removal of bone before the fourteenth day following all circumstances.
And if it is during the summer days, then you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone becomes corrupted from pus, and those accidents that we described occur.
If the fracture has already reached the layer touching the brain and is small with an attractive force, then you must proceed to enter the broken and ground-up part as I instruct you.
And it is as though you are cutting off the head of the wound and removing over the mouth according to whatever possible manner for you: and according to the shape of the wounds, and what is light on the weak.
And if it happens to you during the examination that there is a flow of blood or a warm pus, then oppose it with what needs to be done. And it is to fill the space with wadding soaked in wine and rose oil, and to let the wound rest until the pus settles, and be secure from the flow of blood. Then proceed with the treatment of the bone and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method involves entering the mouth with the closed lower teeth: and this is its form.
Then administer another lower incisor after spreading them slightly further apart: and this is its form.
Then also administer yet another lower incisor even wider than the second one.
And the second method is to have a variety of lower incisors with you: some will be wider than others and some will be shorter than others. They should have sharp ends and be made of iron or malleable metal. Use them carefully in striking over the lower incisor, so as not to hit the head and injure it.
If the mouth is strong and hard, then it is necessary to puncture around its circumference before administering the incisors with the so-called chisels that are not deep: and they are not named in this way unless it is because they do not penetrate the edge of the bone to that which is behind it: therefore, for the end of the chisel being round on what is below its sharp head, similar to a small margin prevents submerging and penetrating through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to receive from these drills a large number, of which each one should correspond to the thickness quantity of bone until there comes before you every drilled piece: whose sharpness in length and shortness amount shall be according to the quantity thickness of that bone.
And this is the form of three types of drills, or trepans.
As for the quality of drilling through a fractured bone, it is this: you place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been pierced. Then change the drill to another place, and place whatever has the quantity of thickness corresponding to all the hole or approximately that.
Then cut with the Incisors that is between all the hole from the bone: and make that slightly finer than you can on top of that end of thinness, as we said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument prepared for this, like tongs, and fine drills.
And you must take every caution so that the drill or any of the incisors does not touch anything in the sinus.
And when you have circumscribed the bone while drilling and separated it from the sinus, if it was continuous with it, and you remove it, you must scrape and make equalize its remaining extremity in the bone with another similar incisors tool. However, it must be thin and finer than other incisors.
And if there remains any part of the old bones and splinters, then take them with ease using what you have from tools. Then take care of the wound after that with lances and ointments as we said.
And another mode of surgery is easy, exceedingly distant from fear: this said Galen and highly praised himself. And this was his statement. Firstly, you must begin by discovering the section of the bone at the location where the fracture is more severe and more obvious. Continue until you have identified that part of the bone, and place the tip of this lens-shaped incisor tool beneath it; this tool has such a shape.
And the lens-like part does not encounter anything soft. Its sharp part pierces into both sides of it longitudinally, as you can see, so that the lens-like part is inserted into the canal, with its acute face encountering the bone in the mouth.
Next, strike the incisor with a small hammer on one side until you can easily penetrate the entire bone, as it turns. And be at ease about the cloth, for there should not occur any events that you fear will happen completely.
And if the surgeon were not dumber than men and less familiar with it, and was not asleep, then if there remained anything attached to the bone from the cloth in some places, it would penetrate him along with the tip of that lens-shaped incisor tool, and release him easily from it. It is indeed released without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the cloth, and that which is removed from the bone has its face, and there remain in it roughnesses and subtle scratches: then you must, using fine rasors prepared with various quantities from different tools, eliminate that roughness and remove those scratches. You should be able to apply these more suitably in every location, according to what your operation leads you to do, and the broken bone, and its shape. And it must be that you administer in your ratio, which for the first of roots, the mouth, more broadly than those who shave. Then use something finer afterwards.
And it must be that you administer in your ratio, which for the first of roots, the mouth, more broadly than those who shave. Then use something finer afterwards. And do not cease to do that until you reach the administration of something finer and more subtle among all of them.
For each remaining narrow crack and slight fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that cannot be hidden from anyone who has any study in this art, and stands above what we wrote and displayed in the larger fractures.
If however, when you remove the nodule and then you detect the hole: then it must be that you take a linen cloth according to the quantity of wounds, immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the wound's opening. Then take another linen cloth which is doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and rose oil, then place it over the first cloth. And do what can be done easily on top of this so that no scab forms.
Then administer a broad ligament above it: and do not tighten it unless its width can hold the wound only; and let it off with this care after one day or two days, until you are secure from the warmth of the pus. Then dissolve it, and administer afterwards medicines with which there is superfluous dryness, such as the roots of lily, and herb flour, and thuriferal ash, and aristolochia, and similar to these. And do this: make a powder from these medicines that is ground over the wound like the powders.
And universally administer onto it every medicine of which the property is that it cleans and does not bite. And take care according to your virtue, that the wound in your treatment becomes clear: let there be no stench of ointment, nor impurities.
And take care according to your virtue, that the wound in your treatment becomes clear: let there be no stench of ointment, nor impurities. And do not let toxins accumulate completely within it: for when toxins accumulate over the brain cloth, they corrupt it and putrefy it itself, and after this incident malice occurs greatly: and now an infection in the head's scalp happens, as it is purified from him, especially when his care is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore consider when such incidents happen to an ill person, as we said, you will know that it is very likely harmful.
And if blackness does not happen, except from the medicine that is put upon him, and it has the virtue of that medicine to make that blackness: then you must take one part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and linen with them. Then place him over the wound: afterwards care for it with suitable remedies until it is healed.
¶ For restoration of the nose when it breaks.
Know that the nose is not broken by both of its upper parts at once, or one of them; because it consists of two bones: since below them is cartilaginous tissue, which does not break and does not happen to him except through friction and tortuosity.
If one of the two parts of its nose is broken, then you must insert a few fingers into the nostril opening, and equalize that breakage with your index finger and thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape: this should be done with ease. And beware, so that through your operation, no pain befalls the sick person.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach the finger area, then it must be corrected at the extremity of the radius where thinness occurs.
If indeed the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to that: and arrange for its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, you should heat it gently until it is warm.
Then insert a linen ligature at the extremity of the nose if the fracture is in one part. Or insert two ligatures if the fracture is in two parts; and place in the ligature such thickness that it fills up the nostril.
And some of the old restorers said that they should be dipped in butter and changed every day. But this does not seem to me correct; rather it should be dipped into the powder mixed with alum, made with miller's flour. Then remove the ligature until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens.
And at other times a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of the ligature, after a soft cloth has been laid over it: and this causes the broken part of the nose to be held more strongly in place, and prevents the sick person from being hindered by breathing.
And this is not a necessary thing. If you wish, do that: and if you wish, use the linen ligature.
If it happens that you have to operate on the nose again while you are working, plaster the nose with camphor, or with a cloth infused in rose oil, or moderately from hyssop water.
If hot pus does not occur, then it is necessary to plaster him with a mixture of saffron flour and powdered thyme mixed with tallow. Then place a soft wax over him, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If indeed the bones of the nose are broken in a small fracture or crumble, then it is necessary to split them over there, and extract them with the instruments that suit them. Then heal the cut, and take care of it with that which causes flesh to grow back and harden from suitable plasters, or ointment.
If an ulcer occurs between the nose, then it is necessary to heal it with lime and administer a lead tube until it heals.
¶ Concerning the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken, and its breakage is not accompanied by an ulcer: then observe if there is a break only of its exterior, and it is not broken into two parts, and it is being healed internally. Then knowledge about it becomes easy.
Therefore, if the break is in the right part of it, you should insert your left index finger into the sick person's mouth: similarly, if the break is in the left jaw, then insert your right hand's index finger. And push with it the hump of the fracture from inside with ease to the exterior using your other hand from the inner part of the bone and make it even along with it.
If the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer extension from both parts according to straightness until an evenness can be achieved.
If indeed there has already occurred shaking or fracture in the teeth: then bind them with you hope that what remains will be with threads of gold, or silver, or silk. Then place over the fractured jawbone a chisel. Then place over it a double layer of cloth, and place over the cloth a large central piece (of leather) or a piece of equivalent length of the sole skin, in the length of the jaw.
Then bind it from above, according to what you have prepared for its binding and fits its application until it is not destroyed. And advise the patient to eat gentle sips while remaining calm and at rest.
If however you think that something changes in the figure at some point: then come quickly and release it on the third day. Then correct what has changed from that, and plaster it with powder of the millstone mixed with urine or with millet flour after you have removed the chisel. And place over the plaster a soft wool.
While the plaster remains attached to it and does not change the arrangement of the bones, remove it, do not break it until healed: or bind the fracture. This fracture is bound several times within three weeks.
If meanwhile an abscess occurs, then apply what we have said many times for its sedation until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, consider it carefully. If indeed it has separated from the bone, or the wound is large: then carefully consider this so that you may remove those fragments of the wound with what you need for their removal during surgery.
If the wound's opening is narrow, then widen it with a cannula according to your need.
Then when you have bled sufficiently from them, and nothing remains in them, then if the wound's opening is large, do so. But if not, place over it some of the plasters that suit this, and harden that until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of the furca (a tool resembling forceps used in surgery) when it is broken.
Indeed, the Furca (a surgical tool) is broken in most cases from the anterior part of the humerus, and its fracture occurs according to one of three methods.
Or indeed it may break and split into two parts, beyond which bleeding occurs: and this makes its restoration easier.
Or if it happens at the site of drilling into bone: and it is more difficult to restore it.
Or in this way, where there is a fracture with a wound.
And the procedure in such cases when there is a fracture without a wound is as follows: you should have two attendants present, one of whom holds an assistant tool that follows the broken Furca, and the other extends his neck towards the part.
Then equally break the fracture with your fingers until its shape is formed as required, and there should be neither prominence nor concavity in it.
If you need more extension, then you should place under the hinge a small spherical padding of cloth or wool: and its size should be according to your need: extend it and lift up the Furca, and tighten the sphere with your hand until an equal break occurs, as required.
If you cannot pull the extremity of the Scapula towards the outside: because it has reached depth, then the patient should lie on his back on his own neck. And place under his shoulder in middle a cushion of medium size, and press the patient's shoulder against below until the mouth of the Scapula which is deep goes up to above. Then correct the fracture and level it with your fingers.
If you feel the scapula moving and causing pain, then it is necessary to place something over it, and extract the part that causes pain with ease.
If it is retained within the bone, then use your ingenuity in making an incision with one of the teeth you prepared for this. After placing under the scapula the tool that holds this place: and the tool can be made from wood or iron. And this is its form.
It assimilates to the cochlea which does not have a concavity.
And let its width be according to that which you need from it, from the size of the bone and its firmness. As for its length, however, also according to what is possible for you with respect to the operation.
And let it have two ends, as you see: and one of the ends be broad, and the other narrow.
If the breakage of the skin where you cut when extracting the part that causes pain in the bone is wide, and you secure it with a warm stitch: then join two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the breakage is small, or you fear an abscess will form: then fill the wound with bandages and grains according to the size of the cut in the wound.
If an abscess becomes warm, then immerse a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top.
If there is a narrowing of the bone when it is without wound and without sectioning, it is to put on the mouth a plaster made from mill flour with curd. And place a soft wadding on top of it. Then place a sphere under its nipple if you need that. Next take a hawser, that is, a rope which the Saracens hold, which should be extremely long; and its width should be one hand or roughly around that. Next place a doubled cloth on the wadding and plaster. Next take an aster from a thin table, which width should be three fingers, and similarly in length. Next wrap it in cloth. Next wrap the cloth with the aster over the spot where the hawser falls on the fracture and location. Next place the hawser on the fracture as is described, and wrap it over his neck, and under its healthy nipple and under its sick nipple: and place it across all parts, and however you see that the constriction holds the fracture to the proper extent: and this thing should not be hidden from you, and whole, so that it is not removed a hawser above the fractured mouth. And for this reason, you must observe the sick person every day. So whenever the ligament softens and you see that the hawser is already moving: then straighten this out, and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sick person on their back, and put under their breast pillow during their sleep with insufficient milk production at night, so that when he/she is lifted, his/her assistant can be removed from beside him/herself. So the clavicle fracture should be treated by lifting the shoulder.
Or bind his/her arm to the neck: and do not loosen the bandage if there is no accidental occurrence from itching or slip until twelve days.
Then renew the dressing, if you have to turn his/her face towards that. And add to the bandage, and release him, until he recovers and coagulates.
And the clavicle fracture is tightened and strengthened for the most part within twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in certain individuals in lesser time.
Chapter on restoring the Spatula fracture.
The spatula is rarely fractured, and if it is, it's at the broad part of the bone: and it doesn't break from that area except its edges.
So when it breaks from that place and breaks in the middle of it, and cannot be recognized unless by touch: then according to how the fracture shape is, try to prepare its treatment. And return it over to its natural shape in every way possible using your skill, which is within your capability.
Then place on the area flour mixed with urine and soda ash, and a soft fat, and place above it a dust from a doubled piece of cloth. Then place on it a wide piece of thin table wood according to the size of the spatula in total, or somewhat larger than that.
If there is an indentation under the star (instrument) at some locations on certain parts, then equal this indentation with soft wax, until the star descends according to equality.
Next, cut above with the Alhammati knife, until it reaches the constriction and the firmness of the star, until it does not move from its place.
And examine the ligament every day. Therefore, whenever the ligament softens, tighten it, and adjust the star if it moves from its place; let the unhealthy lie on the healthy side.
Indeed, the spatula is restored within twenty days or within twenty-five days.
So when this number has been completed, then release the ligament: and you will be safe. For it is from bones whose connection is not feared, nor their dissolution.
But if it proceeds from a fragment of bone and pierces under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what we said about the fracture of the carpals on immersion in hot water, if anything happens from it.
¶ On the restoration of a fractured Chest.
The breast sometimes breaks in the middle of its span, and this is rare. Its extremities, however, break and crumble due to the various accidents of its nature.
When it breaks its middle section that inclines towards the lower side, and this causes it pain suddenly, difficulty in breathing, and coughing. And perhaps blood is vomited out, and a concavity in the broken bone is revealed, not hidden from sense. The restoration of its condition is when the sick person lies on his back: and place between its spatulas a pad.
Then press the ribs of him/her, and unite the back from two parts or sides with hands: and refine in his/her equation, according to every manner that is possible and fits, until the shape of the bone returns, as it should.
Then place a plaster and fat on him/her, and place a layer above that of an oak or ash wood tablet, or of similar thin materials. After you have immersed that in cloth. Then refine the act of tying it over the broken bone so that it doesn't move: and proceed with the bandage according to roundness towards the back multiple times, and tighten it to a suitable stricture.
Then consider the bandage at every hour, and whenever it softens, tighten it: and if need be prompts its release due to itching, or corrosion that happens in the area, or pain, or pus: then hurry, and release it, and remove the plaster, and correct whatever happens according to the method of its treatment.
Then reduce the plaster if you see it fitting back: and attach to him/her a constriction until he/she is healed.
¶ For the restoration of ribs, when they break.
You should know that the breaking of ribs does not happen except in the large areas following the back, and from their ends towards the front part. And it does not happen due to friction on them, except for that reason, because they are made of cartilage. The knowledge of this does not escape perception during the examination with fingers.
And the restoration of it is performed in this way: equalize the fracture with fingers according to the possible manner, until its shape matches, as required. Then apply the plaster, and suture the broken mouth with a needle if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is downwards towards the interior: then it happens to the sick with violent pain and puncture, as the puncture that happens to him who has pleurisy: therefore, because the mouth pierces the membrane, and even this causes difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood: and this is a difficult treatment.
And the ancients have devised many ingenious things in this matter: among them are those who say that you should feed sick people who cause inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflamed, stretched, and pushed outwards by the fracture.
We however, detest it, so that not the cause of making a hot blister is made quickly, if it does not happen. If however it has already happened, then add to it.
And some of them said: let there be a windy thing over the place, then extract it with strength, and this is similar to their reasoning. However, it is feared that the windy thing will attract excesses to the place due to the weakness's disposition.
And some of them said: the place should be covered with wool that is already submerged in hot oil: and put cotton between the ribs until it fills up: so that the binding will be even when you remove it according to roundness.
Then the sick person is treated with the therapy of pleurisy from food and medicine.
And if it constricts the sick person with pain that he does not bear, and pierces the membrane of the wound causing irritation, and we fear for the sick person: then it is necessary to cut above the place, and expose the fractured rib. Then place on it an instrument that preserves and seizes, whose description has preceded: and enter the mouth with ease, and enter it.
Then bind the two lips to the wound if it is large with stitches: and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if a hot pus bubble should occur in between, then quickly do it and pour in the powdery substance in oil mixed with rose water, and put it over the place. And the sick person will be cured along with that which conforms to the management of the pus.
And also it is covered over the side on which he sleeps, until it heals.
§ On the restoration of a fracture of the Spondylial column and neck.
Indeed, occasionally the bones of the neck suffer fracture and are rarely subject to abrasion; similarly, even so with the Spondylial bones of the back. And when such a thing happens to someone, and you want to know whether they will heal or not, then trust in this. For if you see his hands already softened, and stupefied, and dead; and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor constrict them; and when you constrict them with your fingers, and prick them with a sharp point, he does not feel that, and does not feel pain in them: then you will know that they are not healing, and there are many postures where it is fatal.
And if he moves them, and feels constriction with fingers and a prick inside, then you will know that the neck of the bone is saved, and that the sick person will be healed with treatment.
And if a similar thing befalls the Spondylial bones of the back and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider his feet. Then if you see that they are softened and this happens in them as it does in hands: and when he lies on his own back, wind and weakness come without desire: and when he is laid on his belly, weakness comes without desire: and when he is laid on his own back, and desires to move, but cannot: then you will know that it is fatal. Therefore, there are no labors in curing it.
If indeed nothing from that happens to him, then the matter is lighter.
And the treatment that happens from this is like compressing abscesses with hot oil: do so by placing on top of rubbed Spondyle a single drop of rose oil; or when you're hungry, eat an egg.
Apply that to it several times a day until the abscess settles with hot application. Then apply one place from the bandages that strengthen, dry out, and bind over it with a bandage: and instruct the patient to use it in peace and tranquility. And let him not sleep on the part with which he finds pain until it is healed.
If during the rubbing of bone spicules occurs, or if anything separates from it already: then it is necessary to separate under the skin and remove that. Then bind together the two lips of the wound if it's large with stitches. Then care for it with something that promotes flesh formation from ointments until it is healed.
If indeed the last bone is fractured and it's the end of the tail: then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the anus, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible, and align it again in its second alignment.
Then place on it and remove it; and care for the wound with the treatment that preceded it until it is healed.
¶ On restoration of the Ankle.
Chapter XI.
Rarely do ankle bones break. If they are broken, then their fracture is not, unless a break occurs at the extremities of them: and they split longitudinally, and bend towards the inside: and sickness arises where it happens, and piercing: and the leg that is broken swells.
And indeed, its restoration is to place your hand over it until you are above the fracture according to the shape of its figure.
And if the fracture is only in its extremities, then equalize that fracture according to what you prepare from an equation until it resembles its natural shape.
And if the fracture is in its length or has already bent towards the inside, then have the sick person lie on their stomach until you prepare for yourself the restoration of that fracture. So when you have equalized it, place plaster on it. Then place a splint of wood or skin over it. And apply the bandage tightly above where you do not fear the change of the fracture, nor the removal of the splint.
And equal the concavity of them with what fills it up until he catches it through the bandage according to equality. And instruct the sick person to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
And if a warm abscess happens to him, then stop with his extension and restoration until the warm abscess settles. And place what settles over it according to how it has proceeded, then return to restoring him, and apply it as is necessary.
And if it happens in the soft bone or breaks, extract it.
¶ On the Restoration of Fractures by the Helper.
This aid is that which is between the elbow and head of the spatula.
If it breaks, then its restoration according to one of two ways is when.
Of which there is one: to take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form that follows.
And two ligatures are tied at both ends.
Then let it be suspended from an elevated place, and the patient should sit on the seat. Then move his broken arm over the wood until it reaches the end of its socket, with the middle of the wood having a curvature that is attached there.
Then hang something heavy above him, so that he can stretch his attendant downwards. Then the doctor should gradually reduce the fracture with their hands until the break returns to its proper place, as required.
And the second method is that the patient should be made to lie on his neck: and hang his hand from his own neck with a ligature. Then instruct two attendants, one of them to hold that which is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold below him, each extending himself towards their respective parts.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then tighten with the ligature under the fracture, and with another ligature above it. Each attendant should extend each part towards their respective sides.
If the fracture is close to the elbow, then one ligature must be placed under the socket and another under the fracture towards the arm.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the elbow: then one must place a ligature on that spot, and over the elbow itself.
Then make an equal fracture with ease and without effort until the fracture equals what it should according to need, and a good treatment is applied. Then tighten it, if no pus occurs, apply heat.
If pus does occur with the application of heat, then release the tightening until the seventh day. And place upon it wool dipped in vinegar and rose oil until the pus stops: then tighten it; the way of tightening is to place a poultice over the fracture.
Then place an unraveling from new cloth over the poultice. Then raise the arm above the assistant and place his hand open on his shoulder.
And place a cloth, and tighten above the assistant's arm so that the arm stands in place of the stars: unless something prevents you from it, do not let anything come to you from the broken bone.
If you fear that something will come to you from the broken bone, then use stars: and it is like placing on the fracture itself a star which is wider and stronger than other stars. And place within the width of all stars, the length of a finger: and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from every side.
Then tighten over the stars the constriction that I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is for your tightness to be tighter than the place of the fracture itself. And the more the fracture extends, the less should the constriction be.
If therefore you see the arrangement of stars and constriction as we have said, at the time when you restore the member immediately, then do: and if you fear pus with heat application, then release the constriction and stars until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then examine the ligament for all three days, so as not to occur at the place of itching, or swelling, or food from being able to come to the member due to the arrangement of the constriction of redundancy. Therefore correct that whole thing, as we said.
If indeed it is beyond trust, so that nothing comes from it: then do not cut the ligament unless three days have passed, or more.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his hands over his own stomach: and place under assistance a full wadding of equal wool.
And observe at every hour of the night or day so that the figure of the broken member is not released, or the ligament is not softened. Therefore correct that whole thing with your virtue.
And provide the patient's food according to the order we have prescribed, so that the food should be subtle first, until the mouth begins to tighten: then it will be necessary to thicken their food.
Indeed, the habit of the assistant and thigh is that they should be tightened for forty days: therefore it will then need to be released and a bath administered, with treatment using ointment which corrects that.
If the fracture has been foul or contaminated, clean it: then do not cut away from that ligament and stile until the fifty days are completed, and even up to two months.
¶ On the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are named the two humeri.
One is short, and this one follows the thumb. And the other is large, and this one is placed under the smaller one from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore the greater hammer breaks the larger tile, or it is insufficient: and perhaps they break both at the same time.
So when the smaller hammer breaks the upper one, then its repair is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower hammer breaks it, there is a bad fracture, and its repair is difficult.
And that situation is worse, when two bones break at the same time.
So if the bone that is broken is by the smaller hammer above, then it is advisable for the doctor during its repair to apply a gentle and limited extension until it adjusts.
If however the larger hammer is what is broken: then it must be tightened with a stronger bandage.
And it is necessary to apply the hand shape during its repair and the extended extension over the splint. And have the thumb of the hand above all fingers higher: and let the joint be below all fingers or the rest: and let the sick person sit square on himself, and let there be a splint in front of him, or directly under him, at height, so that the sick person does not incur unnecessary labor.
Then let the attendant extend the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And another attendant should extend it similarly above.
Then the doctor adjusts the bone until it is reduced according to the best shape that can be achieved.
If there are defects in the fracture of the bone, then try to reduce all fragments into their place by your own force.
If it appears that there is a protruding abscess within it, and you prick the skin, and have no hope of restoring it: then cover it up, and remove it according to the manner we said concerning those previously mentioned.
If it is a fracture accompanied by a wound, I have already addressed this in a separate chapter on that subject, therefore take its treatment from there.
And if a hot abscess should occur at the beginning of your recovery, then apply a cloth bandage made from camellia oil and white wax, making it have an intermediate thickness between being thick and thin. And bind the cloth tightly over it with a fine strap until the abscess subsides. Then remove the camellia wax, and apply the prepared plaster made from ground cornmeal mixed with egg whites. Then place splints; the splint that should be placed over the fracture itself should be slightly wider and stronger.
And you will know that the number of splints for the arm is six in many arrangements: whether there is a fracture in one bone or in two bones at the same time.
Then place your bandage over the site of the fracture stronger and more firmly, and a little more with the bandage above the fracture, or below it: or place a softer bandage with its firmness slightly matching what was remembered at the beginning of this chapter.
And let the cloths that cover the fracture be soft and wetted: and do not let them be hard or rough. And let there be thread made from linen that is used for binding, intermediate between fine and thick, as we have told you.
And after the passage of days, examine the member and the ligament. And if something happens that requires correction, such as itching in the member: then you should immerse the member in heated water until that itching subsides, and release the member that is not being constrained until it subsides, then apply repeated bandaging.
If the constriction has already softened and the mouth is now removed, and similar conditions occur, then correct that entirely with your force and re-examine again.
If nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to excess tightness, then it must be made slightly softer and allowed to rest for a few days until nutrition reaches the area again. Then tighten it once more.
If it does not happen to the sick person anything of what we said, then it is not necessary for them to be released unless after twenty days, or roughly around that time.
Then have the patient's hand suspended over their neck. And let their neck be equal, and guard it against violent movements with their own force. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture heals in thirty days or thirty-two days; and perhaps it will heal in twenty-eight days. The entire procedure is according to the principles of composition and the principles of force.
### Restoration of Fractures: The Hand
Know that it is rarely that a fracture occurs in the wrist or at the joints of the fingers. And it doesn't happen to him unless it's been rubbed many times.
When then a fracture occurs at the sole or due to rubbing: then it must be that the sick person sits in the square position: and for him there should be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand over it extended.
Then have the attendant extend the broken bones, and the physician shall equalize them until they join well.
Then it must apply a plaster and salve, if no pus occurs hot. Next, place the herb above according to the size of the area: and you have already enclosed it in linen cloth.
If however it is a fracture towards below about the stomach of the foot, then make a similar sphere out of cloth: and instruct the patient to bind it over her with her fractured foot: afterwards tie it with a long piece of cloth.
And let the herb be from leather that has softness, so that the leather is applied together with the body of the foot: and tie it, according to what is necessary.
If however it is a fracture towards the outside, then it must be done: by putting a herb above and another herb from below on the foot. And let your hand be open and straight. Next, put on the bandage as you would turn the hand: and extend between the fingers with the ligament.
If it happens that a fracture occurs to one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it must be adjusted according to what is necessary. Next, bind it with the sole: and if you wish, place a flat straight herb on it, so that the fracture may be treated and not disturbed.
If however the fracture is to other fingers like the middle finger and index finger, or the ear and ring fingers, then it must be adjusted and bound with the healthy finger that follows it: or all may be bound sequentially: and it is better. Or place a flat herb on top of it as we said for the thumb.
And when considering your rehabilitation, and after this arrangement, apply hot pus: and place against it whatever is needed, when something from that happens, according to the progression of its narrative.
On the Restoration of the Hips Fracture.
The hip bone is often fractured and its sensation is described: because it turns towards the inner and posterior parts.
And the restoration of this is done in such a way that a ligament is tied above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. And the patient is laid on his face.
Then, every assistant should extend all the ligaments towards its own part according to equality: and this is when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
However, if the fracture is close to the root of the hip bone, then have the ligament towards its own part so that the extension goes upwards: and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if there is a fracture close to the knee, then have the ligament close to the knee, so that the extension goes downwards.
Then the doctor should equally place both bone ends with his hands until he restores it according to the likeness of a natural figure: and join the bones with a good union.
Then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage if no abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it: then let him rest for several days until the hot pus settles, and then resume your treatment.
The bandage of its own kind should be like this. It is necessary to cover the fracture with a firm bandage, that is, a bandage: and double it twice or thrice: and let there be excess from it. Then wrap the thigh until the heel reaches the root of the foot.
And introduce a long thread between the hip and thigh near the knee towards below, and let the ends of the thread come out from the upper part of both parts. Then roll over onto the thigh and hip that protrudes from the remnants (of surgery).
Then place on the hip at the spot of the fracture claws, and place one claw from them onto the opening of the thigh.
Then fill up any gaps between the thigh and hip with soft bandages, so that it balances the tightening.
Then start from the middle over the site of the fracture with a tight bandage, in three involutions or four. And as much more you stretch with the ligament from the site of the fracture, your bandage will be smaller and softer, and gentler.
Then direct towards the two ends of the thread that you introduced between the hip and thigh. So bind with each of them three claws that are above. Then proceed with the two ends of the thread towards below until you reach the stone (calculation or granule) of the foot. And with each, also pull the ends of the claws from the other side: so that the bandage does not move from its place.
Then let the bandage remain over that, so that no corrosion of the member occurs, nor pustule, nor swelling, and similar things. If anything happens from that. So when the remedy has been applied and whatever happens from there, correct it according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a fragment of bone in the bone that stings: then you must make it equal to what exists, if it is possible for you. And if not, find over it and remove it: and take care with him who precedes memory until he is healed.
And sometimes this thigh bone fracture is tightened, apart from which additional elements are added to it, as we said in the auxiliary and the arm.
But still, during its restoration in this manner of fracture, it does not cause the sick to limp. And if it is restored alone, apart from what the other leg is applied to, then that one who has it must always limp.
And know that the thigh is tightened for fifty days, either a little more is added or a little less: the whole of this depends on the variety of constitutions and other dispositions.
§ On the restoration of a fracture in the condyle of the knee.
You should know that the condyle of the knee rarely suffers from fracture but is affected by excessive rubbing.
If however it happens to have a fracture, then it is either a crack or an opening in its parts. And this is like a wound, and without a wound. And place it entirely over that with sensation.
And the restoration of that is such that what was disrupted from its parts to the fingers is equated until it is gathered and joined as much as possible by equality and ease, and construction.
Thereafter, apply a plaster made from saffron flour or miller's flour mixed with egg whites; and place an oval piece of metal above it if you need that. Then tighten the bandage conveniently over this.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have described in other fractures: such as hot poultice and similar things to them; so that for every incident you oppose with what suits him until he is healed.
¶ On the restoration of the thigh fracture.
Know that the thighs consist of two bones; one is large and named after the thigh itself. And the other is finer and is called the fibula.
And it happens that both of these have fractures of the same type as those occurring in two arm bones; and because of this, its restoration is like the restoration of the arm, being one action.
And if two bones break at the same time, the thigh becomes all parts.
And if the finer bone breaks, the thigh turns to the anterior part.
And if the larger bone breaks, you find that it is below; and there are things from them which are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and adjustment, and the stringing of stars in accordance with that equally.
However, it must be that if the thigh bone is broken and has many symptoms, there should be a larger extension and gentler adjustment on your part.
And indeed in the thigh there is something from operation that surpasses the arm: and it occurs that when you adjust the stars and complete your entire operation, then take two strips of wood from pine, which are used in making sun devices that are placed under plates. And they are made of palm spatulas. And choose those among them which have slight thickness and are not made from finer material. And their length should be according to the length of the thigh from the knee downwards.
Then roll over each piece of cloth twice in two involutions according to its length. And place one part of the leg at one end, and the other part at the other end: and let there be from the knee down to the lower part of the foot.
Then bind two ligatures at three places, at each end and in the middle. For when a constriction is forbidden, the leg bends to the right and to the left, and stands in good position.
And indeed, a crutch made from wood is administered according to the length of the leg, and the leg is placed into it so as to preserve it from motion.
And indeed, you must do that when there is an injury and it is properly fractured.
Then examine the leg every day, and attend to it carefully on the last day from suppuration, or inflation, or other things. So if anything of those happens, then oppose it with what needs to be done against it, until it is healed, if God wills.
Regarding the fracture of bones in the foot and digits.
Indeed, the heel does not undergo a complete fracture.
Fractures of the foot bones occur sometimes, and fractures to a lesser extent also happen to digits: and they do not happen to them unless there is rubbing in various positions.
If a fracture occurs in the foot bones, and you see that those bones rise up over each other against each other, then the invalid should place his foot on a prepared ground as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on what rises from those bones: afterwards press it, or heel it; and level that until it returns to its own places.
Then apply a plaster and place a pad above it. And put under the foot a thin plate, which should have two flat heads.
Then tighten it around the foot to a suitable constriction, after you have enclosed it with bandages and the rest that it requires.
So, when three days or four have passed for her, then loosen the bandage. Then you will find that the bones are properly aligned, or if they are broken, or if they are dislocated. Thus, the operation is as you see it should be.
If any of the fingers are broken, then restore them and align them according to what I have told you about restoring fingers of the hand. Then place on your finger a wedge according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly wider than that. Next, put under the foot this plate as I told you, and tighten it around the foot to a suitable constriction.
If however what is broken originates from the bones being two, or three, or more, then place on each entire finger a wedge of corresponding size, enveloped in linen: and tighten the plate under the bottom of the foot; and have it standing on one head of the plate outside the front part of the foot, so that it may hold well for retention.
And it is for you to remember not to forget to consider all that I have told you about the rest of the broken parts due to accidents which we have mentioned, and match each accident against what needs to be matched.
¶ Concerning the fracture of a woman's wrist bones and the rod of a man.
When the wrist of a woman is broken, then have her sit in a square position. Then incline her towards that part of the back of him slightly, and be held behind.
Then the midwife fills the womb of its owner until it fills her; and a sphere is made from this in the womb.
Then the woman is squeezed, and the back of his/her is gradually raised. For this reason, it exits until it forms in front of the entrance of the womb like a sphere, and the broken mouth returns.
Then place a small ball on his/her back. When therefore he/she wants to eat, move the womb with ease, then eat: and return him/her according to the manner in which you introduced him/her initially; and go back to his/her first ball.
Let that be done for seven days, or roughly around that time, for the mouth is indeed restored.
And if you wish, take the ear syringe, and press over the opening of his/her reed tube, and insert the whole of the syringe into his/her womb. Then blow through the reed tube with force, until the syringe is inflated inside the womb, as the mouth returns.
Then it should be filled with a paste and stand for some days, according to what we have told you, until it heals.
And when the mouth breaks with the help of Pectinis for men or women, then administer in its restoration and his/her own balance as we told you about it in bone Anchae.
And the rectum is not concealed in these minor breaks which rarely occur, especially if there is some study or use involved.
And understand this my book is very much, for the break itself tells you a straight way in many dispositions of his/her restoration and constriction: therefore understand.
When a man's testicle is broken in a virga (a type of reed), take hold of it as if it were the throat of a goose: and insert the rod into him. Then place over him an inversion from a cloth, and wrap it up, and let it be for three days or approximately those, and if God wills, he will heal.
¶ On the restoration of fractures in bones when there is a wound.
It is suitable for the person who encounters a fracture with a wound, especially if it's large, such as in the hip joint or in the auxiliary bones, or similar to those, that you should quickly apply bloodletting: if they tell you about the conditions of bloodletting, as we have previously instructed.
If the wound is bleeding blood, then you must quickly proceed with its amputation, such that you coat it with a powdered mixture of ashes: if there isn't another option available to you.
Then begin the restoration of the fracture on that same day: and do not delay this task if no abscess occurs.
If however an abscess forms hot, then postpone the restoration of that until the ninth day, until the abscess settles. And do not come near him on the third and fourth days either, for you will cause him to suffer harm.
If however the fractured bone is protruding above the skin: then it must be that you reduce it, and equalize it with your hands with ease and a slight stretching.
If however no preparation for its extension and equalization is made with your hands: then reduce it with this tool. And the tool is made from iron, whose length is the amount of seven fingers or eight: and its width matches the size of wounds. And for this reason, it is necessary for the physician to obtain from them three things, or four according to the quantity he needs for that in every species of fracture from treatment.
And let it be round: and let there be thinness in it, so that it does not double upon itself at the time of compression during the operation hour: and let its ends be sharp, which should have a border at their own ends. And let it extend upwards from the middle towards thickness until downwards.
This is its form.
In this operation, it is necessary to place the sharp curved end of its side on the tip of the projecting part of the bone. And drive it along with it one by one until when the bone returns and becomes equal according to some equation.
Therefore, try to make the ends of the fracture equal to each other.
If the ends of the broken side is thin and does not accept that tool properly during insertion, then it is necessary to penetrate that part of the bone until the tool has control.
However, if you cannot reduce them with what we have described completely, then cut into it with the tool that suits it as we said in the incisors: or saw it with any possible way of a single saw.
Then grind that which remains in the bone from roughness and fine cortexes.
Therefore, when the bone is reduced, and after reducing it, a strong pain is found to be hurting, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
So do this. For you confer great relief to the sick, when your restoration is completed for the bone that you do.
Then immerse the cloth in tincture of wine, black. And especially if it is in summer. And do not place wax over the wound, nor anything that contains oil: so as to prevent occurrence of putrefaction and decay within it.
Then administer astelas at the time of your post-meal digestion for bone. And expose the detected wound: so that you may make an opening with your forceps according to the size of the wounds.
And beware, do not tighten the wound with fracture. For many times, stupid doctors have done this: and they caused death or decay or putrefaction to occur upon their sick patients, that is, disease. And make your compression soft, gentle, different from the compresses of other fractures.
If the wound is bad, or if it's a large wound and you're worried about some bad events we told you about, and you find pain in that hanging spot: then you should not place wax over it. And have them progressions from hard cloths at the spot of the wax, and compress it with them.
But when the wound begins to heal after one day or two days, and you see that pus is beginning to form within it: then remove the cloth that was placed upon it with wine. Then administer liquorice and smear with the ointments that are customary for us to use when treating wounds: such as the tetrapharmaceutical ointment, and similar ones.
And it is suitable for you to loosen the bandage. And examine a wound every day in the morning and wait until it is solidified, and healed.
And it must be prepared in such a way for the member that the pus can flow out of it to the lower parts with ease.
And if many days pass and the wound does not harden or discharge pus from it, then you will know that there are small bones there. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the wound when you touch it. And once these soft parts are separated from them, remove those and extract them themselves. And what of them are not separated and penetrate the member, causing pain to occur, try to incise them and remove them in every way possible that you can.
And if the wound festers or discharges pus, that is, it becomes inflamed or exhibits another kind of corruption and putrefaction: then it must be treated with each one according to what suits him from treatment as explained in the chapter related to its case.
And from this point onward, my words must stand and you should adopt the present understanding when a bone breaks and protrudes over the member, as in the case of the hipbone and its auxiliary parts, or similar situations with large bones. You should not mistake it for an injury; indeed, many times such occurrences lead to death. Instead, abandon it until it becomes gangrenous.
Perhaps it will fall off on its own after twenty or thirty days.
So then take care of the wound if you see it needs attention: and if not, abandon it.
Section on the treatment of Nodular Abscess in the case of fracture.
Many times this happens, namely the examination in search of healing of fracture. Mainly, which is akin to sutures: and it is torn from that figure of the member. And perhaps prevents the member from its natural act of operation.
So consider then, if the nodule is recent: administer medicines that promote coagulation in it, such as aloes, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar substances.
So, take from these some or all of them, and mix them with alcoholic wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the nodule wrapped in a poultice, and bind them tightly to it.
And release the bandage, do not loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another one, until the nodule is removed.
Or bind over it a sheet of lead slightly off center. Indeed, lead has the property of removing whatever is feared from members.
But if the nodule has already converted into a stone, is bound up tight, and urgency demands its removal: then apply to it from above of that part, and shave off the protruding excess: or cut it with some razors until it's removed; and attend to it until it heals.
When restoration occurs after this delicate issue remains in the member, not according to its nature.
When the fracture of bone is restored and afterwards a delicate, weak member remains, then this does not happen without many reasons. Of these, one is, the multitude of solutions for ligating and tying ligaments, not according to what should be done: either due to the excess tightness of the ligament ties, until nutrition is prevented from flowing to the member; or due to the excess amount of ointment being applied when it shouldn't: or due to the scarcity of blood in the body of the weak and their debilitation.
And the treatment for that is to feed the sick person and make its body tender, until blood multiplies within it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and mirth upon him.
Then place ash on the member: so that it attracts much nutrition to itself. And apply its ointment with warm water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
¶ On the care of fractured bones when they are being restored.
When it happens that a member, already restored after its healing, still exhibits the twist and elevation of a fractured bone, or the formation of a node, due to this condition. The body heals in this way, but does not prevent the member from performing its natural function. In such cases, one should not heed the advice of those who believe that breaking the bone again is necessary.
And indeed, many foolish physicians and restorers have done this in our land.
And this kind of operation is very reprehensible, leading to death or great fear, indeed it can be deadly.
But if the limpness and node are recent: then it should be treated with warm water into which have been boiled softening herbs such as the leaves of rue, and its root, and red clover, and similar remedies. And let a poultice be made for him with a softifying plaster, such as one made of hydocyanic acid.
Or the mucus of the root of the treacle plant is taken and mixed with chicken fat or safflower oil: and it is used as a poultice.
Or the fat of fatty figs is used, and it is ground with bird clay or other things they call them among medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes the knot is dissolved with regular, old, and gentle rubbing, which is done with wet hands. And motion of the member should be given to every part at all times.
If however, the curvature has already come and made itself strong and turned into a stone, and there is a need for treatment with iron: then it must be cut above it, and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved continuously. Then that which exceeds from the knot or the bone must be removed by fine knives. And ease should be provided in this matter with concern and diligence.
¶ On discussing dislocations.
A dislocation is the departure of some joints from their place. Therefore, movement is prohibited to its own position, and the shape of the member is disturbed. And it causes to happen over the weak pains and severe injuries.
Therefore, when a dislocation happens to someone, it is necessary to hasten its restoration: for it does not completely escape at all.
For if the delay continues, the place gets settled and perhaps with it, the return of the dislocation.
For this reason, it is not necessary for them to move nor be extended during the time of their castration. Because it often causes cramps and painful injuries.
However, when this happens, you should proceed with the bloodletting for the sick person. Then let it go until the pustule rests.
Then the member is treated with warm water and oil. Then reduce it with ease.
And the entire member is treated where its mention has returned to its place.
I have indeed arranged the sections on dislocations, even according to what precedes in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Section: Care of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw.
Dislocations of the two jaws occur rarely, not often.
And the dislocation of the temporal bones occurs according to one method. Or indeed they move away from their places by a slight movement and soften slightly. Or they are completely dislocated until they soften to the chest part, until saliva is produced for the sick person and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is enclosed with speech.
However, when her dislocation is slight, it returns in various postures by herself with little effort.
But if the dislocation is complete and integral: then it should be necessary to administer its reduction quickly, without being delayed completely: and it must have someone hold the sick's head. And the doctor inserts his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocated jaw between the sick's mouth, if the dislocation is from one part. If the dislocation is between two parts, then let him introduce both his thumbs at once. And let the rest of his fingers remain outside to aid.
And instruct the patient to cleanse and adjust their jaws, so they can eat anywhere. And the doctor should align the jaw and push it until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved: then administer steam with hot water and oil until the reduction becomes easier. Do not completely avoid any reduction at all, as we said.
When they return and align properly, and the mouth of the patient closes without softening: then place pieces of linen cloths above them with a candle made from wax: and oil that has been infused.
Then, it should be bound with ease using soft ligaments.
And let the patient sleep on their back: and have their head standing between two pieces of linen, so they don't move it to the right or left. Nor should they try, or be made to chew anything: instead, there should be a soft liquid food for them until when the pains subside and the jaw has healed. Then they can eat whatever they want, and it should be administered with ease.
And do not engage in operations on their mouth during strain, drinking, and shaking, until the jaw has healed and they are cured.
If the reduction of both jaws becomes difficult and they are dislocated at some point in time, not returning to their places: then many times fever and continuous pain occur. And perhaps the patient's stomach is relieved, or perhaps they vomit pure bile.
When therefore you see this: then you will know that it is a loss, and many times that person dies who encounters this within ten days.
Chapter on the Reduction of Dislocations in the Furca and Elbow Extremity.
The Furca (or collarbone) is not dislocated from its internal side because of its continuity with the chest. And it can sometimes be dislocated externally, and this is indicated by sensation.
And the restoration process involves having the patient lie down on their back and stretch out their arms. Then, apply strong pressure with your hand to squeeze the area, as it will return to its proper position.
Next, place a poultice and ointment on the area and bind it tightly.
As for the remaining parts of his/her elbow joint that follow the elbow and continue with it, they do not get dislocated except occasionally. If it is dislocated at some point, then you should reduce and level it according to what we have said and what is prepared for you.
Then place a poultice and ointment over it, and bind it tightly. And instruct the patient to maintain calmness and rest until they recover.
And with this same treatment, the elbow extremity is reduced even when it's also separated from its place.
Chapter on the Reduction of Dislocations in the Shoulder (Humerus).
Know that the shoulder bone (Humerus) can only be dislocated in three ways.
One case is where it will be dislocated towards the scrotum downwards. The second case is where it will be dislocated towards the chest. And perhaps it may be dislocated to the upper part of the humerus: and that happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the back, due to the shoulder blade. And it is not dislocated to the front, because of nerves.
Indeed, it is largely dislocated and exits towards the scrotum: especially in those with little flesh. Because it leaves them quickly and enters quickly.
In those with much flesh, it is contrary to that, namely, because it leaves with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people due to impact or incidents, and the humerus gets fractured after heat application, and this is thought so because it was already dislocated.
Therefore, you should experience that until you have confidence in it, and then proceed with its treatment.
Dislocation is recognized when it's towards the scrotum downwards: and you distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy humerus. You will find the manifest difference among them, and you discover a concavity in the head of the humerus. You touch it near the scrotum like it is hollow: and the sick person cannot move his hand to his ear, nor can he move it with all movements.
Likewise, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, then you find a clear touch, which is not concealed.
And indeed, for this type of dislocation, there is a simple reduction when it has recently occurred or involves an infant.
And the reduction involves having the attendant raise their hand to higher positions. Then place your thumbs under his prominence and lift the joint with strength upwards to its place: and have the attendant raise their hand and extend it upwards. Then put it downwards, for he will return quickly by himself.
If however he does not return through what we said, and it has been several days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary for the sick person to bathe in warm water, and an ointment should be administered which softens and soothes, like when the roots of high plants, and fennel, and the milk vetch are boiled in water, and then given.
Then the sick person is laid down on their back: and under his prominence place a sphere and wool, which should be equal between softness and tightness.
Then the doctor places his heel on the sphere and lifts up the head of the shoulder with strength, and attracts the sick person's hand downwards.
And if needed, reduce him according to this manner: and it must be that you make the present man long for the sick one, stand at the side part, and insert his shoulder under the prominence of the sick person: and lift his prominence upwards until the sick person is suspended in the air. And another attendant pulls the sick person's hand downwards towards their lower belly. If however the patient is of lesser weight: then it must be that something else is suspended with him, in order to burden him; for the return of dislocation happens immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method: and there is a way where wood is fixed in the ground with its head being rounded shape, like the handle of a mortar, so that it isn't bulky nor too thin. Then place under the patient after they have placed fabric underneath the head of a piece of wood. And let the patient stand according to the length of the wood.
Then extend his hand to the lower parts from one side, and extend his body from the other part with strength: for the connection returns to its place with speed.
If reducing him becomes difficult through all that we have said, then use this care: and take a piece of wood whose length is the measurement of two arms, and its width is the measurement of four fingers, and its thickness is the measurement of two fingers: let it have a round head, so that his exit can be inserted deeply into the socket, according to this form.
Then, apply soft cloths over the round head, so as not to harm the fragile wood.
Then place the patient under the socket, so that the hand or arm extends over the wood until the lower parts: and tie the wood over the support and arm and extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm over the ladder step by width, and extend the hand to the lower parts, and release the remaining body from the other side. The connection indeed happens immediately.
And when his exit has been inserted according to whatever possible method: then it must be that you place under the socket a sphere of equal amount made from wool. Then place the prepared plaster made from mill meal mixed with myrrh and egg white over the whole shoulder as it has been described above.
Then bind it around the nipple with a suitable constriction: and the bandage is laid over the plaster from above. And attach his hand to his neck, and let him go, without moving his hand for seven days.
And it should be that only little food is placed for the sick person until the member gets stronger: because this leads faster to its healing.
Then, starting from seven days or five days later, he should be moved around with activity. So if it hardens and does not soften, then he is now healed.
If however the joint is dislocated multiple times due to moisture affecting him or due to some other cause: then it should be treated with a cautery in that area having three holes, as explained in the chapter about the cautery.
If this is done completely, and the bandage is released after seven days, and the joint does not reconfirm, and the plaster and constriction are reapplied multiple times without hardening, and it cannot be lifted above: then you will know that the nerves attached to the shoulder blade have been cut, stretched or softened. And you will know that the joint will never harden in its place.
As for the dislocation that occurs towards the chest and nipples or backwards reduction, it is performed with a push and extension using hands until it returns. Then, further tightening and care are applied to it until it heals.
If after healing there is a heaviness in the limb and slowness of its movement, then the sick person should use hot baths repeatedly until that heaviness subsides and returns to their natural state.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
You know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty and similarly it returns with difficulty. And indeed, it can be dislocated towards all directions, especially forward or backward.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: because it appears under view and under touch, according to whatever figure it gets dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with a healthy one, this is made clear to you clearly. The joint has sunken and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch with its own shoulder.
And you must approach and immediately reduce the dislocation before it causes an abscess hot.
For if it causes an abscess hot, the reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it may not be completely healed, especially when it is towards the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations and more severe pain accompanies them: and often death descends with it.
And the restoration of it when possible among those that can be reduced is this: to extend his hand with both hands and have his arm open, and the doctor's hands are above the elbow and below it, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his own fingers or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or otherwise the dislocation is towards the front: then return like this, so as to bend his hand with his own, until he hits the dislocated elbow with the root of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a strong extension, very strongly: it is that two attendants extend their arms. And they hold him too, so he doesn't move during the extension.
Then the arm is rolled back until the folded cloth or broad ligament covers the entire part that has been enclosed over his hand.
And when the doctor touches his own suture with his hand, he should anoint it with oil, so that this among them which aids in facilitating and smoothness of the suture is done. Then he should push the stitches with a vigorous impulse until they return.
And after reducing it, one must place over it a plaster where there is firmness and drying with an ash, and the bandage should be tightened to a proper tightness. And let the arm hang from the neck of the invalid, and rest for several days.
Then loosen it. If thus the suture is solid in its place, then release the ligature from it and set her.
And if you see that the suture is not well tightened, then apply more plaster and ligature, and let her rest for several days until it is tightened. Then release her.
If indeed weight happens to him after the reduction of the suture and its setting is in motion: then administer moistening in bathing, and subtle friction, and compression until it heals, or place over the suture an inflamed hip, that is, a large navel. Then it is bound, and she is released to rest day and night. Then remove her, and immerse him in the bath. And when he sweats, then rub the suture with a moderate friction. Then apply to her one, and then the second, and the third with entry into the bath until she eases.
And if it is a boil, place upon it a paste of dung, moistened and heated with butter, and bind it over.
Do this periodically. For it indeed softens and returns to its natural state.
Section on the treatment of dislocations by Al-Mahassan.
Mahassan's hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint between the upper arm and the forearm.
And reducing this dislocation is easy. In contrast to other joints. However, it is necessary that the speed be present during the reduction of this dislocation when it occurs, before the place becomes fixed: or a hot pustule occurs.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you make Mahassan's weak hand rest on a table and have an assistant extend his hand. And the doctor places his hand over the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns.
However, it must be considered if the hand has already receded to the abdomen: then the patient places the back of his own hand on the table during extension and reduction. And if the dislocation proceeds towards the back of the hand, then its position is inside on the table, that is, the inner part of his hand is placed on the table so that the doctor's hand falls over the same prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with the plaster that causes pustulation: and let go of it, do not repeat this.
For if it does not tolerate this, nor can you apply it during its reduction, after passing over the days for him, but nevertheless the joint remains according to its twist: and it does not harm the sick in any way, except that the hand softens, and it cannot bind anything: then you will know that the nerves have been cut or rubbed.
Therefore, there is no skill involved except for tightening it with a cautery near its case. And perhaps that does not amount to anything.
So when Almahassem no longer returns, then put on him the plaster that we have described. Then it should be tightened and released for five days: afterwards it should be opened and released, and the hand should be exercised.
If his movements are restricted and something of heaviness occurs there: then soften her with water heated, and with friction occasionally, until it softens.
Section on the treatment of finger dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated throughout its length, or from the end of it to the back of the palm or belly, then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then hold the head of the finger, and suspend it towards the part to which it is dislocated, and let it off for two days.
Then suspend him, and extend him, until on that day he equals the straight one.
So when it is night, bind him according to the said instruction: and do not cease to release him during the day: and exercise him with movement: and bind him at night.
Do this for a few days until it tightens.
And do the same with it if a finger is dislocated towards the belly of the hand: and bind it to that part, and perform your first operation on it until it is healed.
And do the same with it when it is dislocated towards other parts.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
When it happens to someone that the spinal vertebrae of the back or neck is completely dislocated, or many vertebrae are moved from their places: then there is no cure for this, because death approaches the sick person.
And the sign of this is that the weakness of the sick person escapes without his will, and he cannot hold it; and from time to time some part of his body softens from him, or both of his legs, or both of his arms, or one of them: or a spinal vertebra is moved from its place.
Indeed, it is often moved because the removal of those parts happens in four directions.
Therefore, that which is removed to the back, is named Humpiness.
However, the treatment for this is that you should consider if Humpiness occurs during childhood: then there is no cure for it, and indeed, recovery from it does not occur entirely.
As for that which happens due to accident, impact, or similar incidents, the old ones have already spoken about treatments and lengthy treatment methods. Of which much does not return with beneficial outcome.
I have indeed abbreviated it from that which somewhat excuses a great deal of its proximity to my intention: and the explanation I made in exposing it, and fashioned its tool differently than how they showed it and exposed it.
I say therefore that regarding humpiness which occurs from the back part, there is no remedy nor recovery from it.
And similarly in that which happens to both sides as well.
And attention is not paid to them unless the one which happens in the back properly, as I narrate. And it is that, for the patient to be extended over his own face on an equal platform near the wall: and a damp covering should be spread under him so that his chest is not hurt.
Then a straight piece of wood should be fixed in the ground in the trench, at the end of the platform near his head: and another piece of wood about his feet at the other end of the platform: and the attendant should hold the pieces of wood, ensuring it is not firmly planted in the trench. And the other attendant should hold the other one.
Then cover the patient's head, and bind his forehead loosely but firmly. Extend the end of the ligature towards the piece of wood near his head, and tie it there.
Then bind another ligature above his hips, and above the knees, near the stones. Then gather all the ligatures together, and bind them to the other piece of wood which is near his feet.
Then all the attendants should stretch out each ligature to its corresponding piece of wood and ensure that neither of the two pieces of wood are removed from their positions where they are fixed. However, they must not be firmly fixed as we said.
And the doctor should place his hands on the Spondylus (the spinal column) with strength until he returns or places a table over it. Then attach his feet to the table, until he returns.
If however, he does not return through this treatment, then take a table whose length is about three cubits. And dig in the wall as we said is near the patient, for the place where the end of the table will enter. Then place a medium-sized table over the spine. And the doctor should place his feet on the other end. And he should tighten it well until the vertebrae are bound together, and then return to his place.
Next, if you are a surgeon, operate with the return of what is hidden with your hand: and it is that you fix two pieces of wood at the back end of the sick person's head, whose length will be the span of one arm: and at the head of him also at the rear end of the bed, two pieces of wood.
And let the length be what is between each piece of wood being one hand span: and now a hole has been made at every place, through which the thread runs: and all the pieces of wood are firmly set into the ground so that they cannot move in any way.
And insert the round piece of wood: and there is a thread that revolves through the ligament in two holes of two pieces of wood.
And at the end of it is a hole, into which wood is fixed, whose length together with what revolves is one hand span: and similarly in both other pieces of wood.
Next, tighten the ligaments which you tightened in the sick person's chest: and the ligaments which you tightened in their legs are in the thread that is at their feet.
Then stand by each thread a servant who will twist their hand with the rod through which the thread revolves: and the doctor adjusts the vertebrae as we said.
This is the form of the thread that follows.
And after the vertebrae return and the place is adjusted, then it is necessary to apply dry plaster mixed with egg white. Then the sponge. Then place above the plaster a star-shaped piece cut from a board, whose width should be three fingers or roughly that size. And its length should equal the quantity that fills the place of gibbosity, and over the part of healthy spinous processes.
Then it is tied with the ligament that we said. And the invalid uses fine nourishment until they are healed.
If there remains a certain elevation in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that they be administered medicines which soften and alleviate, with the application of the board we described for a long time. And now the lead sheet is applied to it.
And sometimes there is an elevation at the very end of the vertebral column: and it is thought that through this dislocation, and this is the mouth that has already emerged. Therefore, it should not happen that this assumption is made with her regarding this medicine: perhaps she might indeed result in death.
¶ On the treatment of an injured ankle joint.
You should know that the jointing of the ankle and the jointing of the shoulder happens only with dislocation, not with any other injuries that involve removal or concavity.
And indeed, the joint of the ankle is dislocated according to four parts. Which means that it is because it can be dislocated at the front and at the back.
And mostly it is dislocated towards the inside: and only slightly towards the front and back.
And the treatment for dislocation of its thigh is: because when you join the weak with the strong leg, it goes further; and his knee is higher than that of a healthy person, and the sick one cannot bend his foot near the groin. And there is a place following the groin, which follows the heat, due to the fact that the head of the thigh bone has already arrived there.
And the sign for him who suffers from dislocation of external parts is that his accidents are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign for him who suffers from dislocation of the anterior parts is that his healthy leg expands according to the complement: but he cannot bend it without pain in the knee. And if he tries to walk, he cannot do so beyond this point ahead: and he retains his urine, and he gets heat on his groin, and during walking there is a heel strike of his foot above the heel.
And the sign for him who suffers from dislocation of posterior parts is that he will not expand his knee and cannot bend it before his groin bends: and his other leg is also shorter. And his groin becomes soft, and the head of his thigh bone is at the level of the ilium.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is as follows: you should consider the situation when the dislocation is old and has already occurred. Then, if you administer the reduction and it remains according to its own position, there is no treatment at all for that. Therefore, it is not necessary for him to undergo this reduction completely.
In that case, for the one whose dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocations: then proceed as needed to apply a traction force and extend it towards both inside and outside. And move her left and right as well. Perhaps she will return, and no further treatment will be necessary.
If this method does not return the limb, then you must prepare a strong assistant and have him extend his leg from the lower part: either with his hands or with a ligament that is tied above his knee on his leg. And another assistant should extend his hand from above, so as to insert his hands under his nails. Next, tie with a soft ligament at the base of the hip joint and hold the end of the other's ligament.
And let his extension be either from the front part of the groin to the pubic area, or from the back towards the dorsal region.
And let their extensions serve together until the patient is lifted up with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is the common form of the four species.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then for every kind it is necessary that I say about self-treatment which I will tell.
Indeed, in the self-reduction when the dislocation is towards the inside, it must be that the patient reclines on his healthy side. Then place the ligament over the base of the hip joint, at the point that is between the head of the femur and below the groin. Then extend the ligament upwards from the groin area to the higher part of the body, towards the pubic region.
Then another strong assistant should take hold of his arms and reduce the thick place of the diseased thigh, extending it outwardly with a vigorous movement. Now it returns to its place.
And this is the easier of the other methods of treatment by which this member is reduced.
If however, the injured party neglects you and refuses to follow your instructions at the outset concerning this type of treatment completely: then it is necessary that two weak limbs be bound together with a strong ligament, a softer one, over two heels, and over two knees; and each should have a length proportional to its own quantity by four fingers: and let the injured limb be extended further than the other by a measure of two fingers.
Then let the injured person be suspended above a wooden post, which will be set up in the house: and let its length from the ground be equal to the span of two arms.
Then instruct the strong youth to protect the thigh head. And have him suspended together with the injured person by another: and let the other youth push, guarding the thigh firmly, for the connection returns to its place at speed.
When returning the person to their normal position, when there is a dislocation towards the outside, it is necessary that the injured party lie on a platform, as we explained in the case of having a hump. And bind the ligament over his weak limb and over his chest.
Then place two pieces of wood, one by his feet, and the other by his head. Then place an added piece of wood in the middle of the foot, well fixed: over which wet cloths should be laid so as not to harm the injured person: and let the wood be between his thighs so that it does not pull down towards the lower parts during extension.
Then each attendant extends to their own part and the doctor equates the reduction with his hand.
If therefore he obeys in return, it will be good.
And if not, place her on the table and press her evenly as we said in the case of humps. However, it must be that the sick person lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is anterior, then it must be that the physician quickly extends the sick leg: and he should follow this same instruction on a table: and the doctor places his right hand's palm on the groin of the patient. Then, with the other hand, he restrains him and, while doing so, puts him in an extended position towards the inferior side up to the knee.
And if the dislocation is posterior: then it should not be that the sick person lies down towards the inferior side and stands above the ground; rather, he should lie on a hard surface, just as it would also be necessary if his entire limb was displaced externally according to what we said about him lying on two sides of his trunk. He lies facing upwards with the ligaments stretched out: as I explained previously.
And it should be that compression is applied with a table even on the place from which the joint emerges, after completing the reduction according to what is required.
And the sign of its restoration should not be hidden from you: and that is, to extend both legs of the sick person. And when you see them equal, and the sick person grips his leg and expands it without strain; then you will know that the limb has returned, according to what is required. Then join the two hips together, and apply a plaster, and tighten with bandages, that is, rolls: in such a way that not even the entire limb moves towards any part of the body, and the sick person should remain quiet for three days or four.
Then release the ligament and plaster, and compare the legs with each other. Then, if you see them equal in position, then you will know that the dislocation has been set firmly. Therefore, allow the sick person to walk around.
And if you see anything of softening: then return, and cover that with the plaster, and bind it according to your first tightening: and let go even for three days.
Then dissolve that and make it linger in walking over both for several days until it strengthens well.
¶ On Dislocations of the Knee.
The knee joint is dislocated in three ways. It can be dislocated to the outside, to the inside, and downwards, that is, to the back.
And it does not get dislocated to the front.
The sign of its dislocation is that you will instruct the sick person to apply their shinbone to their thigh bone. If it does not adhere with the thigh: then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all forms of dislocation of its knee is to make you sit upright the sick person, so that if he can already extend his shinbone over it, and adheres your back to their face: and place their foot between yours.
Then have the knee of its adhere with your palms, and straighten them between your fingers over the knee. Then apply with your palm, both sides of the knee in strength. And another servant will extend their foot until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of recovery is that the shinbone will adhere with the thigh bone gently, not laboriously.
Then plaster it and have the shinbone adhere to the thigh bone. Then bind them together with stitches for three days, or four. Then release them.
And the invalid should not walk for some days until he is healed.
But if he refuses to be reduced, then administer a strong elongation with bands whose preparation was described earlier in the treatment of ankylosis, until it heals.
Section on the treatment of calcaneal dislocation.
The calcaneus sometimes undergoes a small displacement and at other times a complete dislocation occurs. And the dislocation can occur either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, moving towards the part to which it is dislocated.
The treatment for the displacement is easy to restore: and it consists in extending it with ease using one's hands until it returns to its original position.
In treating it when it is completely dislocated, you should have the invalid sit upright and have a strong attendant hold him firmly at the posterior part of his back, right in the middle.
Then hold his foot with your right hand from the upper part of his foot and from the heel area with your left hand.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. And then use both hands of your left side.
Then extend with your left hand and push the foot's arch towards the shinbone with your right hand without effort.
Do this twice as we have instructed.
Then push the chest of the foot towards the thigh for a third of its length, and you pull out the stone.
If therefore it returns after one or two thirds of this manner, and you see the foot level, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation upon it: because he himself returns.
But if it is prevented from being reduced with what we have narrated: then make the sick man lie on his back on the ground, and fix a stake deeply into the firm earth so that it falls between his hips: and you have covered him already with a cloth, in order not to harm the sick person.
Then let the attendant grasp his hip: afterwards let the attendant stretch the other leg, or with his hands, or with a bandage that is tied over the ankle. Then let every attendant stretch against the extension of his own: and let the stake stand between the two hips of the sick person holding him, so that his body is not drawn down towards the lower part at extension.
Then the doctor will equate the dislocation with his hands, and the attendant will hold the healthy thigh towards the lower part. For the dislocation returns with velocity.
When then the dislocation returns and it is made clear to you its return state: then place the plaster and paste, and bind that firmly with ligaments, and tie the foot with a ligament to the thigh.
And it is necessary that you either suspect or feel the nerves, which are above the heel bone behind, so that there isn't a band over them and harm them.
Then release him for two days or three. If the band tightens up, tighten it again: then release him on the third or fourth day: and forbid the sick person from walking for forty days. If it is intended to walk before that distance, there is no certainty that the dislocation will not break over itself, and be injured, and not receive treatment after that.
If an ulcerated sore occurs to him: then it is necessary that you administer the thing in his sedation which precedes our narrative in another place from treatment and ointment, until it is removed.
¶ On Dislocations of the Foot's Fingers, and Care Thereof.
It must be that which is dislocated from them with a few equalizations without much effort: and indeed this is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in certain joints of the heel: then it must have the sick person sit with their foot on an equal place on the ground, or on a table: and standing as if walking.
Then stand up, and place your foot upon what protrudes out from those joints. Then press the shoe against your foot with force until it returns to its original position and you realize that it is now equalised, and there no longer appears a prominence in place.
Then place under his foot a table which will hold the entire foot, and has two ends. Then bind him with a binding appropriate for three days. Then release him, and make him rest from walking for many days until he is bound and secured by the reduction.
¶ On the various forms of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something like that happens and you attempt to treat it and restore the injured person, it often leads to death. Therefore, unless one is skilled in medicine with long use, merciful, pious, cautious, not daring or presumptuous, it should not assume this kind of treatment without careful consideration. Instead, they should use remedies that calm hot ulcers only from the beginning and allow the sick person to be judged by divine wisdom for a long time. Unless you have ideas, or hope for salvation from destruction with a degree of relief from sickness, and where there appears something hopeful. Therefore try to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before the pus becomes hot.
If therefore the member returns, as we desire, then administer a treatment that calms the pus: and care for the wound with what is appropriate to it from drying ointments.
And if there is dislocation with fracture and happens in the bone of the distal part separated, then try their removal, and do what we said about simple illnesses from what precedes in those places.
And be cautious according to your virtue, and protect yourself from entering the path of fear: according to what my prediction has been to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and lasts longer for the glory of you, and brings more safety to your body among them at your time.
