I have completed this book, dear son, for you, which is the rear part of the science of medicine along with its filling, and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is hampered in our region and is entirely foreign everywhere, it is destroyed and dismantled, and nothing remains of its origin except for the small descriptions about ancient practices that have been changed. And from this comes error and vanity, and closed are the intentions and alienated is wisdom.
It seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I shall come together with the forms of cautery irons, and other instruments of work with the addition of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good master of hands is found in our times, the art of medicine has grown distant. And he who engages in this must master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to the extent that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms and joints and separations of them, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of bones, and their movement and the moving and resting veins, and the direction of their outflow.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the nose with the thumb is much, and with work is little; and the same in the art of healing.
We tell you in the beginning of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, let him be careful lest he err and cut men; thus I have seen many times more of those who engage in this science and abandon themselves to science and experience.
Because I saw a foolish man who cut open one abscess of scrofula from a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
And I saw another man who removed a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; it took with it a piece of his bladder, and the man died within four days.
And I had already been summoned to treat it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if it was cut he would die.
And there was another doctor who took care of the leg of one of our land's dukes, which had been broken and caused an injury; and these doctors, full of ignorance, set the break above the wound with great force, and did not leave any splint on the wound, leaving it in such a state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated again; and it stayed like that until the leg became completely swollen, and the toes rotted away and came to ruin.
I was called upon to come and loosen the leg; and when I did so, it became peaceful and he felt no pain.
But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until it was completely destroyed.
And there comes another mirror which collapses an inflamed abscess, and then sets it on fire due to the malice of its power.
For a chancre, when it is full of black bile, it should not be touched with iron unless it can be completely removed that which is corrupt.
And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, a surgical operation where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to take care, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Take arms in custody, and begin your sick people lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; leave frightening diseases aside due to great health; remove your weapons from those that cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can depart from this world to another of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish person."
I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire and medicine cauteries and they are arranged from the head to the feet; and the forms of instruments, and the cautery irons, and everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of the ventouses and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are arranged in order with the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from the head to the feet, and with the forms of instruments.
Therefore, remembering the work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
The quality of the aid, and the harm, is a long discourse and subtle science, and the secrets responses; and many wise men spoke about it, and agreed with this; and I do not trust their words much because I reduce the length of it.
I say that cauterization helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it be in two complexions: that is to say the hot complexion with matter, and the dry complexion with matter.
In a hot and dry composition of matter, some said that fire cautery is great aid; and others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not useful for sickness caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; and he who said otherwise said that fire makes great aid for hot and dry sicknesses coming into men's bodies. For when you understand the body and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it once by experience.
And every way, do not interfere unless the one who has tested it and knows by long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the variety of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and the space of time; we have no fear for other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians agreed and concurred to the cautery.
And know, son, that a cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater goodness than a cautery of burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not come out except for the member that is burned, and it harms no other member unless named.
Burning medicines come from one member to another in spreading, and bring diseases of great suffering to the sick member; and by chance it kills the patient.
Fire due to its high nature and the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
And I have found this for you by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into my art, and it is in line with truth; and because of this, I apologize for the length of my words, for I do not wish to deprive you of the secret which is revealed or fire, and the quality of the work, how diseases of the body can be driven away, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauterizations should be done and chose their assistants.
And I say that a cauterization is useful in all times, because the harm that occurs is kept at bay by the help of cauterization; and indeed, if the cauterizations are necessary for pain, they should not be delayed until greater harm comes to the member.
And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; for a disease treated by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not just medicine that changes the complexion, but rather dries the humors that cause pain, and acts more quickly than other medicines due to its potency and the virtue of its work and dominion.
And sometimes the disease comes according to the complexion of the sick and the nature of the disease and its properties; and superfluidities are gathered in him through the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauteries have been administered where there is little superfluity or moisture, such as dense cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this does not often happen.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauteries have value after other medicines, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they are of no use, then we administer cautery, and it has value. Then it is clearly stated that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
They used to say that cauteries made from gold instruments are more effective than iron ones, and said this only because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; but this is not true, for I have tested it, and found it true in some men; and a golden cautery is as effective as an iron one, as they say.
And even though you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot due to the color of the gold and can suddenly cool; and if heated too much, it causes fire, and so there is enough reason for concern.
And therefore we use the fire cautery, which we have found suitable for our work.
I hereby order you this chapter on the head down to the feet, because the veins will be easier to find.
olive oil cautery
This cautery is good for both moist and cold conditions on the brain, and it helps with a disease called "soda," as well as many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and numerous dreams, throat pain, and neck pain, and similarly for all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, clearing his head for three to four times or according to what the virtues and age and accustomed tolerance of the sick person can endure; and then make him lie down again on top of the sick man's head.
Then place him crosswise between your hands and put his hands on a soft place; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your thumbs meet, it will bleed, then heat the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
Then place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand back and forth while turning it over and over; then remove your hand immediately, and watch the spot to see if you can see a small bone; and if you don't see it, continue heating the cautery until you do as I have told you; afterwards take a small piece of oil and put it on a soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; afterwards place soft buttery cotton on top of it; and leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And as the ancients said, when the wound is left open longer, it purges more; therefore, if assisted, it heals faster.
And said some that the fire cautery should be allowed to burn part of the bone, then clean and heal what is burned.
And others say that the cautery should be allowed to burn from above, and strike it so hard that a space as large as a walnut is hollowed out, because the humors flow out; then the wound should be left open for a long time, after which it should be cured and dressed.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good to me altogether, except in some men where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other members; and even when the head of the patient is naturally weak, the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more beneficial to me, and from this use I work for salvation.
of the ancient pain of the head
When the head comes chronic and lasting pain, the patient should use earwax and pills called "cochie", and purge of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does the cautery that we have said before, it is not worthwhile.
Take care if the patient's shoulder is strong and not too cold; then cauterize below that fire cautery a small amount as we have mentioned before.
After performing cautery on each temple of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and perform one cautery called "vasselz"; it is one in which ventouses are placed; align your hand so you do not see past the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak about this later; and the cauteries on the temples should be finer than those used to cauterize the midline of the head, and here is the shape for it:
the cautery on the head When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the oil, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases are performed, but none of it helps; then cauteries are done according to two ways, namely by hot medicine and fire.
The cautery by hot medicine is that you take a shallot and remove the skin and place it on two eyes, one piece for each eye, then make an incision in the temple where the pain is located so you can place the shallot under the skin; and when it is placed, press it well and let it stay for 12 hours; then release it and treat the shallot strongly, letting the wound heal for 2 or 3 days; then cover it with a cloth dipped in butter until it becomes dry.
After the treatment with ointment until it heals; and if you see that this does not work, perform one of the treatments using burning medicines as I have written or the 12th remedy for treating burning medicines.
The cautery of fire is as follows. Heat the cauterizer according to this shape:
It is called "clo" because the head is made in the shape of a cup with a shallow indentation, and it has a small appearance; place it on the painful area, hold your hand and lightly press the iron until half of the thickness of the iron is burned; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, that is away from the burn, and draw out the blood abundantly.
After placing cotton on it for two days, then put dampened cotton wool on it, and afterwards heal the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this boil with the cautery called "cultellare", prick it all over, but be careful not to touch the artery in this boil that is not old.
Of emigraine (Translation: From emigrain)
When you treat emigraine, as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you find that cauteries before mentioned in the medicine do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called «cultellare» until it becomes white; and hold your hand on the side of a line of half a foot long, and strike once, and strain so as not to touch the artery or come to the bone; and watch for the jaw that moves when eating, and veins should have no sight but the moving one and spasms should not come upon the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, or bleeding too much where there is great fear, especially for those who do not know it and are not trained and experienced; and leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be found in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you find, administer the cautery mentioned or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the one and more helpful.
From the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain in the ear comes from cold and medicines soluble and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", here is its shape:
After pointing all around the sick ear, or in both sides where the pain persists, move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot; and place 10 "poins" around each ear; treat the spot until it is healed.
Of the torture of the mouth
The torture by cautery can only be applied to those that move due to fever, as we have said in the division of diseases; and never do cautery to similar ones that come from scurvy and internal bleeding.
When treating this type of torture caused by fever and purges of the head and gargarism, it is not effective. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little distance from the temple, and the third in the corner of the lips; put the cautery in the open healthy part, and make it burn towards the ear above a little bit below the forehead, and another in the temple as long as a fist; leave the cautery for as long as half an hour is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the shape of a surgeon's instrument that we have mentioned, but it is slightly more subtle and requires the knife to be a bit larger; after curing the wound as I have previously stated, let it heal when it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one on the top of the head, one in the place called "bellybutton" as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
bedridden
For this disease, give the patient large years and round pills containing cerebrum; afterwards, anoint the head of the patient completely, and place the plaster of mustard (sinapi) on the occiput which is written or treated as plasters; and this is the method of cautery: if done as I have said.
If it is healthy, it is good; if not, perform four cauteries on the head from the neck to the collarbone, and keep a distance of two between each cautery; heal as with others, and if you see any danger, and the patient is enduring, perform one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns (temples), and heal until it is healthy; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare", as I have previously said.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary to clean the head (skull) with years and what was said before; afterwards, the head of the patient should be shaved, then make a fire cautery on the head and one at each temple, and one at the back and three on the spine of the neck; if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; let it be until the most painful part is burned, then wash your hand; afterwards, cure it until it is healed, and heal the cautery that is called "olivare" which was said before.
epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to clean the brain with years and other remedies as we have said in the division when the patient is large and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give him gargarism and frequent mastication of the brain with good foods; afterwards let the head be repositioned, and make one cautery according to what has been said before, and one cautery on the forehead, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, make cauterizations as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make a subtle cautery in this way:
When because of melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupted and thick fluids, then make the cautery with such cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are descending towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will purify the brain, according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
Then place the patient's head; make a small linen bandage in the shape of a circle and put it around his head; cross the patient, hold him securely from all sides; apply liniment made of old butterbur, then heat it gently so that he can bear it; empty the circle from within around his head, and let it cool; do this to the patient once a week with good management, until he is cured.
Or, if you wish to cauterize him by making multiple punctures throughout the cautery, this method will greatly soften the brain. Then place damp cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top.
From the swelling of the eyes When the swelling of the eyes comes first as I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something cleansing for the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it more times on an empty stomach.
Afterwards, command him to lie on his back, and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the swelling is in both eyes, or one if it is in one; and touch all the veins and arteries under the skull with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the size of the temple; and be careful not to spill blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making incisions with caution, how to stop it; and sometimes a fire cautery or hot iron is made under the two bones behind.
The heart weeps
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or from the arteries that appear on the forehead; and it is seen that this is due to cold, fleumatic superfluities, then do the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this work, namely: cauterize in the forehead, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or cauterize beneath the eyebrows of the eyes; and if there is need for more, cauterize skillfully above the corner of the eye with a small cautery.
The heart weeps inside the eyes
When you treat the patient as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the sick person three black eggs to drink; after these, roast the head with olive oil cautery or millet seed cautery; and make two cauterizations called "clavilis" over the two sores, one under the hair; beware of the artery that you do not cover. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then perform this cauterization with the olive oil cautery. Here is its form:
And if you wish to perform two cauterizations on the two witches who are long as witches are; and do not leave your hand except when the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair which pricks the oil Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted into eyelashes and prick the oil; and cauterization is done according to two methods: either with fire, or with burning medicine.
Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient on a paper with a figure shaped like the fennel stalk, and make the incision at the beginning of the sign where the hairs are; then put dampened cotton soaked in egg white and mustard seed oil on the heated cautery, then heat the cautery to this shape:
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked with small strokes many times until the hairs are burned in that spot; and the signs of the health of the work are when you see the paper shrink, and the hairs rise to the tip of the oil; then lift your hand and let it rest for four days, then soak the cotton in butter until the burn is removed; after treating with ointment until it heals.
And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper becomes soft, then repeat the fire cautery on that same place, as you did before; and if the hairs curl, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position, and is straight, and does not curl anymore.
The hot cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and straight, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot vinegar, each one .Z., and grind them together well; and apply it hastily, so that it does not cool down, then place the medicine on the parchment with the hairs; and if the patient only feels one oil, you must work with one, and if in both also; put cotton moistened with egg whites under the oil; and the patient's shoulders should be healthy and you place your hand on top of the medicine, pressing it with one finger every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, because it burns like fire. When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, lift up the limb and check if the wound is raised as it was by heating or incision; and if it is so, it is good. If not, apply more medicine on the limb, or if no medicine has worked yet, keep your actions equal, and position your hands correctly; then place damp cotton wool on it until the blisters are burnt, afterwards cure the limb with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it heals.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not seep out from between the hairs. If the wound becomes soft and the hair pricks in the oil, repeat the medicine on that limb which has been properly cleansed; afterwards cure it until it is healed; this is the shape of a mirte leaf:
And know that the hairs of men are different in size and length, and according to this, apply your efforts; and never deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
Treatment of a fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as previously mentioned in the description of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on a clean surface; and have an assistant hold the patient's head between their hands in such a way that it does not move or turn; then put cotton soaked in egg white or linseed oil on the area to be cauterized; after heating the cautery until it is hot like iron, place it on the patient's head in the shape of a pen nib, with the cautery also being shaped accordingly; if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also resemble a tent; but regardless, the one that is shaped like a pen nib is more suitable for your task.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it and remove the scab; after that, place the heated cautery on it in the shape of a cross, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part near the nail so as not to burn yourself; and place the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrode it.
If you begin the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, restart the cauterization once more, and do this as many times as necessary, and leave for 3 days; after that put soft cotton in butter, and let the ointment with drying properties heal until it is healthy, and if after 40 days it is still not healed, put corrosive medicine on the bone; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients spoke about. Understand that by fistula, I mean an opening, and cut open the area; afterwards put one subtle camelidum (camel's fat) into the opening in this form: and they make the quantity of one .5 cubits; hold your hand with camel's fat firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the molten plumb flows into its oil; it is necessary to put linen cloth dipped in egg yolk or oil on the wound: the plumb will heal the fistula by a wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer poultice to the heat, and return the fistula to the body of the heat according to what is needed in its own place.
deep grooves in lips Many times there are grooves or cracks in the lips, called "hair" and also in children's lips.
When you treat these cavities as we have said in the previous sections and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
And apply it promptly into those cavities until it reaches the bottom; after heating the area with a cautery iron until it is healthy.
of the abscess from the throat
When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or roots of the teeth, after becoming pus-filled, growing, and developing into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the previous sections, and it does not help: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after emptying or puncturing the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron is hot at the bottom of it, and where the last part is; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it heals like this, it is good; and if not, you must discover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
The translation for "dou movement des dens" in this context is "the double motion of the teeth".
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but it does not work, then put the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside immediately, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and continue with the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gums are kept restrained, and the moist corruptions dry up.
Of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold or there is cold or fever, and the medicinal remedies do not work, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to two ways: cauterization by bull and cauterization by fire.
Cauterization with bull fat is as follows: take bull fat and put it in an iron or brass container; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in boiled bull fat, apply it quickly to the painful tooth and hold until it cools; repeat this process until its property reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that the linen and cotton are moistened in cold bull fat, then apply it again and apply hot iron on top of it so the fire penetrates the tooth's crown.
The cauteries together use fire if it is such that you take a chain of iron or steel, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, its shape will come afterwards, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that day itself or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cautery, and then blow hard; this is the shape of the cautery:
When scrofulas are of the fluids and cold moistures, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery hair from what follows next, and have two apertures for the smoke to issue from the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the root of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put cotton soaked in butter over the wound until the boil is opened; afterwards, cure the affected area with ointments and poultices until it heals.
When phlegm prevails over the channel of the throat, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; afterwards, make cautery at the root of the throat, but not reaching the throat, and take care not to burn it too much but just a little. Then make another cautery at the joint between the neck and spine (the "clavicle"), using the form mentioned before; and treat the affected area as previously described until it heals.
of the cough When all and the disease of pormon are due to cold moistures, and the patient does not have fever or secretions, and the disease is old, make two fire cauterizations on the thigh; and another cautery in the middle between the breasts; and let it be the cautery called "clavile" according to the shape mentioned above.
And if you wish, make a puncture (cautery) at the tip of the cautery called "poins", as described above in the disease of the ears; and let the punctures be up to 30 or around it. After curing the place as stated before, let the cauterizations be at four intervals according to this shape:
And because the cauteries are lighter, since you make them in pairs (copies).
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After placing the patient on their back and on their side, press the sore with the heel of your left hand, and if the joint is dislocated within, use a heated iron with two nerves as shown here to reset it.
and cauterize the sore up to the ribs, and the figure of the cautery will be accompanied by four cauteries; and this is made with the cautery that has two nerves, because the figures of cauterization are these cauteries; and these nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, which is the form of the cautery that has two nerves.
And sometimes it is dislocated above this nerve, for which there are eight cauterizations.
After apply the cautery, break it with oil; after that let the patient rest and do not move the limbs for long times until they are comforted.
If it is dislocated above (the joint), which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the large bone or many cauterizations in piercing. For the joint is repositioned, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
the cautery of plasters
The ancient ones said that one should perform cauterizations on pleurisy using roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and long as your fingers; moisten it with oil, put it into fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the area beneath the beard; two cauteries between the fifth costal cartilage and the sixth, declining slightly behind a little; one cautery on the side, and one other on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at the sides of the shoulder away from the cautionery that is between the shoulders; do not press your hand tightly, but act gently as when smelling.
And some ancient ones said that a person uses a cautery resembling .i. razor, and they heat it up and put it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then the pain subsides, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mice as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then there are three ways of cautery that are good.
The first way is that you make four cauterizations, or eight, in lining according to the length of the mice, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver as we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be aware on his back.
And another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the curve which is towards the mice, where the patient's pain comes from the left, and raise the elevations from which you lift the curve according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After heating the 2 nerves inflamed to the point where their cores are pierced from the other side, then pull out the cautery and thus it will have 4 (pieces). If you see, cauterize the entire cautery on 3 nerves. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is worth noting that the other treatments mentioned earlier should be done first.
After removing the water from the bladder by applying pressure and allowing it to empty, then place a hot poultice on the bladder for three days and nights and cover it with cloths. Then remove the poultice and clean the wound with wine and salt.
Cautere is not useful for bladder stones, except in the method called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not work, then you must make 4 cauteries around the bladder, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one on the kidney; and let the cauteries be close to the base of the bladder.
After letting the fire cautery heal for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions (healing and God's help) would be united.
The form of the cautery for the belly is like the key that we have shown before; and for the back it is olive-shaped, as it has been mentioned before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is edematous, and filled with citrus juice, it must be cauterized on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and dip your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deeply, otherwise the citrus juice will burst out, and let the cautery be shaped as follows:
After doing two cauteries on each leg with the tip of the knife; let one of the cauteries be behind the knee and the other outside the leg; and leave the cauteries above for a long time to heal, as the citrus juice is in it; after healing the other wounds that we have mentioned.
of the treatment
When the hernia of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, while the digestive and retentive virtues that are in the stomach and intestine are obstructed, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, do this: make one large cautery on the stomach as described earlier, the cautery of the stomach, around the circumference; and four subtle cauteries around the abdomen, one subtle cautery each on the flanks.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the joint, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries on the stomach in place of the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are founded, either one or several, and are old and are of large, cold and corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, it does not benefit if cauteries are done: 4 on the spine of the back, which is completely turned out below the coccyx and point by point triangulating, and 1 caution beneath the anus. 2 times;
If you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and swelling of the face is observed, then one large caution is done on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with a long incision; and leave the caution open for a long time. After curing the place until it is healed.
of the flesh growth which is called "thelul"
When you apply althelul, heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then place it entirely over the althelul-coated wound; leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the vein opening, thus burning the wound; do this once or twice, and if there is much of althelul, cauterize each time as we have said; afterwards, cure with herbs until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large cautery over blisters, it will provide more aid.
of an improperly healed wound
When the patient cannot tolerate incision or opening, as we will explain in its place, this illness occurs that can only be healed by cauterization.
When any fistula comes, and it is swollen and filled with pus and corrupt moisture, you should probe it thoroughly with great subtlety, and be aware of the extent to which it has become full. After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the size that the pus has entered, and continue the cauterization until the flesh burns and becomes corrupt, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of pus required; be careful not to burn the nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the body of the bladder and intestines, be careful with these areas, and do not do anything outside the charnut area, thinking it is not dangerous; after curing the area until it is healed, if the area is ulcerated or the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is completely healed; if the matter has not been removed, know that the area is closed and the bone is corrupted in the process; and so with one of these as we will say in its place.
Kidney disease When cold pain comes to the kidneys, accompanied by large swelling, and does not take on female form, then it requires cautery over the kidneys on both sides with the cautery described earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have four cauteries in a line, and will provide more assistance.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a cautery on the area outside of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, both as long as our thumb; and make one incision on the back, or two if necessary; and let the incisions be like the shape mentioned before.
of the kidney When the matrix is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delay; and when they come, they feel great pain: then it is necessary to apply four cauteries around the womb, as we have said (cautere of the bladder), and two cauteries behind the back; and may the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
When the loins are cold and moist, and do not allow conception, and the seed is corrupted and its term prolonged; and when it comes, it causes great pain: then it is necessary to apply four cauteries around the flanks, as we have said (cautere of the bladder), and two cauteries behind the back; and may the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
When the viscous fluids descend into the belly of the loins, and because of this it moves away from its place, and the signs are that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be dislocated, if so you must cauterize the patient on the belly of the loins with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the joint around the belly so that the belly is within the circle; and may the cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this fire cautery is not present for you, make 4 large olive oil cauteries and let them be as perfect as all the others; and apply it until it is healed.
of the pain from the hernia When pain comes in the area of the hernia, and it is caused by coldness and moisture; and the patient is cured with what has been said in the division, but the treatment is not effective, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient from the thick humors using fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
After the cautery, the method of the cautery is according to two ways: namely with burning medicines, and cautery of fire. The cautery of fire is according to many ways, of which one is such: you should cauterize on the boil of the haunch four triangular cauteries according to this form, and make it a good depth and large, and have space between each cautery the size of a thumb, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on the head of the haunch, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the haunch, but make it so that the circles encompass the entire haunch, and all the fat surrounding it is burned.
And this is the method used in sciatica when the pain remains in the haunch and does not reach the thigh or the leg. If it reaches the thigh and the leg, two cauteries are made where the patient says that the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, on the left side a little bit; and let the cauteries be scissor-shaped, and burn the fat surrounding it; if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers or less of the foot, cauterize there where he feels the pain two or three fingers depending on the cautery called "poins".
And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire cautery with a cutlery or circular cautery, and be very careful in all your cauteries not to let the cautery burn nerves and large arteries, and not to cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
I have also seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot and let it burn too much so that the leg was all swollen, and the toes as well, and they were pierced and corrupted in all the toes. After an abdominal solution, death followed.
And if the pain is in two places at once, make a cautery in one and the other, as follows. // The wise say about the cautery of the neck, here is how it is done, make a rod of iron that is as thick as a little nail of a thumb or a bit less, and let it be between-the-crossbars or let it be from one between-the-crossbar to the other at a distance equal to a nut of the fist; and let the between-the-crossbars be two fingers wide and shaped like nuts, and there should be a single handle of iron well made; and this is its shape:
And let it be scorched until it is all red and blistered, and then place it on the sick person's bed, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one hot iron and leave it for 3 days; then make a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; after that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance, and not many seem to use it; nevertheless, this is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and in places where it adheres.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from striking or excessive bleeding, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are worth cauterization except for that caused by infusion of cold matter.
Afterward, the patient should be purged of foul pills or similar substances applied to the back where the pain is located, three lines marked with incense, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations depending on the potency and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cauterization should be done according to the cauterization called "poins"; and if you see, do 4 cauterizations or 3 according to the medium clavicle cauterization in this form:
Often, this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; and you find in the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you intend to cure it, if you cauterize it with the cautery of that kind according to this form.
The cautery should reach each part of the spine in length. And if you see, if you cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .2 or .3 inches, and the points should be close to one another. After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, be careful not to apply caution in a gillboise state that is in the nerve's splay.
of the pain of the joints
The pain of the joints is due to swellings which are present in every member of the body. When it comes in the feet (they call it podagry properly), and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries as follows: make the patient ready for the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the foot, make a cautery all over the area that people call "point". If pains come up to the knees and other joints (this happens many times), then make a cautery on each knee. Make four olive-shaped cauteries or four for each part, all around the cautery. And if more is needed, do more, but do not hold your hand outside the area longer than the tips of the coals are burning.
And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. If the pains are at the hands, make pricks around the fingernails; and if there remains no pain at the thumbs, make pricks on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the sides or shoulders, cauterize each part, and pay good attention to the patient and think about medicines. For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the aid of God.
of the swelling of the face
When swelling comes in anger and the boils descend into the eyes and it is suddenly occurring, if you see it when you want to cure it, you must not let him eat on that day; and he should use things that loosen his stomach, so that phlegm descends from his stomach. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his elbow as long as the boils are protruding, and rearrange them to your fingers, and sign on top of the swelling over the bone of the wrist, and at all one sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery in the shape shown here:
Keep the hairs long and even while it is white and exudes pus. Then you should realign the dislocated shoulder; and have the assistant hold their hand on top so that they do not return to their original position. Work well on the patient's thighs, put one cushion and one sergeant on the thighs, and another on the affected area where the hands are held; then place the cautery on the affected spot all over your hand, hold it straight and continue until you reach the bone. If you do not reach the bone the first time, try again until you reach the bone. Be careful that the dislocated shoulder does not slip out while performing the cauterization; that you do not burn it; and that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless. The cauteries for children should be subtle according to their age, and for adults as big as them; after four days, cure the burn caused by the cautery with butter until the blistering is removed; then cure it with other medicaments until it heals, and keep the patient lying on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well. It is necessary that his urine be allowed to flow slowly, so that the dislocated shoulder does not slip out when he tries to get up from bed.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, bring him a well-made splint and let it stay for another forty days; he should have good rest, avoiding excessive work, and watch out for too much drinking and eating, and excessive shouting; if he follows this guidance, he will be completely healed. And I will tell you about the cure of amputation in its chapter later. From the rupture of the abdomen
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make one cautery incision according to its size, and burn the third part of the body; after that, cure it as we have said; and none of the ancients say that it should be cauterized with a cautery at four angles according to this form:
But first sign the location of the incision and make a line above the rupture, and another below, and place your hand on the entire cautery handle. However, the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
From ancient pain in any limb When pain comes in any member, either due to falling or injury, and that pain lasts for a long time, and medicine does not heal it, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be done according to the length of the member, its smallness, frailty, virtue, location of twisting, and pain. If it heals from the first cauterization, that is good; if not, repeat one more cauterization on top of it, for it is customary that it should change in the member that is near, so you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
When mixing medicines, be careful to measure each ingredient accurately and mix them well, so as not to create an incorrect or ineffective remedy.
The following text describes the use of cautery in treating certain diseases, such as those caused by putrefaction of the fluids and melancholy. When cauterizing, it is important to be careful that the disease is at an early stage and has been properly treated according to what has been said in the division. If there is doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the patient, perform five cauteries on the head: one at the nape of the neck, another at the end of the hairline on the forehead; two on each temple; and one behind the ears. Leave your hand in place so that the cautery reaches the bone and the scabs come out, allowing the vapors of the thick humors to escape. Cauterize the mice according to what is appropriate for its condition.
And if the flesh is scattered everywhere; it is clearly rotten, you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have said, namely one cautery on the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the crotch and another small one, two on each shoulder, two on the sides, two on the tendons of the feet, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of nerves that are above the last calcaneum, do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the thumb, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more you make of cauterization, the more help it provides, and it benefits him; and know that the sick do not feel pain from cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the art of iron-working. After curing the leprosy with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it heals.
inflammation or swelling
When swelling arises in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but remains unhealed, then cauterization should be applied to the member according to its size and smallness; and the cautery should be a small amount inserted into the flesh's depth. Then cure it with herbs until it heals. And sometimes a cauterization is performed on hand, foot, back, at the nerve's issue that stops movement in the member, thus removing the swelling; but no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the issues of moving nerves of the body.
If a worm falls into the eye, you must put the infected eye into vinegar to make it sleep for a while, and then take out the worm with tweezers; if the worm does not come out, you should apply oil of roses or camomile to the eye.
When the illness called "albaras" appears and the devices of medicine are useless, then cauterize it with a deep cautery, according to the thickness of the flesh, until the white spot is removed, and the color changes; then cure it with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, blood of cattle and blood of almonds, each one in equal parts; mix them all together, tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it heals.
The treatment of syphilis by cautery
When syphilis begins and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize the cautery that appears as a circle around the edge of the syphilitic sore, according to wise men, they say that you should also cauterize in the middle of the syphilitic sore; but this does not seem right to me, since I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen once; a more appropriate thing is for it to be cauterized around, using the cautery called "circle", as we said in the section about cauteries.
The swelling that cannot heal
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which is slow to heal or due to its superfluity, or because the patient is weakened when old and has little blood, or due to time; and you wish to hasten its healing: then cauterize it with many small cauteries while pricking; after that, leave it. For it will hasten in healing.
And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, heat the cautery as follows:
Place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and make sure that the cauteries are such that the patient feels it move away from his body in such a way that the course of the pus is cleared. After that, cure it until it is perfectly healthy.
The treatment of fire by iron
Another type of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a rotting of a member, for it eats away at limbs just like fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can bear cauterization along with fire, then carefully heat the cauteries, both large and small, according to the place or location where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all corruption, and nothing of it remains except that what is corrupt is removed. Then let it heal for three days, and apply soothing ointment made from cauterized flesh mixed with oil until the burns caused by fire and all corruption are healed. After the treatment of ointments generates healthy skin. And if you see after three days that healthy skin does not grow, that is good; and if not, repeat the cauterization on the place where the corrupt parts remain. This rotting is sometimes cured with medicines made from wormwood instead of cauterization by fire; but nevertheless, cauterization by fire is more beneficial. I have already said the treatment for the medicine made from wormwood in the division: take as much as you need.
sore on the feet
Very often, in the feet, a disease called "clos" arises according to our understanding, and it is a large thing swelling that afflicts the foot. And the cures for this disease are according to .ij. ways. This includes fire cautery, and water hot cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat .i. cautery comb similar to a feather of a bird, made of good iron of suitable size to penetrate the nail from all sides, and it should have subtle edges; after heating it very hot on top of the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the root of the nail; then leave it for 3 days until it begins to emit pus; then make a poultice with foul-smelling herbs ground with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the heated iron will become cool and be removed from its roots. Then heal the place with soothing ointment until it is healed.
And if it is converted by the outside of the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you should apply water hot cautery; and it is done like this: take a cane made of iron or a feather of a bird, and place it on top of the nail and press it, causing blisters; then place the cane so that it surrounds completely, then put a little hot water there, and hold your hand tightly, pressing your hand while turning so that the edges of the cane reach the root of the nail, and the hot water can penetrate to the root; and let the patient bear the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will be uprooted with all its roots. Do the same procedure for all others that are on the body, then heal them with ointments that soothe.
the trembling cures
When someone shakes from cold or from quartan fever or another illness, you must make 4 or 5 fire cauterizations along the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and 1 cauterization on the heel, and 1 on the stomach using the olive-oil cauterization; it will stop the trembling, and the health will improve from the cold disease.
of putrid boils
Sometimes the body appears swollen with boils that are full of putrid matter. In such cases, at first when they appear, it is necessary to make a cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery made from the myrtle stick, of which the tip is placed in fire or long roots of aristolochia, or with a cauterizing iron. Sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear according to this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the excess is dissipated from where they come, and they become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Often there are large internal movements of blood from the cut artery at the wound, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; it is a very grave thing to let it out.
Nevertheless, whenever this happens, hasten to put your finger over the opening of the vein, and hold it very tightly so that the blood is stopped under your finger, and no more comes out; then take olive oil-soaked cotton balls of various sizes and apply them until they are all red; then take cotton made from hemp, or large or small according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery is damaged, and apply the cauterized cotton over the vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterized cotton in place until the blood is stopped.
And if the limb jumps violently when you place your hand on the vein, and the cautery is applied, take quickly another cautery that is near the fire.
Keep doing one after the other until the blood stops flowing; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and ensure no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when the artery is large, it cannot be stopped from bleeding if not through one of the four ways we have mentioned: either by cautery, or extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it which can stop the blood; and bind and tighten it accordingly.
Whoever brings a tight binding of fabrics or places hot substances on it, or other similar things, if they do not help, will not benefit.
And if this happens to anyone who has no mirror or medicine present, you should place your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it is stretched taut over the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold moisture often so that it becomes very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stretched taut; and inquire about the ones in front of whom you need cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicines, and we have explained their types, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization; and I placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter along the same path for those who seek it more easily.
And therefore, as I begin this, dear son, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason, greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to act foolishly. For many kinds of people come seeking cures. Some come who are so sick that they die easily because of the confusion and the greatness of their illness, and of these one should have fear. And of these who give you counsel, and says: "wait, I am healed"; the patient is disdainful. It is not appropriate for you to agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater consideration in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly but wisely from what you are certain, and from what you can perceive; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients, so that salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dearest child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, come here.
I have arranged this chapter in discussing by chapters, following the order of each chapter of cauteries that I have previously described to you from head to feet, as these are easier for you to understand what you will need.
The full head is swollen with water
This disease often comes to children at childbirth, and sometimes it occurs due to an unknown reason.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those whom I have seen hurried death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worthwhile to devote some treatment to certain cases.
And I saw one child whose head was swollen with water, and it grew larger every day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture gathered underneath the skull between the brain and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make an incision large on the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out; and see the shape of a lancet:
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
If the moisture is beneath the bone and you see the signs (of the abscess) as the corners of the head open up from each part, and the pus jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not heal: then you must make four incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:
And after the incision remove all moisture completely. After holding open the cuts with fabric strips and powders, put vinegar and oil in it, leave it like that until the fifth day; then release it, and treat the wound by bandages and ointments, and let the wound heal gradually, and give the patient dried meat of a moisturized member as long as the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Another way of incision is that you look for the size of the abscess, and the flow of fluid; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind; sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Therefore, make the incision where the abscess opens, and empty the fluid, and do as you can; but be careful not to cover the artery; and let a vein of blood flow, so that the patient dies with dignity and from the evacuation of moisture.
of gout
When it happens with any disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the worst, and the disease is old and medicine does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery, namely by cutting two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to cover them, the patient should lie down with their head back; afterwards, rub the area of a rough cloth on the arteries until they appear; then grab the patient's neck with one rough cloth; then look for where the veins are, and they will be found behind the ears, and the arteries will be opposite each other; then mark the places to cut, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of 2 parts. The incision should go as far as the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
And if you want to cut them, push the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, while cutting as deep as 2 fingers through.
And when a vein is cut, it leaps out continually without stopping.
And if the artery is not opened to feeling, you must measure the space of 3 fingers, then apply pressure and cut up to the bone; and the quantity of blood that should be let out is 6 cubits, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone point without swelling, if the piece that you cut out does not come out, then press and hold the wound and heal it with ointment until it is healed.
of immigration
When an old migration comes and an acute catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes, heat in the temples and an ancient madness, which seems like other things, and it is treated with methods of medicines, but none of them benefit, we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have said.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls the hairs on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and is easily found except in some cold people; and if it is found, the patient should strain the neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and burn the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile (a medical instrument) as shown here:
then lightly peel the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up towards the tweezers, and separate well the fabrics that are underneath each part; if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the tweezers, then cut off that part according to the number of the two hairs. Because if it is not cut off, it will not move at all in any way.
And draw out the blood from the .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the arteries are large, you must tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound is sealed, and there is drainage of blood; then cut off the excess between the .ij. ligaments at that same hour, and if possible, cauterize the area with a cautery knife up to the bone until the head is amputated; this is the mutilating work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot constitution.
The cauteries are aid for healing wounds: therefore it is of greatest aid to those who are wounded. It is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the area with old cotton and places well-made tourniquets on it; and when they are loosened, one should be cured with dry medicines that produce heat, and tourniquets, until it is healed; and if without cutting the artery as you work, you must hasten to cover it by cauterizing, or use vitriol and hold it with your hand so that it is scorched; and if this is not present, place your thumb on the area until it freezes, and moisten the area with cold water until it stops, and hold as necessary; and the one that is mutilated and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery twice, but the cuts should be wide enough to keep its heat longer. For when the straw is too thin, it retains less heat. And it should have between the two knives, one thickness of a finger's space, and then when you have signed up to a depth of two inches, and heat the iron hot enough for it to reach the bone, strike the vein in intervals of two inches; they should be spaced apart as they are not entirely sealed by this fire cautery, and this is the form of the cautery.
tears
When the tears flow from the eyes that are above the vein on the forehead of the head, and it does not benefit the medicine applied to them, and you see the patient wrinkling his forehead like shivering; and if they are thin and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls out, and the eyebrows are burned and scorched by the heat of the tears, this treatment is required.
And they called the ancient one "contused cure", and you must shave the patient's head who has this disease, his hair from the forehead, then make three cuts equally along the length of the forehead; one of the cuts should be as deep as two fingers beneath the brow bone, and the others two at the temples above the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries which are at the temples above the eyebrows; also keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and each wound should be of the size of three joined fingers.
from the first incision which is at the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core that is between the two cuts to the root of the bone, then continue from the mid-incision to the other second one, and draw out this pointed spoon.
Push the instrument called "cultellar" into the first incision, and it is very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and its shape is: And cut the flesh that descends from the hair towards the bone with the sharp side, and the soft side against the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision. And gather all the veins that descend from the base of the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where the bone opens, and then make another cut in the middle incision towards the other opening; and press the blood evenly, and express the place for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put on moist cloths soaked in wine and oil and ashes, and ensure that no pus comes out; on the third day unbind the bandage, and apply a large amount of hot mustard plaster, then treat it with ointment made from basilicon and oil of roses, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
the root of the hairs
When anyone comes with an acute catarrh, you see the eyes becoming swollen and small, blurring the vision, and burned papers; hairs fall out, and a headache ensues due to pain, and the patient coughs; then recognize these symptoms that those substances and this catarrh do not come from anywhere else but multiple veins, and the remedy for this illness is what is needed.
And you command the patient to lean back his head, then make a large incision across the forehead, and another wide one. First cut from the left temple to the right temple and let it extend to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; when the bone is exposed, drain all the blood with a sponge, then press between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton, and bandage; then cover with dampened cloths soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to get hot; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to grow, then cure with things that promote char growth.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with it; apply it to these wounds in order to promote the growth of char everywhere.
Of the stoppage of ears
Anything falling in the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stone or similar things like iron; seeds such as peas, lentils, beans; or something flowing like water and similar things.
If something falls in the ear that does not fit or grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the object, apply a drop of purple oil or camphor oil, then perform extraction; and have the patient cough, and close the nostrils when the coughing starts, and place pieces of fabric or wool around the ear; and hold it upwards. Many times expulsion occurs through this cure; and if it does not occur, extract it with fine tweezers as shown in the following form:
If it jumps at the hinges, that is good; if not, bring forth extraction with subtle thin forceps of small double curvature; and if it does not jump by this means, make a fishhook of wax and thrust its tip into the ear strongly, and stop up that which is around the hook with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the hook; then pull it forth, for it often comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in this manner, take glue of that and take the birds, and put any instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or something else, and pull it forth. If it does not jump in any of the ways we have said, hurry to cut the ear so that abscess pus and spasm come out; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient sneeze from the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to the measure of its power, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; let the cut be like a moon until you reach the bone, then break it according to your power, and suck it out quickly with your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. And if it is a grain that swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one thin, subtle spatula according to this shape:
And make the incision of that grain, but not when you believe that the grain is moist due to the moisture from the ear, until you have made many pieces; then strain it with fine tweezers and extractor, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
For the moisture that falls into the ear, the patient should first use ear drops consisting of vinegar and honey, or warm olive oil. Then stuff the ear with soft cotton and let it lie there on top of the ear where the moisture has fallen. If it jumps out because of this, that is good. If it does not, take many small and light pebbles according to the size of your finger, heat one slightly in the fire; then place a piece of cloth or wool into the ear of the patient, hold the stones from the other side, and strike another stone against the stone inside the ear; continue striking one stone with another until the moisture jumps out completely, and it should jump out entirely; if you see, take a string, tie one end to the stone in the ear, and the other end to the fire until the first stone is burned; then repeat this process with other stones until the moisture is completely gone, as we have said earlier.
In the removal of a beast (insect) that is small like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large and can be felt, make an extraction using tweezers; it is the lighter things that are easier to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where to treat distillations, if the treatment does not help, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if any worms open, you should take them with subtle tweezers, and if they do not open, then you should take the cane of which this form is.
And it should be narrow inside and wide outside. And insert the most subtle head of the cane into the ear according to the quantity of pain suffered by the patient, then suck firmly all along the cane; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, you should stop up around the cane with cotton as I said in the stone; if they do not swell as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the elimination of worms and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this device as shown:
And it should be narrow inside and wide outside made of silver or lead with one small hole, and above a distillation chamber for distilling; and to press the distillation within this device made of lead, and if you see that you need a scraper, you should wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you have into the cane, which is in the ear; then push the scraper into all the cotton and press your hand evenly until the oil distills or moves from the ear; let the patient smell inside, and the distillations should be about one spoonful heated in fire thus it is distilled in the ear; make sure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be as effective.
of the stoppage of ears
No child is born who does not have any birth defects in the ears; and this same thing happens to adults through ear stoppage caused by pus or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage can sometimes be deep within the ear, which cannot be seen; and sometimes it causes one of the eardrums to move out, which is easily visible.
Therefore, if it cannot be seen deep within the ear, it is a serious condition in many cases, and in this case you must put the sick person's ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the accumulation clearly, you should use the spatula shaped like this one to remove it:
And let it be sharp and incisive all around, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the opening is of soft flesh or cartilage of the ear, hold it with subtle tweezers and strike gently until all the flesh is completely removed.
If the opening is deep inside the ear, take a subtle razor and heat it slightly over fire, then apply it to the cartilage of the ear. If you feel the opening that causes pain in the ear, pierce gently, making sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a plug in the ear according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a plug and moisten it with rosewater, add powdered vitriol; if you see the ear swell, then it is necessary to draw out the plug and insert another plug moistened with roset oil and beeswax until the swelling disappears; then let it heal.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cold water in it, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are to treat distillations.
of the bark of poplars
This is the method that comes in papers from the eyes when they are moist and dry; it must be stretched with tongs and tweezers, and then struck with a spatula at its roots; then place it on the side of vitriol powder.
And if not dressed (cauterized), the subtle lenticular cautery should be applied to it, and afterwards the cauterization following the incision is worthwhile; and they often heal, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hailstorm
Many times there come to papers hailstones that seem like hail in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hailstorm", and it is a large assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the process is as follows: Take care so that the hailstone moves neither left nor right, and this is an easy thing to know; then make an incision on both sides, then remove the skin gently from each side, then take them with the forceps, and squeeze. If you cannot cover it without perforating the paper a little, do not worry about the patient; and if the tear is large, gather it together with a stitch, and cure it until it heals; and if it is small, do not use force, because the ointments restore it soon and cause pain.
And if the pus is descending within the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and grasp the pus with forceps, then press it from both sides; and if the paper is pushed away by the incision, it does not matter; and when the pus is pressed, apply salty oil to the area where the patient has an infection until the patient recovers.
of the fat from the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is infused in the paper on top, and this happens more often in children than adults, and it causes great discomfort to their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears flow rapidly into their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces immediately and sleep, and their wet paper is covered by exinach which spreads in the oil. And when you press the affected area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of work is that the patient places their head in your lap; and then takes one piece of linen cloth, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size that contains exirnach for each part, then puts it on top; and presses with both hands from one side and another, so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then makes an incision in the middle of the moisture with a pointed spatula cutting a slit wide, but not larger than the wound made at the vein opening; and cuts the skin completely until you can see the exirnach; and in various positions, the exirnach comes out from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then, place a piece of linen cloth between your hands and spread it apart; and make sure you do not displace the spatula in the slit, go up to the oil but do not pierce or cut it.
If the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the slit, slightly enlarge the slit until it appears; then pull as previously stated, moisten cloth in oil and water, place it on top, and hold with bandages.
And for such men who grind and apply [something] on top to corrupt the moisture that has remained, heal it until it is healed. If it becomes abscessed hot, then heal it with plasters soothing it until it is healed.
the hairs of the paper
When paper hairs grow other than naturally and are nurtured, they harm the eyes and bring on various diseases such as common eye ailments like tears and swelling of the paper and albugine, which cause the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to cure it: either by cautery with fire, or with medicine ointment according to what is stated in the previous chapter about cautery, and this is done either by incision and stitching, or with canes, as I will explain.
It is required that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of oil on your left hand; if it has been converted, that is good; if not, push a needle through one thread above it; and it should be pierced where the edge of the paper meets the hairs, or where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull one thread across the whole paper, and turn to the razor; then make in the part beneath the paper, under the hairs adjacent, as wide as a spatula, from the large blister until the small one; then pull one thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen underneath the paper, then mark on the paper a sign of a thorn, as a bunch of myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you wish to lift the paper which has been designated for all.
And if it is necessary to use a large quantity of the paper according to what the paper has been softened; then make on both lines that you have marked, and begin from the large blister until small; and let one of the cuts be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the keyhole, then peel all; then sew together the two lips with a thread made of subtle linen and an awl at one filament, and squeeze the blood, and make it dry the excess threads above both scissors, if you want to do this; and if not, have no concern, then leave the stitching and threads for 2-4 hours; then treat the wound without stitching with things that are drying and tightening, because the paper will rise to the wound's edge and join it, but the stitching is rotten (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear.
and in another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure that is like the bunch of myrtle, as we have said before, with four needles pierced according to the form shown here:
Then bind equally with cords, according to the shape shown below:
And if you do not have the ability to hold pincers and the shape is not even, take a needle with one thread and insert it into the figure; and take another thread from the large incision, and the second thread from the small, and bring them together between your hands equally; then bind your hand equally, and bind all the skin above which you have sewn, as we have stated, then suture the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments.
And sometimes the hair of the papyrus becomes converted: if you need to use what we have said about incision, but stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure for bites is as follows: You are to fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, and then make 2 stitches with art, and 2 subtle threads of the same length as the paper and width of the spatula; take 2 pieces of each piece where you hold the threads; then bring together one and the other delicately on top of the paper oil, and bind the 2 stitches of the 2 parts; leave it for some days, and the skin that is bound will rot and die, until it dries up.
If it is slow or if you need to force it, then cure it until it heals; and when the wound is closed, and no more hair can be felt, this is the shape of the 2 stitches that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The work is such that you take a subtle needle and insert one thread of fine silk; then assemble the pieces and join them delicately, and let the length of the threads be about a span; then arrange another fine silk thread briefly, tie the threads together; then make the patient put his head in your healthy one; and place it in the sun so that the work is exposed, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle all along the root of the hair next to it, and pierce through the paper quickly until you pull up the natural hair above; then pull out the hair up to the needle, if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then hold your hand until the hairs come out fully with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, you shall draw out the arrow beneath to its full length that you have ordered, until the arrow comes forth from the flesh above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you shall draw out the arrow and the string, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and new flesh is formed; and if the hairs are small, one long hair of a goat's beard should accompany it, and let it be raised with this until it is distanced and then cleanse it.
Of the boils on the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or boils appear in the eye, it comes in two ways: natural and unnatural. And it often occurs due to a wound, or from cutting or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of work in it is that you cut through that joint, separate the sides of it, and put threads of flax inside and keep it until it heals; and you should not use anything in its treatment that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but the treatment with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the broth of water or oil and flaxseed cooked, and immediately dissolve alum in one of the oils, and wrap it in a linen bandage, and treat it with this.
And the treasure of your care is that you do not allow it to heal in its previous form; and this treatment that we have said is only appropriate for correcting this disease, so that it does not return in its previous form.
of the fat that comes in oil
This illness that is below, which is truly called "axacrati", is both natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds and fractures and cauterizations and similar things; and the work process in it is that you take a needle, with it having one double thread, and pierce it into the flesh, entering from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out in two heads of the flesh; then lift the flesh above the whole needle, and press with one spatula wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that's good; if not, take one rasp and put it in the fracture, turn the paper, and make two fractures where there is bone inside the paper; and let the edges of the two fractures from the two angles of the incision you made meet, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape will be like the shape of a letter with no "i"; then remove the flesh according to the thickness that its sides are sharp under the paper, and join the two separated parts with a thread of linen; then treat this as we have said of medicines softening, and of tenets, until it heals.
And if the illness comes from a fracture or sewing or cauterization, then you must make a full incision under the hair of the paper, as mentioned before; then separate between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said; and it is necessary to do the work according to the shape of the illness, because it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare devices with all possible skill to bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is required for the work and instruments in various positions.
swiftly of the paper
When this adhesion occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is glued with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is necessary to insert the tip of a razor beneath the paper, lift it up; and hold it with pincers until you reach the cartilage that is subtle, which should not be too sharp nor too jagged, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp spatula piercing the oil; and make your incision, from which you scrape the assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and the entire assembly heals, and sometimes becomes infected with foul oil, and lifts of sweet oil and colirium; then place between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil wool moistened abundantly with egg; and after the third day use the colirium and other healing substances until it is healed.
of the nail of the oil
Know that the nail is of two kinds: it is nerve-like and resembles a hard horn, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white solidified moisture, such that when it is touched by iron and boiled with pincers, it cannot be moved; and both seem to start from the great root, and grow little by little until it covers the whole eye and light and the movement of the oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you open the eyes; take paper into your hand, then hold the nail with small pincers and lift it up; then take a needle, put one hair from a horse or cow or ox, and a strong thread; bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing it all the way through, and tie the nail with the thread and lift it up; then scrape off all the hair on the side of the nail that follows the root and the silk to the hair until the skin, then cut the remaining part in the root of the finger as finely as possible with a small knife or tweezers, leaving the natural flesh at the root of the finger so that by the incision no blood comes out as usual; and sometimes the nail is held only on the end, and along the thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue of this shape:
And be careful that the soft tissue does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the pulp is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a little bit of broken sebum, and let it sit until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerveous and you cannot insert the needle, and the unguents cannot enter, many times this appearance of the nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the oil of the sick person, and take the spatumile lightly pointed according to this form:
Gently press the nail upwards, and if you see that it does not shrink at all and the reason persists, distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litargyre and red collyrium powder, and strain the oil until the next day; then repeat the work according to this same procedure until it is completely healed.
If nothing goes against you in the oil, as a general rule of abscesses, then milk it, and first heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh at the wound worsens greatly in oil, suspend it on a hook, and cut off a part but not all, so that tears do not come forth; then distill in the oil collyrium made from litharge.
And if the growth arises on the eyelid
In some men, a red growth may arise on the eyelid and cover the eye and be held on the paper and turned inward, resembling a rosebud of balustrade; and such treatment is that the patient puts his head in warm water, then opens the eyes and removes all that red growth with appropriate scissors as needed, taking care not to damage the oil gland during the procedure; it should be the incision of the spatumile as mentioned in the incision of the nail and the small forces used for removing the scab, as shown by the form after this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, use oil of sulphur broken or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton soaked with egg white on top to ensure that it stays hot; and if anything remains, and the wound becomes swollen, and you doubt that it is hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling agents for the abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and do the same for all wounds that are soothed in oil by this method.
But you must alleviate the cure of each oil with weak natural remedies; and in the work of iron, alleviate with hot remedies; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is strong enough for that work.
the veins of the eyes
When the veins that are covered over oil become red and their work can be seen by the eye and weaken the oil every day. Therefore, it is necessary for you to first examine if the oil, in which the vein is located, is healthy and has no other disease besides the one; then squeeze the oil in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your healthy hand, then press those veins all along their entire length according to your wisdom, and make the incisions subtle, double as shown in this form:
And be two incisions by degree in one body according to this form:
Then squeeze those veins gently, and suck out the blood hour after hour until you see them move away from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the spatula, and perform this task at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not cut anything but those veins; and when you have done this, if it distills green and red collector oil for correcting those remaining with the sebel.
And if you do not have the power to hold it all in that hour, apply a plaster over oil of soothing things on the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and assured of abscess healing, then resume as before until it is healed; this is the form of strength.
And from the fistula of oil
The mirror is named "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, there is an engine in it that you cut open above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, if it requires all the tools as stated here; it is called "rough head", and one should make a hole in it, exactly round, and point it like a chisel as shown in the current form.
And place the tool on top of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands and press your hand slightly so you know that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the position of the medicinal tool.
If the joint is swollen and pus forms, and the bone of the bow is also swollen and remains so for 40 days without healing or becoming an abscess, and no evil accident occurs, knowing it is healthy; if not, there is no other means but to bring back the fistula to the pit of the neck according to this form: And you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines that burn, and when it is exposed take a foret according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at four angles, and the shaft be shortened up to the head as you see here:
Then place it on the dislocated bone at the elbow, and move your hand away from the oil (i.e., fat). Then turn the screw (foret) completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand on their elbow; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh hardens and strengthens the joint, the matter goes to the elbow; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the oil issue
When the eyes are wide open all around and there is no dislocation or decrease in size, it is necessary to hold the patient; then clean it, apply leeches or cauterize to aid healing, then place oil made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcolaxis on it, and tie it with a bandage, and then wrap it with strips and cloths; the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes require; then bind it with a durable bandage form and repeat the leeches or cauterization without cutting again; then remove the leeches and leave the tied oil for a day and night, and if the lien becomes loose, you must tighten it; then remove the lien after the day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that is good; if not, repeat the application of the poultice and cloths and the lien and the leeches until it heals.
The broken separation of a ruptured membrane
When disruptions come in the ruptured membrane, it opens and is forced out like grains of paper, which are frightening to see; then you cover it over. The procedure for this is that you insert an awl into the root of the affected area up to where it ends above, followed by another awl or a double-threaded needle from the tear edge; and make it perforate, leaving the first awl as it was; then hold the eye of the double thread and tie a part of the umbilical cord around it, tighten it well, then remove the awl and apply moistened linen oil over it; and let it remain until the threads adhere to the umbilical cord, then treat the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the umbilical cord on both sides of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear large, pierce with a fine spatula that comes from oil, and remove the moisture and soften the eyes, then insert it immediately; then pull it out when it is healed.
From the bone of the oil [it is made]
This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from the bone that is assembled in the oil, resembling an abscess descending, but it is not an abscess; and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a chair arranged and straight, then take the head between your two hands, and move it until you see the bone appear above your eyes; then it should be pierced, and the opening should not be reduced and the light removed, and let the patient observe things as he is used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is an abscess, and if the descent of the bone is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtile spatumile [instrument] and apply it on the horned cloth .1 inch along the continuation of the conjunctive with the horned cloth and the corona, until the bone issues; and when it has issued, it should be distilled in hot, sweet oil mixed with honey, or hot oil or fenugreek boiled and mixed with honey, then cured with another remedy until it is healed.
From the waters of the oil
1. We have the appearance of the eyes in division, and that which is required to pierce; if you work according to its health. You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light due to the sun, and let him hold the oil sanitary and press it very hard; then take paper of oil with your left hand if the eyes are on the left side, or with your right hand if the eyes are on the right side; then take in your right hand (if the eyes are on the left side) the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand (if the eyes are on the right side); then place the point of the instrument next to the cornea by a ray's thickness into the white part of the oil at the lower part of the inner corner, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and hold your hand as long as it pierces through the white part of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to an empty place; and the measurement of the path of almagda should be at the full length of the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris; this is the cornea of the eye; you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horn-coated cloth, then place the instrument up to where the eye is, and press it down through another opening. If the eye moves now, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his oil.
After a short rest and if the eye rises again through the second path, place force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise again, hold almagda gently while rotating your hand slowly; then insert a small amount of gemstone oil again, and remove the oil inside. Then put on the outside either damp cloth or wet and oiled linen, and bind with the sanitary oil. We, and those from our times, put comfrey with abundant egg white on top.
And if almagda cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, for there are some people who have excessively hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is as follows:
And therefore pierce only the conjunction [joint], and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then apply alum, as we have said; and when the work is completed, arrange a pillow for the patient, in which he sleeps on his back in 2 cushions; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his position until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark place, and test his sight, and let him see certain things, and then rebind him for up to seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this during the time of care or after the incision, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because the pain increases quickly.
When the abscess comes out, you unbind the oil before the seventh day, and direct those who soothe the abscess; and when it is soothed, unbind the sight and put 1 eyepatch over his face to cover any day, and remain in that dark place. Then gradually leave the house little by little, and convert in his case; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from Iriha, who told us that in his country people pierce alum, so that the pain subsides, but I have never seen anyone do it on our land, nor have I ever read it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of forms of almadga, for this reason those who do not recognize them will see them; and they are of iron properly speaking:
And their heads are of the same subtlety, and the points in four angles are sharp.
from the flesh on the neck
Never are born or grow necks with different shapes, for this reason there are some that resemble scorpions in many places; and if there is a neck swollen of a certain color and the flesh soft of good color, then you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour vinegar on those necks, and pull them out; then hold what you can grab with the subtle pointed spatula, until you know that that neck is completely severed.
And if there remains any matter which cannot be covered, open it all with subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if without your protection or abscess covering, it should break, assist it as necessary; and if the abscess is malignant, hurry and cauterize it until the pus is drained and all the charring is removed, then pour in oil or warm water or wine.
If the nostril opens and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as necessary, know that there is pus in the bone above, so instruments do not come to cut: then you must place a thick thread of flax, knotted at regular intervals, between each knot a space of one finger's width or less; and insert the thread through the nostril into the patient's mouth as far as possible, and pull while smelling until pus comes out through the nose; and children in school often do this, and it is easy for those who wish to perform it; then hold the head which comes out through the nose in one hand, and the other head which comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and know one after the other while we are those who hold the thread. Do this until you know that the threads have corrupted the pus, then pull the threads, squeeze out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for four days or more, until the ointment has corroded everything remaining of the pus; and then put oil in the nostril for several days until it is healthy, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as one distills oils and medicines through the nose.
And it is made of silver or brass, resembling a lamp with an open top, like a funnel, and guide it in this way; and if you see, make a closed funnel, and have the instruments full for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
Of the flesh on the neck
Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the neck, which grows and becomes large enough to see; and because of this, you must cut it at the beginning, excise all of it, then put fire cautery or burning medicine on the place; if it is delayed until it becomes large, if it is hard, blackish, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an enlarged abscess, for when it is cut once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not blackish, and you can cover it, then empty the patient and cauterize with fear, and treat the place with drying and constricting agents.
when the neck is cut and sewn up
Know that when solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilage joints, it benefits little, except in some men. Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, you should check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together with a stitch, heal it until it is healthy; and if the lips are already separated from both sides, you must sew up all the parts of their joint as much as they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder on top, and incense ground; and place some plaster of strong or other plaster on top of the powders until it hardens by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of stitching is that you bring the solution together: either with needles, as we have said in the abdomen stitch; or with thread, as I have told you.
abscesses of the lips
In the hands of men, there often forms an abscess deep within the lips, resembling grains of wheat, smaller or larger; then you must turn the lips, and cut open each side, take it with tweezers and squeeze in each part; then apply the powdered vitriol to the wound until the pus is drained; and then apply alum to the wound, and treat the wound with dry things until it heals.
of the gums (of the teeth)
Many times a pimple appears on the gums, which the ancients called “albulus”; then you must hold it with tweezers, and squeeze its root, and let the blood flow; then apply vitriol powder or other powders that restrain and dry it; and if the pimple returns after the incision, and this happens often, then squeeze it again and cauterize it; it will not return after the cautery; and these are the instruments to cover (the wound).
The sores
Sometimes there are sores around the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh sores; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and decaying when corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and you should remove the sores or the roughness that appear, until nothing remains; and do the same for the blackness and greenness, and the yellow and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if you remove what is there at first sight, it is good; but if not, start again on the second day and third, as long as you have completely cleaned them; and know that the teeth need different forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the instrument used to clean the teeth has other forms than that used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as possible, for this should not be done at all; for this is a very high substance up to which there is no excuse for scraping. Then when the patient is compelled to draw a tooth, it is necessary that you are certain of the correct one. Many times, despite the pain, the patient believes it is a good tooth and draws out the healthy one; yet the pain does not cease until the bad one is removed, as we have experienced with such patients; and when you are absolutely sure of the tooth to be drawn, first scrape around the tooth entirely with strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then grasp it with your fingers or fine pliers at the base of the tooth, and gradually loosen it until it is well dislodged; then firmly hold the pliers; and keep the patient's head steady in your lap, so that it does not move.
After drawing the tooth correctly and if it does not break out on its own, take any of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you have previously done. And if the tooth is perforated and broken into pieces, it is necessary to fill it with fabric or cloth where the fracture has occurred; and grasp it subtly with pliers, so that it does not break while being extracted; and work very skillfully around the gum to extract the tooth.
And take care that you do not break it and leave a part behind, and return more pain to the patient through the root's malice than the original pain. And beware that you do not act as ignorant doctors who in their haste and recklessness sometimes break the chariot and do not achieve what we have described; but sometimes they bring about great disease due to the roots that remain or because they break the chariot, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, wash the area with wine or oil and soap; and if bleeding persists, which frequently occurs, use vitriol powder; and if it is not effective, cauterize.
The forms of the instruments, with which one silences the teeth first, should have long points and large handles, so they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are their shapes:
And should be large handles so they do not bend when pulling, and made of good iron, and have teeth for holding on.
of the root of the tooth When the root remains after pulling, then you must put cotton soaked in butter on it for 1 to 2 days until the area is softened, and then insert the tongs called "algefri", which look like a tweezers for this purpose; they should be made inside like a chisel and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tools, then you must expose the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as palancha, of this form:
And it should be thick and large so as not to break it, and if the root jumps out through those tools, that is good; if not, help with all the instruments, from which the shapes come after:
And if you use an instrument with two prongs, of this form:
And other instruments which are before the teeth, and of this tool that seems like large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
And it should not break, and know that many instruments of the teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters find their tools by themselves, according to what their work and the illness indicate, for there are such diseases where the old masters did not teach any tool because of the diversity of ailments, and if it breaks a chariot or another bone, or if it could, then seek the instruments that are required, which I have told you, and help with gestures, as follows: And they should be large and sturdy to hold the bone and not slip, but it can hold and extract; then restore the joint with appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, use this entire instrument:
When teeth appear not according to natural shape, and the form is ugly, even in girls, you should know that if the tooth is not born after the gum, and it is not correctly positioned, and cannot be straightened or filed: drill (it); and if it is exposed with the tooth, take this tool whose shape is like a small beak, made of hard steel at the tip:
And the handle of the copper instrument is held for long hours due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a small flat file like this shape:
and is similar to the file used to make needles; and file the tooth gently for long hours until it stops hurting; then plane the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and bites the tongue, you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the teeth fall out
When the teeth fall out, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot force it back up for chewing, you should treat them with medicines that tighten, but this is of no use; instead, they must be held together with a gold wire, as silver wire becomes green and rots, but gold does not change; neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you want to align the teeth, take the wire and place it double between two healthy teeth, then put the roots between the misaligned teeth, whether there is one or more, as long as you see clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then cover back up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and skillfully, so that it does not move; and hold your grip at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then grab the roots with the pliers, and assemble them, and place them back between the healthy tooth, and make sure it does not bite the tongue; then leave it so tight as it can remain for a time, and if they come loose or the wire breaks, hold it together with another wire; if it remains and serves for a time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two misaligned ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a bone tooth is made and placed where the lack exists, and hold it together as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
To cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue due to nature or birth defect, or by accident due to a wound; and these treatments are as follows: open the patient's mouth, hold his head steady, and lift the tongue; then cover the nerve-like ligament widely, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, if there is stiffness or not, and it is due to a deep wound, you press the unguent and widen the ligament; be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is beneath; and when done, lift a piece of fresh lambskin or a piece of fresh cold rose and place it under the tongue; and bind the patient's mouth so that it does not heal. If blood discharge occurs, apply vitriol powder; if the wound weeps, cauterize with a gentle cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
If you see it (the wound) of pale color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it is declining towards a blister and there is moisture, pour unguent onto it, and loosen it from both sides with a thin spatula; and if the wound weeps at your work, apply vitriol powder until it is drained, then return to your work until you drain all of it; then lift fresh lambskin or silk and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
abscesses of the throat
Sometimes boils called 'godath' appear within the throat, which are properly called the two mandibles. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess with small sense and pale color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, for fear of blood flow; but let it be until it dies, and then you will cut it, or it would burst by itself; and if it is of white color, retracted, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover. But first check that the abscess is cold and calmed. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, his chin in your hand, and open his mouth wide, and take hold of the sergeant with the tongs between his hands, and press the whole instrument under it, which is its form; it can be made of silver or subtle brass like a knife:
Can you press the tongue with the whole instrument, and you see the abscess, take the hook and pierce it into the mandible, and draw it upwards more than you can; and draw any cloth away from it, then strike with the instrument, which is its form, resembling a spear; but be aware that the head is curved, one end towards the other, and they are very sharp, made of iron or bronze:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the object with pliers, of which shape is as follows:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the object with pincers, of which shape is as follows:
I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, specifically one of small size; and I had closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and would have died within a day or two if she had remained in this state. The abscess was so large that it had filled two fingers' width through both openings of the throat. I immediately drained it, and inserted a cannula through one opening, then pulled it out, and extracted a large piece of pus; after which, I closed the other opening of the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the cannula into these abscesses, took some of its contents, and only a little blood came out; and in this way, the blocked passageway of the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink hot water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away from this abscess for long periods; and the abscess grew back again, filling the space that I had intended to empty, until it became quite large; at that point, I tricked it and cauterized it inside her throat: in this way, it stopped growing; and I left the area, and did not know what happened to her afterwards.
of the eye
When the eyeball recedes and it is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is swollen and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the inflamed abscesses are subsiding, and it becomes thin, then you should incise it; and when it is rounded and assembled but not long, and it is blood-colored or of a dark color, you should make an incision in it. For there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, by its whiteness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then insert the probe into the eye, pull it out, and incise as I have said in the treatment of the two anatomies. And do not incise beyond the natural limit; for if you do, it causes pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two anatomies, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears the incision, then you should use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate fear. The manner of the cautery is sharp and hot. It is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then presses his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned or chapter of cauterization, and hold it with a live hot coal, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this shape:
And have a hair or a piece of cloth where medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument completely over the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flows from his mouth into the medicine, but does not go down the throat or nose; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it on the eye, for about half an hour, until you see the swelling and pain of the medicine subside; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the sheath above, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this frequently, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and wait for four or five days. And if you need to reapply the cauterization of the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization rinse around the eye with a cotton swab dipped in warm water, and clean what is around the medicine; and apply cool water and gargle until it is healed.
This cure is more effective than incision, not the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take camomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and put them all together or any of them in one pot, and place it on a fire; and let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot have one instrument hairy according to this manner: And be it of silver or brass, and let one of the eyes be placed into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the eye through the canal, as long as the eye is mortified; afterward, repeat often, as long as the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not begin this at the start of an abscess's heating, for many things may occur; and do not do it except when the abscess's heat declines. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an eggshell crack into the head of the patient so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; because the eggshell crack does not let the steam burden the mouth, and this is good cure together with safety.
Many times an eel or spine of fish, or something else is lodged in the throat; therefore, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the entire instrument so that you can see movement; and if it does not open and is pushed back into the throat, the patient should vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance, this may dislodge the thing. Or, the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of soap, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie one thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and you will draw it out again. And if it does not come out as we have said, take a splint of wood according to this shape:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and raise the head high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, as it would die or push the bone inside; it is better if the patient pushes the instrument, because he will move or the thing is loosened; if he pushes downwards, or pull it out completely to equalize the instrument, until it is out.
the windpipe of the throat
Sometimes the windpipe is healed by medicine, as I have said in the division; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, after you press his tongue with the instrument I told you about. And if you see the windpipe, pull it out with a small pair of scissors or fine pliers suitable for that purpose. If this is not possible, take a thin cable and put it into the patient's throat, then insert or bend the hot part of the cable into the throat several times. And anoint the patient with cold water all day. Then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, pour it in without letting him swallow, and move it around in his mouth frequently; and as soon as the windpipe feels the cold water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then subdue the patient with a sedative, using the instrument I mentioned in the eye fumigation; do this many times, for it will not yield easily. The method of the fumigation is that you take one pot or one containing charcoal, and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and put the head of the instrument in it; then pour your fumigation, and make the patient place the head of the snake in their mouth, and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes only to the nose; and the patient should hold their breath, and eat salty and oily things, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out under this regime.
The form of the instrument with which to treat the snake, is such that when it can be seen, resembles curved pincers for entering the throat; and has the shape of a syringe's tip, and it should have a liming sharpness so that what it takes, it cannot lose; and here is its form:
The chapters on abscesses
Many resemble abscesses, according to what is remembered hereafter from one and another in this book, and they are diverse in penetration and cutting; and it is in .ij. ways that one is like itself, and of those that retain moisture. And the second way is for the joints where they are in the body. For abscesses of the head are other than those of the base, and abscesses of the shoulder blade are other than those which come in joints, and each should have its judgment in the work.
And if the abscess should not be pierced, until the bowels are ripe according to their completion; and if of those that require piercing when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses which come from joints. For when abscesses come from joints, and it is left until it is surrounded by pus, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint will be corrupted, causing contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is from the main part of the body, and the piercing is delayed until it is ripe, it will damage the main part; or if it is from the base, pierce it thus before it becomes ripe; and do not pierce a hard abscess without complete digestion, except that which is from the base, that it may not be hollowed out and become long within, and a fistula comes forth; and cannot heal in great term.
And you should know the time of piercing the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the swelling and movement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the piercing sit where the abscess depends more closely, and where it has opened; and let the piercing be long in the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all even places where there is no plaque.
In those who swell, act according to the affected member. And when an abscess is in place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, the body will fill with blood and be full of much pus; and possibly harden the lips and deeply affect them. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limb needs. And you must bring small perforations, small incisions; and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where the head needs to be covered, and sewn; when it has become as thin as .i. cloth, and is softened, you must do as with babies: and for those that are cut into four angles, and those whose cover is done like the leaves of myrtle, as abscesses in the joints; and for those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar sewing.
If there is no head (abscess), and it is a superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected a lot of pus, you must pierce it, but not drain all the pus in that hour, but some part; stop the abscess until the next day, then drain something incorrectly; do this many times gradually, until the pus goes away; be careful with weak patients, women, children or old people. The puss sometimes jumps out at the release of the pus, possibly killing the patient, and you should not worry about it. Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large wound, bring sutures of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there is much pus, you must put a stitch in each one so that they come against each other; and if you have sewn a part of the skin in the abscess and shaved it around, you must fill it with old cotton or woolen fluff without moisture, and tie it for three days; then remove it, and cure it with ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold and gentle moisture, and moisten one cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, administer medication and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned in this book to the affected area; and if it is winter, or the affected areas or abscesses are very nerve-like, you must place hot and damp cloths on top of them; and if it's summer, and the affected areas are fatty, you must put damp cloths on top of them, or cold and damp cloths, until the third day, as we have said; and then drain the abscess and the pus and treat it, as necessary, until it is healed.
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Again, do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
This means "of sores".
1. For small abscesses that come on the head, we have ways which are in bandages, as the jeweler of a pearl, and there are many similarities. There are some fat ones with moisture, like pustules; and there are some hard and stony ones where there is no doubt that the arteries do not oppose. And the treatments for the neck are as follows: you prove everything individually with an instrument called "entromissoire," from which the following form comes, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, they should be dealt with above the long side. And when the moisture is drained, scrape skin without leaving any hair that contains that moisture, for it will return immediately if anything is left; then place cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in oil and linen, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who are delayed by night will heal. And on the second day, renew the cotton as before, on the third day, as long as you know that it does not remain by night; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains one hard nut, cut it along this form, lengthwise; and pour your eyes into it, and scrape it from all sides, and apply all your care to draw pus out where it is located; and if the arteries oppose you, do as I have said before. And similarly deal with the abscess if it is stony, and treat and cure as I have told you.
And the cutting above the stony abscess and the moist one is easier, because they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and of these there was one abscess that I cut on an old woman's head; and I found the abscess as hard as a quartz stone, harsh and white, and could not be broken; and if any were made with iron in it, it would have made an equal wound as with a stone. In other abscesses coming from the heads, whether they are those that come on children's heads and the roots of the ears, they should be opened every day depending on the location, to let the pus out; and they should be treated as appropriate.
of scrofulas
There are often these abscesses at the neck, under the jaw, and in the throat, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and they are many and interconnected. Each scrofula is properly within its own side, as the notch and the abscess of the neck, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and do not want to obey health. In such a case where you see it well disposed to be touched, and is like the color of the body, and silent on all sides and not swollen at the throat or artery or duct, and not inflamed; then you must cut it above, and scrape off each part, and hold the two lips of the cautery (if you need them), as we have said in abscesses of the neck; and pull it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula be neither sharp nor cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and look too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not let you finish, put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; then let it stay until the abscess is appeased and the wound softened and begins to purify. And when the blood is stopped, return to your work, as long as you complete it; then check your guide if there are any small scrofulas remaining, cut them and clean them. And if there is a large root in the scrofula's wound, do not cut that scrophula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang down, without harm; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment on the wound, then heal it.
And if you excise the entire scrofula (boil), you must gather the two edges of the wound and sew them together since there is no excess to remain due to the size of the scrofula. You must understand how to cover its root and draw out pus, then sew it as we have said. For those scrofulas with excessive tissue, perforate where it has become necrotic; and perforate in the same way as that mentioned before, depending on it; then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption. Once the wound is well cleaned, apply an ointment of rejuvenating char to it until it heals.
And if you lancet a sciatic vein (swelling in the lower limb), you must cauterize the opening with a hot iron and bind it up, then keep the leg raised for seven days without moving it; otherwise there will be excessive bleeding.
The ancients spoke of the measurement of the throat, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the throat slit called "epiglote" should be opened; and no aid should be given by these, because all the veins and the pore of the sick person are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two tonsils. When the sickness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglote, it is necessary that we make a slit below four circles or two small cuts across the transverse, between the circles or according to the size of the fissure of the fistula, not in the cartilage.
And if the loosened joint is at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, then you must stretch the skin of the throat all the way down to the chin, then make an incision in the neck until it reaches the trachea; and cut off the vessels carrying blood, if you see anything, and then sever the windpipe as we have said.
And it is proven by the incision of the trachea that flows out due to the broken joint, and by the lack of voice.
And leave the wound open for a while.
When the hour has passed in which there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and sew it all around the cartilage; then administer medications that cause pus to form, until it heals.
Albuscasis says that this should not be done until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient has been judged to be dead, and the bird removed from him. Then the epiglottis is seized because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and in this way he is kept from death.
And for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in 3 or 4 days. Then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed;
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden take one knife, and she thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the windpipe.
And I was called to heal her, and found her thus dead.
I found the wound, and saw the blood flowing from it, and knew that she had not coughed or breathed except through the throat, and the wind passed through the wound.
I hastened to stitch up the wound, and healed it until it was healed;
And it happened to the maiden that she became red-faced from shouting, and returned afterwards to her position.
Therefore I say that in this manner of the epiglottis have no fear.
from the thick throat   (in this context, "gorge" refers to the neck)
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bluish-green hue, and it occurs mostly in women.
And it is according to .ij. (2) ways: nature, and accidents; or natural has no device.
And the accidents are according to .ij. (2) ways: one is similar to fatness in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us due to artery; And there should be fear, and it is not appropriate to make strong measures unless in the case of small one, and it proves and seeks through all the intromissory. If you find it [the dislocation] as hard and firm as a knot, and it does not yield to any force, strike it, as one strikes the nails, and pull it completely, if there is any of it left; Then surround [the affected area] entirely, and heal it as necessary, until it is perfectly healed.
The bones   (the affected area being the bones)
Many ways of ours are, which I will tell all their similarities;
and it is necessary that I say the entire difference that exists between a dislocation and an ulcer.
I say that an ulcer is heat and continuous fever until the eruption has passed, and the purulent matter has been completed; then the fever and heat subside.
With an ulcer there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains one abscess, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a boil, and becomes large;
And there are two kinds, either fat or moist, and they are very much colored as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the knot, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form or chapter that follows.
And the method of inquiry for abscesses is that you take or more moist soil than you find within the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then straighten the joint, and take care because it can spring out.
If moisture runs out of the sore, let it be colored as I have said for other abscesses;
And if no moisture comes out after the joint is straightened, know that it is fatty, then make a cross incision, take it with pincers and scrape gently from both sides and watch the cloth or linen where it lies to ensure it remains intact.
If you cannot draw it whole, then draw it in parts so that nothing remains.
For if there is nothing left, it comes back to us many times;
If a little remains and does not trouble you, use the wound with some corrosive powder, hold the wound closed with something warm, apply soothing things to the abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
If the injury is large, make two incisions in the wound and treat it with healing salve.
And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is in opposition and you hurry and use vitriol powder, leave it lying for 2 to 4 days, until the wound heals, and let the inflammation of the blood subside; then apply the ointment where it has remained unhealed.
Here are the forms of the intermediary instruments, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; and among them there are four squares which are called "albarets", and one which is called "breb", and there are also two types: large, medium, and small, for encircling the abscesses with fistula.
And they are also like the needles with which one sews charms, and they are made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and yellow ones have more value, and black ones are more skilled at encircling the corners of a fistula.
And there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wound's extent.
The forms of ulcers are similar in appearance, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if one has two humps in four ways also.
And if the ulcers have four humps in four ways; and if they have two humps, and ulcers with one hump only, and these are also in four kinds; and all this is necessary for their treatment.
The head of these animals that are being cut is sharp, and those who do not cut thoroughly from one side are at risk of cutting nerves or veins;
And the instruments used for this are the tourniquets wrapped around the limbs, so that the patient does not feel pain during the opening of abscesses.
They come in three types: large, small, and medium-sized, as you can see;
and one should not use it except for the shoulder joint, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar joints.
And sometimes, another small instrument is made, resembling blades of forceps, in this shape, to draw blood.
and it is placed at times on the joint that heals from veins, and arteries, and sometimes it returns in this large shape:
And sometimes, a man's breast swells when he begins to decay, until it resembles a woman's breast.
And they remain swollen and inflamed, and those who wish to treat them must do so according to this form on the following lines b to g: then scrape the fat, apply medicinal ointment to the wound, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches and cure it until it heals.
and if the swelling slopes downward and is large like it happens in women, they should be cut into two pieces horizontally through two similar cuts; From this, one should hold the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line b to line g; Then scrape the skin between the .ij. lips (of the wound), remove the fat, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it heals;
and if it is not healed or the incision is not complete because the patient does not want to rest or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. And let it remain until it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses on the buttocks
These abscesses that come beneath the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas where there is a hardness, and if they contain moisture within them.
Therefore, those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when the entire cavity in the abscess is emptied, you should use old cotton on the wound and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment to it until it heals.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, you should treat it as we have said in cutting scrofula, and if the wound forms a cavity, you should apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
Of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin closed over it, there are often abscesses, and this also occurs with an opened vein and abscess;
And if it is recognized in this way because it is from the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. And when you feel it with your hands, if it feels dislocated; and when it is through the vein, it appears rounded.
It is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the joints and in angles or the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, the iron cure must be avoided, and so should the one at the head. Likewise, in those swollen with an artery, make a cut through the skin along its length;
Therefore, the iron cure must be avoided, and so should the one at the head. Likewise, in those swollen with an artery, make a cut through the skin along its length; Then open the abdomen in one piece, and carefully cut the artery of the intestines while it is exposed.
Then insert a needle and pierce it until the other side of the chest, and tie an twice thread around the artery, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then poke the gap between the two ligaments with an instrument until the abscess within it bursts and breaks open.
Then apply the remedy that will cause a swelling to form on the ligament. Then treat this one with ointment following this procedure, until it heals.
and if the abscess is due to the vein size, then you must paint the affected area from the abscess all over the skin. then insert the needle under the location you are holding with your hand and pierce it, and have one double thread so that you draw it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I told you, or tie one of the two parts to each of the two shoulders with thread.
And if you doubt that the thread is not inside [the wound], push another needle through one end of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
Then press the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut off the pus and leave that which is attached.
Then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of it, then administer medicines such as tents and ointments until it is healed.
From abscesses of the nerves
As abscesses come in the artery and the vein, so abscesses come to the nerves when they are wounded or from too great work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulder and the thigh, and in all places where there are joints, which is a grave abscess; its color resembles the color of the body, and it is found in multiple positions with pain.
And when it is strained (pressed), the patient feels pain, but it is not in all of the body, but under the skin.
And it must be kept quiet from all sides, and neither forward nor backward, neither below nor above, and one who is in the joints should not be covered with iron: by chance, there might be contraction.
And the one who has a head or forehead, scrape the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, take tweezers and press it at its root.
If it is large, lift it with the onion, peel it, then open and stitch up the wound until it heals.
Large lumps hanging Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge," resembling worms, and it has subtle roots, and large heads; there are small and very large ones.
I saw one man who had two bellies that resembled worms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them; they were white, had a thin root, were slit, and continually oozed moisture.
I cut them out and found one weighing 16 ounces, and the other 5, and the incision in the operation shows that if the patient is moist, the color of the mass is white and moist, and the root is thin.
If the thigh is severely wounded and the fire cautery is in your presence, for in the wounding of the thigh often comes too much bleeding, and if it overwhelms you, then hasten to apply the cautery.
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a good thread made from flax and tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
then he restrains it and does not cease to tighten the flax thread until the artery is stopped, and feel by it whether there is work; and if the roots are large, be careful with it for the belly, but you can certainly stop the bleeding on half of it.
Then burn (cauterize) so that it does not return; then heal the wound and keep covered the thin skin which is of dark color, weak sensation and watery eye.
For this abscess has grown large, and I will come to treat this syphilis afterwards.
when the boil is mature
If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of wound or crack of hernia, and it is on the abdomen and among some of the boils, as happens in other cases, or from blood that cuts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind;
And if it is by the break of the thigh and the exit of the bowel, its color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and wide open with various outlets. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed with hands, it returns and comes back again, and in some cases may become hardened, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through heavy labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is light and opens wide when you press with your hand, but does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a certain quantity.
And if it is due to inflammation, it is soft and the work indicates that you look to see whether its appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or inflammation. You must allow the treatment to continue. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or feces, you should command the patient to strain his anus and stretch it out straight, then clean all around the stool. Then command him to rest quietly between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed with a splint. then spread half of the abscess to the great spoon-shaped knife.
Then, open half of the abscess stretched over the ligament, and insert your finger as an indicator, seeking the intestine. If you find it caught in the ligament, undo it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
and if you find the fecal matter, take it to the edge, and cut off any excess.
and if the arteries or veins are obstructed, go around them carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and place the needles around what you have done in a cross shape that you make pierced.
Then hold the abscess for four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as it is until it can, and kill the dead flesh by itself; Then strike it when it has become subtle and can be, then heal what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said;
Then strike it when it has become subtle and can be, then heal what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said; And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the wound of what is necessary, and seal the wound.
The pustule
We have said in the division the likenesses of pustules, and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one should choose the cure of iron; and we shall say what a pustule is, and great caution must be taken in its cure, and the ancients said that when pustules are in a place where they can be shaved like a pustule on a mamel, and in the thigh, and in similar places, one should remove it completely when it begins; and when it is large and old, it is not good to approach it, for I never knew anyone who could heal it; nor has anyone healed it before me.
And the operations, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, are that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him purge if there is manifest distention, then shave the patient one good length for the operation; then take your lancet or pustule, and shave off all hair and flesh from all parts, leaving nothing remaining; and allow the blood to flow freely, and anoint the wound well with your hand or something else, and if the discharge of blood makes you hesitate about incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is cauterized; then treat it with other medicines until it is healed.
Of hydropisy We have said in the division the resemblances of hydropisy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure that is made with medicines, and the one that is cured with iron: it is revealed only; and no iron should be used in these two resemblances: namely tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this resemblance of hydropisy which is called "ecchylma" with medicines, and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or if he has another disease other than hydropisy, such as dropsey of the belly and similar things; if there is no iron used, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has only hydropisy itself, and he is not too young nor too old, then do so: Lift the patient upright onto your hands, and the assistant presses the belly towards the lower part of the backside, then take the pointed spatula as shown in this form: It should be slit in two parts with a sharp point, but not so deep that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and not sharp enough to poke through.
Then look to see if the urinary stone is directed towards the intestines: if so, you must make an incision beneath the navel, three fingers' breadth right above the anus; and if the urinary stone is due to liver disease, it should be cut on the left side of the navel, three fingers; and if it is due to constipation, it should be on the right side, and the patient should not lie on the incision so that excess fluid does not flow into the weak place.
Then cut through the skin with the instrument and push it out, hold your hand on the spatula between the skin and the bladder to the thickness of a nail or within; then cut the bladder until the spatula comes to the place of the water, which is its base, then pull it out and put this instrument in the shape as shown here: It is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light iron or brass, and has one small hole at the bottom; on one side, three holes; on two sides, two holes; and on another side, one hole; and the testicle is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make when they cut a feather:
At the top above is the abdomen, so that when the instrument reaches the water, now push up on the instrument; then empty it now, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls unconscious, or approaches death.
But in emptying according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the dispositions of the power mean for the patient and his pulse; then draw the instrument and hold back the fluid, and it is held back now due to the cautery which stops the flow that is on the wound, as I have spoken about, so you pierce in this manner; then use the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small amount of fluid.
Do this every day and be careful not to let it remain but a little fluid. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much fluid, cure him with burial or warm sand, and with sweating or bathing in warm water and sun, and anoint him with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the member At times, children are born without foreskin in the penis, or the foreskin is small and not properly positioned. If this happens, it should be pierced immediately with a very thin spatula as follows: first place a thin piece of cloth on the foreskin and hold it in place for 2-4 days until the child wishes to urinate; then remove the cloth, allow the child to urinate, and replace the cloth; and if necessary, this should be repeated because the urine that comes out does not close the opening. Children who have a small foreskin or one that is not properly positioned are treated with a cloth of linen as previously described, which will stretch it open. Those who lack a foreskin at the tip of their penis are blistered because no child is born with a foreskin on top of the penis; therefore, they cannot urinate before lifting their penis and this prevents the matter from reaching the opening. It is a bad disease.
The method of the work is that the patient lies on their back with the penis and scrotum positioned as the width of a feather, so that the foreskin can be easily drawn back, as necessary; you should also avoid the discharge of blood that often occurs, and if it happens, drain the bleeding area and heal the wound until it is healed.
boils of the penis Often this boil appears on the penis, it is an ugly appearance of pus; and among them there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you must pick them once a week with a thin instrument, strike and clean them all, then put damp cotton in Egyptian ointment over them; then heal them with diaphinicon ointment until they are healed. And if the boil is malignant, full of pus and decayed, you must bring fire cautery to it. When you have struck it, and if the boil is on the top part of the penis and has both parts inside the skin and outside, you must first remove the boil that is inside; when it is sewed, you cure the outside. For when you heal them together, there is no assurance for the testicles of the penis that they will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption comes in the penis and the area around it; you must clean all that is black and corrupted, then lie over it a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate peel and wheat, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, bring the lunar cautery as follows: The cauteries aid in two ways: for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must bring or lead a sheath of plank from the penis and make the patient urinate; and when the hairs reach the tip of the penis (which applies to those who have not been circumcised, or it applies for injury or abscess), then you should shave it with one instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
Then if it is necessary to talk about this, you should shave with one spatula or thin piece of flax from the tip of the penis and the hair; then carefully separate them, and place a thin linen cloth dampened in cold sharp water between them so they do not stick together immediately.
circumcision
Circumcision is not a simple continuation like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own volition and specifically on children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest job for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the majority of masters and lords who perform circumcision to be around one day old, and to use force if necessary, and always with a new knife; however, the foreskin is twice as thick, and sometimes it cuts the upper part and leaves the lower.
Or the dislocation should be covered, and the pain is doubled; at the amputation which is near the joint is not assured the tip of the limb; and at the amputation of the nail by accident escapes the iron, and spoils the work, and many times it happens as if there was no need for amputation and I have seen it.
Of the amputation which is made at the joint of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the threads cut equally well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you cut equally throughout the entire time; but that the threads are well tightened around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think that you do not tie it tightly with the thread except around the rod, and then allow it to be loose in all ways that you can. Then make it be between your hands straight, and restore the strength between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see [it], nor any instrument; then press your hand to the vein and blow or cough, and pull it up until the head of the vein is in; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the joint signet with a double thread, then tie one end to another loop; and hold it with the second loop at the thumb and index finger, and break between the loops, then quickly untie the knot and pull the head of the vein.
Then make it be between your hands straight, and restore the strength between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see [it], nor any instrument; then press your hand to the vein and blow or cough, and pull it up until the head of the vein is in; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the joint signet with a double thread, then tie one end to another loop; and hold it with the second loop at the thumb and index finger, and break between the loops, then quickly untie the knot and pull the head of the vein. Let the blood coagulate drop by drop, for it is the pus; and apply powder on top and on top of the powder one cloth glued with a mixture of cooked egg white steeped in rose water, mixed with fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it heals.
The shape of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and sharp, and they should also be as large as the middle finger equally:
The error in the amputation occurs when the cartilage within is incised; therefore, it should be extended to your fingernail so that the bone protrudes equally; and strike it evenly. If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, grasp it with pliers, and then strike it.
And if it lasts more than three days and the area below the verge swells, let it be until the abscess has calmed down and the scab has formed; then gently scrape it off; strike it as much as you can move it, but avoid hitting the part of the verge, this will not harm it.
Therefore, treat the bone of things submerged in a wound with powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if it is struck too harshly and goes above, it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or charneal, or similar things, as we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that it is retained due to a stone lodged in or neck of the bladder, then the patient must be placed on all fours; his feet should be put on the back, and he should extend his abdomen from the upper part above the lower back, and hold the patient firmly until he can bear it; then the necks of the bladder are constricted towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is relieved.
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must administer extraction using all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is the form: it should be made of thin delicate silver tube, like a bird's feather; and its length should be a palm and half, and it should be thin at the top.
And the method of urine discharge is that you take one double thread, tie one end to the patient's chin with a piece of linen or cotton, and push the other end of the thread inside the syringe; then tie the excess linen and push it up to the tip of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and insert egg white or olive oil and water into the bladder and urethra; and make the patient sit on one seat, and irrigate the bladder and urethra with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra, then bend the urethra upwards towards the bladder; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and make the patient feel it reach the empty place, and this is not done incorrectly because the guide is twisted; then tie the thread to all the linen piece by piece, and the urine follows the linen, then remove the thread, and correct the urine.
And continue the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
diseases of the bladder
When scorching or blood comes to the bladder, or pus is assembled there and you see it exuding acids and medications, then do with all the apparatus that is called "clepsydra," and this is its shape:
It is closed at three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; and the necks are shaped so that the medicine comes out easily through the opening without addition, if it is possible to drain the moisture, and insert when necessary.
and when you see that your medicines enter the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and pull out the string that is inside; if you draw out the moisture through the syringe, and then push the string forcefully in; the moisture will enter the syringe, and come to the bladder now, so the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle suppository with which to suppositarium the bladder: it is as follows:
And it is made of silver or alum, and the head is raised higher; below that, there should be one knuckle or finger joint; then take a bladder from a sheep and fill it with the moisture intended for suppositories to treat the bladder, then place it between two fingers tied with a good thread, and heat one end of the moisture on fire; then insert the head of the suppository into the penis, then hold your hand above the bladder against all the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, make one circle, and perforate it roundly; then insert a strong thread into these holes, close the circle like a purse, put inside oil, moisture, and water, and place it in the instrument; and proceed as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of stone (in modern English)
We have told in the division the ways of stone, and extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone embedded in the flesh, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; it opens a small hole, and the patient's penis swells, and it pains him many times, and then wraps itself up again; and often the foundation of these jumps causes the stone to move downwards; and the healing of children is quick until they reach four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is among the middle-aged, for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient by enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes obstructs seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, bend and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes rises up; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining towards below; then press and touch it with your hand.
if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall with the touch, moisten your right index finger with oil, if the patient is an infant, or thumb, if the patient is a mature person; and push it into its foundation, press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it to the neck of the bladder; then press up with your finger, and push it towards where you will cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the testicles, and with his left hand push aside the skin that is below the testicles in the area where they make the incision; then insert the spatula, which is shaped like this:
And between the place of the testicles and the bottom, not in the middle but to the left side of the navel; let it be straight above the bone, and your fingers should be close to or at the bottom, and the incision should be wide open at the top and narrow inside according to the size of the stone, not too large;
In case the pressure does not work on the fingers that are at or near the bottom, he presses it firmly until it pops out with effort; and know that there is a stone or an angle there, and edges: it must be removed; and if there is one that is soft, like a plum and round, the release will be easy.
For the person with angles and a border, make the cut larger; and if it does not spring, you must stretch up with tongs like a limed tip, to push the stone so that it does not escape; or you push something subtle curved under the tip; and if you cannot force it thus, expand one small hole, and if it is not pierced, stretch with vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, you must push the largest one at the bladder's neck first, then strike it, then pull hard, and the smaller ones afterward. And if it is very large, it should be, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes out immediately when the lees cannot seal; but nevertheless, try to draw or break with tongs, as long as you draw it by pieces.
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on top one damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then make the patient lie on his neck, and do not loosen the rope until the third day.
And when you dislocate [the limb], anoint it very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of dyafinicon and ointment of basilicon until it heals.
If an abscess or ulcer comes in the wound and congealing of blood in the bladder occurs and thus retains urine, which is known to be harmful without delay: therefore, press down on your bladder in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will rot and rupture.
Then raise the wound with water and linen and silk, help it in every way you know, until it heals; and all the wounds that you treat, bind them together with bandages and assemble the medications on top of the area.
And if the stone is small and led into the member by a rod, pierced, and urine cannot pass; in this case, you should cut it many times, as I am saying, until excused of the cutting due to this treatment. I have already proven this so.
Take a piece of iron in this shape with four corners pierced into one thong:
then take a thread and wind it around the rod under the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder; then gently push the iron piece in the rod until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron piece slowly in the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on the part that is remaining inside the rod which is within the stone. It will soon be broken and expelled with the urine, and the patient will be healed;
And if you cannot do that for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread below the stone and another above, then insert a rod towards the stone between the two ligatures, then pull it out, and detach the ligament, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
from the stone of women
It happens that stones appear in women, and if it ever occurs, it is a serious matter, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is because one cannot find a wise woman who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone (arrow) of the woman is deeper than that of the man, for which it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear there.
If you must do this (incision), it is necessary that you take a midwife who knows the art of hands and if she cannot be found, not even one cast-iron midwife; and present a wise woman in the life of women or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command for the incision of the stone.
And carefully observe if the woman is a virgin: then she must thrust her pelvis and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her pelvis and command the patient to bear down with her left hand on the bladder in the manner of pushing.
If it is found (the dislocation), then it must be moved forcefully from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike above the pelvis in the root of the thigh near the middle of the bone, where it is joined together, and feel the bone in that area; and do not move your finger above or below the bone, and cut (the bone) first at a small size.
Then push the thighbone (femur) towards the pelvis, if you feel the bone protruding, cut open the wound so that the bone can come out, and know that there are many types of bones: for example, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and curved. Recognize their shapes to know the course (of action).
And if the bone does not come out by itself, place vitriol powder on it and keep it for an hour until the bone is stained; then return to your work, when the bone has protruded, have tools that I told you about in the extraction of the bone for men to help you with your task.
And if it (the limb) moves without restraint, and it is the artery that has been struck, place powder on the spot and hold it with straps and bands, and do not touch it again, and leave the arrowhead and do not draw it out, lest the patient dies; then treat the wound.
When the heat of the blood has subsided and the limb can be moved, if the arrowhead is still in, return to your work until the arrowhead comes out by itself.
Of carnous hernia
The first sentence to translate:
And the production of this ramice is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and the matter spreads out.
Sometimes it comes from trauma to the kidneys, and this moisture appears in various forms: either with a declining yellow color, or without redness, or black, or white watery, and this occurs more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, it is an abscess, that is, a long thin shape like an egg, and it does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
If there is moisture in the very fabric (of the abscess), it is an abscess with a part of the egg-like shape, and for this reason, people think it is another egg.
If the moisture is between the skin and white matter (of the abscess), it can be felt; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should probe the entire cavity, from which the shape is described above. According to what follows after the incision, judge what is within.
According to what follows after the incision, judge what is within. And when we cure it with iron, the patient should be bled as much as our power allows and his body can bear; then put him on his back, on something slightly raised, and place many cloths beneath him.
then lie him on his left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two breasts from the shoulders.
then take the spatula and cut the skin of the shoulders along their length to the tip of the thumb, ensuring the incision is straight from cutting the skin of the shoulders up to white fat, and peel off the skin delicately as much as our power allows.
Then pierce the sore completely full of water about one inch deep, drain all the water, then place your fingers, and close the sore from above; do not touch the core of the bones, but only the sore; cut all around or in pieces the edge of it carefully, otherwise the water will return.
And if the egg (abscess) jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the job with the sore; then bring together the two sides of the bones to a suture, and treat it as other wounds, until it heals.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, being careful not to release the flow of blood; then cut the bone all around the suspension, and drain the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if a wound is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part in the same way as you did the first one, then draw out the blood, and put wet linen soaked in rose oil in the wound.
and place another linen soaked in wine and oil on it, and put two poultices on top of it, and cover with double cloths, and tie it all up with the lacing as follows:
Then take two cloths, and use hemp lining according to this appearance and assemble them by sewing into the belt of the braces, and one of the heads takes hold at the base up to the back, and the other at the handle part; and the other head on the two angles, and let the rest be gathered in the brace loop.
And sometimes this ramice of cautery medicine is used in the place of iron cutting, and it is that you take one subtle cautery cutter, and strike the hide of the boil, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water becomes exposed;
if you take the cautery in this form and pierce that pus at once, and strip it with this subtle heated cauterizer:
and hit it in all ways that you can, until it is burned through completely; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more saving; and beware of the discharge of blood, and make sure the incision is straight.
And if no thing happens contrary to you, or abscesses boil or bleeding or something else, then heal what is contrary to you, according to what was said before.
If the patient is afraid and does not wish to endure this work due to its horrible nature, then perform a perforation as I tell you, and it will be that when you are sure by the signs we have said that the bladder is located there.
Make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part with a lancet of broad blade and make the perforation long along the body; let the openings be wide, so that all the pus can flow out.
Then place cotton on the place, bind it, and leave to drain the remaining moisture, then heal it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow the moisture to come out from the wound's mouth, then you must put a reed or instrument for draining the moisture of edema in its place, as described earlier; widen .i. inch of the wound, check that the moisture returns, and is collected after 5-7 months, and when it is collected as described earlier, then the patient will pass their days.
from the abscess of the eyes
Know that in the treatment of this disease [ramice], many fear various positions, therefore it seems to me that one should leave [it].
and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body or from the kidneys; and this is often so.
This is due to an excess of sour and damp humors, which is spread through the kidneys or by trauma.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and it does not cause pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And sometimes an abscess is hard and tough, of the same color, and at times comes from an artery, or the inflammation of a vein.
When it is due to an artery, it can be recognized by the hot abscess pustule formation when you press on it with your fingers. And one should not touch it.
The one who is made of swelling of the vein is known by his disposition at the expression of the touch of the fingers,
and can well make the cut on this appearance, and on the others. and it is that you cut the core of the kidneys, then the yolk is above, and the thread far from the white yolk, and deliver the suspensioner of all parts of the yolk.
If the egg is already soft with these characters born, then it is necessary that you draw the yolk and cut it;
And if it is affected by the sores within the body, you must release all that pus and crush it thoroughly.
If the birth of the boil is on the backside, you must cut it all off and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is done, apply linen moistened in rose oil and wine to the wound, then heal it with other remedies until it heals completely.
of the abscess on the cheeks
This is an abscess enclosed by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the cheeks, and the patient becomes silent as he goes.
and the cure for this disease is as careful and precautious as that described before.
Nevertheless, we will tell you its treatment, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then push the suspension device from the lower part of the hips towards your hands. Touch the vessels that are close to the penis, and mark them with the master's marks, then stretch them out.
then cut the pointed spatula broadly across the vessels until they are exposed.
and then scrape from both sides as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert an awl where there is a single thread of flax, and bind it to the first joint where the vein is visible, and bind it to the other end. Then break the bones straightly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture.
Then dress the wound as one does with other wounds, where no pus leaks out from either side.
Because in this way there is no harm, and if pus appears on all sides, then the abscesses must be drained of all the pus. If the eyes do not lose their moistening due to incisions from vessels, they dry out and cannot be helped.
of the breaking of the saffron The effects of this herb (ramice) are by the section that comes or saffron, or the extension on the stomach in the part of the flanks, because the intestines descend from that cut to one of the kidneys.
and this dislocation is either simple or extended, and these two types of movement come from several causes: either from impact, or jumping, or pushing, or lifting heavy weights, and similar things;
and the signs when it is of the extension of simple dislocation are that they occur gradually over a long time, and do not happen suddenly. and abscesses are equal until they reach the fullness, because simple dislocations follow the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section through the abscess, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there appear various abscesses under the skin close to, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body expelling through the abscess.
And sometimes the intestines protrude through the abscess and are retained inside, causing great pain to endure by the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, where there is fear, therefore it is necessary to escape from them.
And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestines out with their hand inside through the wound, if they can reach it. then bring him by his neck between your hands, and lift the thighs.
place the chin on top, and strike the whole skin of the cheeks with a long blow. then push in the fingers of the waist one by one, according to what is needed to open the wound, and they should be such that the eyes can come out.
Then scrape the boil that is beneath the skin of the toes, as long as the white boil is hard and exposed on all sides.
Then insert your thumb into what follows the toe, in that which is between the white boil which is beneath the skin of the egg and the second white boil.
and remove what is behind the egg, and between the second white boil; and then move your right hand inside the groin of the toes, and bring the white boil up to your left hand, and lift the egg to the entire length of the white boil towards the abdomen. and command the minister to stretch the egg upward, and cut what is in front of the ligament behind it.
And if there is any intestine wrapped around the fingers or hardened white substance found, and if you find anything of this kind, push it into the stomach below.
Then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten strands and push it into the back part of the white substance, which is behind the skin of the fingers; after the waist, then cut the limbs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four strands. then bind them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the white substance (that we mentioned is behind the skin of the fingers) with a strong cord of 2 parts. Then wrap the shoulders in cloth and bind them together with strips of linen, so that no one who feeds them can enter, except for a surgeon's hand. and tie the linen following the first linen long enough by two fingers' width of that length, and after these two bindings leave a gap wide enough for a finger to fit under from the edge of the wound.
and after that, according to the roundness of an egg; then cut into the part that is under the skin of the wounds, as much as necessary, and shape it, as we have said before.
Then bring moistened linen in oil, put it on wounds, and apply the thread as we have said. And sometimes white cancers are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
For this often happens, and let the thread hang until it falls off by itself; if it takes too long to fall, warm it with hot water, and put what has been said above on it until it falls off.
Then heal the wound with another treatment, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
of a hernia carnivorous
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to heal with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made in a similar way to the treatment of hernia, by binding the vessels together lightly on top of each other after the incision.
Then, press it [the abscess] in the middle and treat the abscess of those who work, until they burst; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture comes in the entrails, as we have said, and open the belly; and do not remove any of the intestines from the anus, and if it is done, it is bad, and repair them every hour.
And even if it remains too long in this place, the wound or syphac grows, as long as the intestines are coming out.
And this happens due to the extension of the siphac, which is in the anguish, as we have said, because it is extended, then the joints are softened and opened.
And the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; sometimes it is cured by iron in this way:
and it is that the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then strike the swollen joint of the rupture with a large iron rod according to the size of three fingers.
and then extract the siphac that is beneath the skin, then take the wire and place it on the swollen joint of the siphac.
And press the entire belly deeply, then cut the two apparent ribs above the right side of the breast, and cut one and the other;
then remove the right side of the breast, and do not cover the rib nor extend or any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of removing the entrails;
then treat it by wound care. And when you cut the threads, if they are putrefied and the wound is healed, let it be until it is healed;
The ribs are constricted and have no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are made in this place, and closer to salvation.
Of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Many times the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men due to the moistening of the glands that are inside, and it can be seen; and it is necessary when you see this, to cure it, to make the patient lie on his back, and strike the softened skin on the natural skin; then join together the two lips at a suture, and if you see, sew first the superfluous skin that has been moistened with four or five stitches firmly; then strike between the sutures, and the cure is done as for other wounds, until it heals, and bind the thread.
of the lancing
1. Know that castration is mentioned in our law, and I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: the first being that the mirrors in castration respond when asked about it and its cure, and the second, because we often have need for castration of certain animals to help us, such as a bull or sheep or cat or other animals. I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the way we do it by attraction, let us sit the animal in hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed; then seize them with your hand, keeping them pressed down until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two kinds, namely males who have an opening between the two testicles as a woman does, with hair and sometimes urinate in court. The second kind is in women who have something above the clitoris like a penis and two testicles. The cure for both male and female hermaphrodites is to cut the surrounding skin (scrotum) and treat it like other wounds; however, there is no cure for males whose urine shoots through the skin of their genitals.
Of the tension
The superfluous tension (tentigene) that is too unsightly should be removed from the natural part; and some women have it as large as a hand, and it is a disease. You should dye the excess of the tentigene with your hand or onions, and lightly cut it; do not go too deep so that no bleeding occurs, and cure it with another remedy until it is healed; and in another case where a growth arises from the mouth of the vagina, and it swells, and possibly jumps, and resembles a cow, for which they will call it "the disease of cows" among the ancients. If so, you should cut it as we have said with the tentigene, and cure it until it is healed.
Of the erratic growth
1. If the nature of a woman is not perceived or small; it may be natural at birth, or an accident due to illness that comes upon her; or it may be due to discharge, whether subtle or thick, and this occurs in the marriage bed, or on the side, or underneath, wherever it may be; they should be aware of it, and know when to conceive and give birth and possibly have flowers; and knowledge of these things is by the observation of the midwife. If the discharge is approaching, whether at your hand or at the head, if it is subtle, move quickly and follow these steps: put both hands together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart; then the subtle discharge will form, as long as the thick discharge subsides; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the area, and have the woman lie down each day so that it does not heal. If the discharge is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. If the discharge is of blood, suspend it at the navel and cut; and apply medicines to stop the bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg; then place a large bandage around the wound so that it does not heal; and in this way it should be kept open for a long time, and you should also apply a linen tent; then cure her of other ailments until she is healthy. And when there is blood in the marriage bed, if necessary, cover it in this manner, unless it is an abscess that has grown. For an abscess that has grown in the marriage bed, one should not touch to treat.
If the nature of a woman is not perceived or small; it may be natural at birth, or an accident due to illness that comes upon her; or it may be due to discharge, whether subtle or thick, and this occurs in the rectum, or on the side, or underneath, wherever it may be; they should be aware of it, and know when to treat and cure it; and knowledge of these things is by the observation of the physician. If the discharge is approaching, whether at your hand or in the rectum, if it is subtle, move quickly and follow these steps: put both hands together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart; then the subtle discharge will form, as long as the thick discharge subsides; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the rectum, and have the woman lie down each day so that it does not heal. If the discharge is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. If the discharge is of blood, suspend it at the anus and cut; and apply medicines to stop the bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg; then place a large bandage around the wound so that it does not heal; and in this way it should be kept open for a long time, and you should also apply a linen tent; then treat her of other ailments until she is healthy. And when there is blood in the rectum, if necessary, cover it in this manner, unless it is an abscess that has grown. For an abscess that has grown in the rectum, one should not touch to treat.
1. Emorroydes are openings of veins which, without care, often become inflamed; and when emorroydes are old, they become hardened; and we have said in the division, their resemblances, and signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment. I say that the emorroides and the hardened ones, when they are fully within the anus, cannot be felt, unless they are cured by iron. Those which are at the opening of the anus, can be felt, and these can be treated. It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then press the inflamed area with tweezers at its roots, then sprinkle medicines that stop bleeding such as cinnamon and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then hold her feet to the air for an hour, then immerse it in cold water; and if blood comes out, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and grenade bark and gall, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice on her back. If it bleeds, that is good. If not, make bladders inflate on the back and at the breasts without piercing them; then take linen, wet it in juice of plantain or marshmallow with old wine, and apply to the area. And when the abscess subsides, cure the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a hard knot, it must be covered as I have said for the inflamed one; and then heal it until it is healed.
openings of the anus
Many types of abscess come in the anus, such as canker sores, pustular abscesses, herpes, fistulas, emorroides, and other diseases that I have mentioned earlier. It is therefore necessary for me to describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the anus, which is not the same as hemorrhoids; and if you wish to know about iron treatment, look to see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its occurrence, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red when touched. In this case, do not hurry to lance it, but let it ripen until the pain subsides; then make the patient sit on one seat, or two small seats where he can lean, and support his back and feet at the parts away from the leg; and spread his thighs, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature; then squeeze the rectum towards the right side, and bring the instrument used to open the anus into position, as follows: when you wish to introduce this instrument, make sure that what enters does not go further than necessary, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is large, cover the depth of the anus with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause pain; and put the handle of the instrument on top, and mark the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and is softened by hand, it should be covered with a sponge dipped in rose oil, or dry green oil; and place the sponge inside the wound, and over the anus and over the handle linen that has been washed and rinsed. Then apply ointment for two days, following this procedure until it is healed; occasionally lift the anus and the wound using enemas of water and honey, then of boiled lentils or long-cooked aristolochia root; then return to the ointment. And if the wound has healed in the anus, you should be careful not to burn with iron, but treat it as we have described earlier.
Of childbirth
The midwife must first recognize the figure of natural childbirth and the signs when she sees the woman in labor and desires to defecate; then hasten the birth of the infant; afterwards know that this childbirth is according to nature, and it comes out through its head, followed by another part with it; and when you see these signs, gently press on the woman's abdomen so that the infant is born quickly; for when it descends towards its head, it follows it, and the husband sheds his superfluidities through good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes over the feet, or the body or the shoulders, or the hands, or over the abdomen, or the backside, and it may be turned by chance on its neck, and in other evil figures; therefore, the midwife must be wise and subtle in these matters and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should help.
If the infant comes out through its head naturally and the woman is laboring intensely with weak vitality, let her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then apply oil or fenugreek that has been cooked to her nature. Then insert the small spatula-shaped instrument shown here between her fingers. And cut the second bone [or birth canal], and strike its nail [or fetus] until the moisture that is within it goes out; and press the woman's belly until the child comes out, and if it does not come out, then you must oint her with mustard seed oil of sesame; then make her take a position and vomit with emetics, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: this is now when the child will come.
Of the birth of the child onto its feet. When the child comes onto its feet, then you must push it upwards; And then turn (the shoulder) to and fro, until it is even.
Then take one piece of wood and stretch it back and forth.
Can it jump up to the hips (or groin), if commanded, and make it vomit by squeezing? If it should jump forward, as God wills.
And if it is not as we have said, it should be turned bit by bit, until it is according to the natural shape. And therefore it should be done gently.
And if it does not come as we have said, take musk oil of altar, and oil from roses, and melted resin, and grind all together in one mortar. and apply it to the woman's nature within and cover this ointment, Then make him sit upright with high fever below his ribs;
and when it becomes soft beneath, make one myrrh cataplasm, place it beneath, and leave it for an hour; Then make him sit on a chair, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose, and gently press his stomach, for the infant now jumps. Of the birth of the child upon its knees When a child comes in this manner, place the birthing blocks, hand over hand;
The issue of the child coming through one hand wide; It is necessary to devise a way to set the hand: If it cannot be set, have the woman lift it and walk:
If she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed with her legs spread apart:
then bring the belladonna that I mentioned:
And if it does not give birth [to anything], make her sit on a seat or chair, then study how to reposition the hand; And if it gives birth according to its natural shape, make her vomit, and command her to grasp it as long as the child comes out;
Hold the issue of the child by its neck, and spread your hands wide apart, turning your body towards the back of its mother; You must hold the child's hand first, then turn it gently and draw it out lightly;
And when it is equal, place upon it a salve of muscle relaxant and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little.
When you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to catch it. Then make her vomit. In the same manner, apply the remedy to all the others.
In the same manner, apply the remedy to all the others. When it comes on in this manner for all the others, grasp the sore with your nail, until the moisture is removed.
And if the child presses upon its face and neck, the head of the bone should not be held back, and the child dies.
Then push the child inwards until you have put it correctly, and command the woman to take herself once.
of twin births Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange and rarely happens. Twins are rare and do not often live, unless they are named.
I know that they multiply, and are conceived by the seed which is tied to the cowd.
Sometimes they are born naturally like any other child, as we have said.
And if it issues loudly, treat it as we have said, and let the balm be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does. and make it such that it brings salvation. of many children.
of many children. Sometimes they are formed in marriage. One, two, three, four, five or six, seven, or more up to fifteen; and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of sacred glory,
And it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, for similar things often happen. Follow according to what is necessary.
of a dead child.
When you cure the woman of a dead or unborn child, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out by itself, and you are compelled to perform an operation by hand. If you need to know if the woman is of sound virtue and not experiencing any accident or fear of death;
If you need to know if she is pregnant, lay her on her back with her head down and raise her legs.
and the minister should examine her in the lower abdominal area, or bind her to the bed so that she is not treated for childbirth.
Then anoint the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with musk, aloe, and fenugreek seeds, and then anoint the minister's hands with these oils and mixtures. Then push it gently into the socket, then seek one side where it pushes out, that is suitable for this.
and take care if the tendons are exposed so they do not slip back up on the head; if you push the tendons into his eyes or neck or mouth or throat or under the beard or in the hollow of the jaw or near the sides,
and if the dislocation is on limbs, it is pierced or pressed and the ribs are broken.
and it must be held with the right hand, and the curvature placed between its two left hands, and it should be pushed with all its left hand lightly, and the oncine is pierced in any of the places mentioned above, until it comes to an empty place.
then pierce towards one other oncine, where necessary, so that the extraction is equal.
And then it should be kept equal by moving from one side to the other, so that movement can occur, and the bones should be brought together for movement, as shown in this figure:
And if any part remains, then open one of the joints with oil and press it into that part, and pull the other part.
And if no part remains, then put the bone in a higher position and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to strain. and you must wrap it up in a cloth until it subsides;
then the wound in the joint of the palm or fingers, and you should do the same for the other hand, and to both feet.
And if the child's hips are large and the birth canal is narrow or there is a sharp assembly of the head: It is necessary for you to insert the pointed spatula between your teeth, and bend it and draw out the pus. you turn to the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the tools or chapter that follows this;
and in the same manner, make the opening naturally large for him. and then remove the bones with the pliers.
And if the head of the shoulder leaps out and is held with force, it should be cut, as far as the moisture that is further out;
If it cannot come out, strike it into pieces as far as you can;
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, it must be pierced until the moisture subsides.
And if the swelling is on the feet, the treatment is light and the reduction to the mouth of the bladder is easy.
And if it is narrowed in the stomach or thigh, you must straighten it with one gauze rolled up on the hand; and if it is narrowed in the stomach or thigh, until the moisture that is there is corrected;
and if other limbs are dislocated, and the head remains, push the ball of the thumb into deep within the anus and pull until it reaches the mouth of the anus; Then push one or two times, and pull it through.
and if the mouth of the sore is narrowed by the hot abscess that has come, do not try to force it. Instead, administer moist and fatty substances. Apply poultices, and soak in warm water to soften and moisten them.
And if the infant is on its chest side, and you can place it straight, bring the head downwards as we have said in the living child.
And if one cannot do it, pull it apart piece by piece and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Then bring the head downwards as we have said in abscesses that come during childbirth;
And if bleeding comes out, it should be put in tight constriction and other treatments applied.
And I saw a woman whose womb had a child die, then consulted another on it, and revived the other. After a long time, an abscess came in the armpit, and swelled so much that it opened and began to rot.
I was summoned for treatment, and for a long time I thought about the wound, but could not heal it.
I applied powerful astringent, and an bone came out, then after several days another one did. I marvel greatly, because the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to treat the wound, and took out many bones until the woman was in better condition;    Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os. and the woman recovered for a long time in this manner, and after a short while she had some swelling in the place.
And I have not recorded this chapter except for the reason that, when masters find an unusual thing, they know how to help it.
To remedy a dislocated joint to its place
Here follows the form of the pressor, which we use in books; and to the two joints of the two chains at each turn. Nevertheless, the horns should be thinner than the retractor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
And let the mouth of the furnace be 1 finger wide (about 0.6 cm), and the edge of the trees (anvils) 1 dactyl (approx. 2.4 cm), and length of half a palm (about 7.5 cm). And within two leagues (about 10 km) should be two anvils (stones) aligned with the same furnace, which are joined together in one and the other, half a palm long (about 3.75 cm) or slightly more;
And these two alignments are placed in the mouth of the hammer to open when turning the two horns (anvils).
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, in the shape of pliers. and have two heads, two pliers, as you see, one palm length, and two fingers wide;
and when you see opening the matrix (of childbirth), make the woman sit on one bed, legs apart and knees opened, Then push the two jaws together, close them together in the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between the thighs; Then work your hand on the whole instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the jaws, until the patient does what he wants.
This instrument is completely covered, and they are multiplied in their resemblances; and when the patient has arranged them, he works more quickly, and higher for men according to their size.
Do not unnecessarily discard the instrument you have prepared, for there is no excuse for its necessity.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the woman to hold her breath and then make her vomit with a blow to the abdomen; next, hold her hands to the mouth and nose. if she jumps because of this, it is well.
If this does not work, take a pot and make a perforator or spoon, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as calamint, rue, anise, camomile, chamomile, and centaurium;
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over fire; then put a tube or punctured pot at one end and the other end into the mouth of the patient.
And let the steam rise within the patient until the vapors arrive, then make them vomit as we have said. If the second one (the patient) jumps up quickly. And if the patient remains after this treatment and does not recover as commanded by the nurse, tell her to wet her left hand in oil of savin or in musk-essence of ambergris, and then apply it to the affected area.
And who desires the seconding; and when he has found it, take it and extend it slowly straight, so that the male does not resist at the extraction; But you must move it gently to left and right, then pull; it will come and will dislocate.
If the male's orifice is strangled, we have said the cure for purging, and of fumigating with herbs;
if it does not have any of that which we have said, then make sure you do not pull;
But it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the woman's womb, you tie him to the woman's thigh, then you clisterize with a four-medicine ointment.
If it will pass through and be expelled, it will come out; but nevertheless, when she has passed it, if a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and burns the patient.
Therefore it is necessary that appropriate fumigation is provided for this: no one of the ancients has tested fumigation with dill and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain flowers and her afterbirth is as follows:
And it resembles glass in shape, with a narrow neck in its nature and wide lips over the fire.
and let the fumigation be over the embers, and let the tinder burn until it is consumed, and start another.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it has been stopped up by a subtle obstruction. Therefore it is necessary to give birth by piercing that obstruction at the appropriate time, and not with a sharp spatiule, and ensure that it does not touch the membrane.
Then put moistened linen in wine and oil on it, then cure with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will reopen, put a plug of wood in it and leave it for several days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go to bed.
And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess occurs; it should be covered: whether it is to be cauterized, as we have said about the lime of lead.
of the fistula from the bottom Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodules, and those that come out above the foundation or in between two parts,
If it has a fistula or more than one; and when the swelling is old, if it is opened, and moisture awakens pus or thin pustules,
And sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by those who are familiar with either the discharge or wind when the patient has discharge, and by chance it jumps one direction or another.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; they reach the joint of the thigh, and to the knee of the cow.
And so one recognizes the fistula persistent at its base, but not non-persistent: and it is that you bite your thumb joint or base, and insert a fine awl of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twist to it.
If it has a twist, then insert a thin splint or horsehair until you feel the splint or hair at your thumb.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not bring forth pus, wind, or worms, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce at all; hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula extends to the bladder or the channel of urine, if it bursts and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced at the junction of the calf, then the tendons come to the surface. If it is not twisted and the pain is around it, then it is always bent, and no medicine nor poultice helps.
And in these Persian blisters, there is no cure but labor, and the empty vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
In those which are neither Persian nor ancient, hoping for health by iron, as I have experienced,    \*Note: The term "ancien" can mean "old", but in this context it may refer to an open wound or sore rather than the age of the patient.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his stomach;  \*Note: The terms "ventre" can mean "stomach" but in this context it likely refers to the abdomen or belly. Then push a tent of reed, or plank if there is curvature, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must push your finger into it,
If you feel that the tent has been pierced; and it is exposed where you feel a hole or flesh, then you know it is pierced. If one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
It is said that one can heal some, but this happens rarely;
and the help that is given, if it is done, is to heat the cautery subtle according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before; and put the heated cautery completely in the fistula until it reaches its foundation; and do this two or three times until you know that these small fibrous growths are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
And then treat the wound with softened tents moistened in butter, until the inflammation subsides, then treat it with an ointment soothing and healing.
If it is thus healed, that is good. But if it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if it breaks open, not all the way to the underlying foundation, and cover between your finger and the wound with a thick layer of fat or silk, and you see the fistula where the covering is damaged. If the head of the fistula at its beginning, presses forward towards the tent and then apply the fire cautery afterwards until it reaches the tip of the tent.
and the tent will be released, and burnt; then remove those charred pieces that seem like a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
And if the sinew swells and splits apart, cauterize it with fire or medicine.
The fire cautery gathers two good things: namely, the burning of these charred joints and the stopping of blood flow and the drying out of moisture.
then the treatment for damp tents with butter or crushed cheese, until the limbs become hard, and the charred joints are burned in the fire.
then treat the wound of onion juice boiled hard char, and these medicines are dry.
When it is treated, it heals and does not return.
And if a fistula reaches down to the bottom of its foundation and is separated from the body, push your finger into it or its foundation, and examine it.
If you feel a swelling and enter between 2 layers or the skin or flesh where it is about to pierce, but there is no way out except for a path of faith and hope, through one of the three methods of administration:
or you can cauterize it as we have said, or cut it open to the bottom, or if it is a boil, treat it and heal it as we have described in the beginning.
And do not go too deep that you do not cover the foundation's support, and let the evacuation come through the body by natural desire; then heal, as we have said;
then heal, as we have said; In case it becomes healthy, then remove the cover and clean it after it is cut away from the foundation, either by force or another instrument pointed; Then clean the charred material that is in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study to heal the wound, and keep the fistula in the part distant from the foundation; this will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation of the skin above, If you take a probe pierced at the head in this manner: And insert one threaded wire in two, and insert the sheath to the entire length of the wire into the fistula until it reaches its end.
If it is perforated at the edge of the foundation within, then pull out the thread from that one, thus insert your hand or foundation;
Pull the head out with the wire, and join the two heads together, and pull one against the other, and leave it for one day or two;
And it holds any movement, until the children squeeze those things that are between them, and they burst.
Then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not pierce itself, make it pierce in all possible ways, if it is not too full.
Because it should not be covered too full for the ligation, and then healed as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of a spurlike spine from which a fistula is made is very sharp at one end and cutting. and not the other end, because you should not strike where you should not, as you can see here:
Hemorrhoids come in two forms: either they are located inside the foundation, like a piece of resin, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood. And if there is one or more [dislocations], and they are dislodged from their foundation and the base of the foundation; but those that are dislodged have little moisture,
and there is always a little amount of citron juice or blood, and they [the affected limbs] have the color of the body;
and the cure for those with dislocations within the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to lie down on their bed, until the foundation recovers, and this can be observed by the son. hurry, and hold it with pliers or your fingernail, then strike at its roots;
And if the joint cannot be held by moisture, take either linen cloth or cotton, or a piece of gauze; and straighten it with your hands, then press and powder some hot powders that are used instead of fire cautery; or cauterize them as the cautery chapter says, then cure them with other treatments until they heal.
and if the foundation cannot come out, cleanse the patient with biting and sharp clisterium to wash the area where the foundation is, so that it comes out openly.
The patient must take care, and if his veins are too deeply pierced, the treatment is easy. And you grasp them with your fingernail or tweezers and crush them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision with iron.
You must apply the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two threads below the needle. and make it wide; then bind the thread tightly, knot the thread, draw out the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving one to tie off excess blood.
Then place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave it until it drips, and when it stops, if he cures it with ointment and other remedies, until it is healed.
the drying of the fire or foundation. Often, there is drying in the intestines due to fire and by the nature of constraint, and when the disease is old and medication does not work.
It is necessary that you pierce with a splint or your nail the bark above, so as not to let it moisten. then heal it until it dries as required;
and if it cannot dry, renew the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and be barked; then heal it until it is healed.
The trembling (or shuddering) Louse is a small growth that comes before the body and goes deep in;
And sometimes the trout (or eel) bites, and it is felt as if one were dying from trembling, and it comes over the entire body, but more on the hands than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a cane of an owl's feather or a strong eagle's feather and place it on the trembling part, until the purple circles encompass the trembling part entirely; Then turn your hand along the entire cane until you cover the trembling part entirely, and press it deeply, and dry up the trembling part from its roots.
If you wish, do it with a cane of iron or steel in this form and be subtle underneath and traverse above:   In the medieval context, "subtle underneath" probably means intricate or delicate, while "traverse above" likely refers to applying pressure from above. This sentence might imply making an instrument or device out of iron or steel that is designed for a specific medical procedure. However, this is just an educated guess as the text does not provide further context or explanation.
Do not pierce, instead hold it tight and press. And if you wish, cauterize the quivering, as described in the chapter on cauterization.
The form of the cluster. Sometimes one makes the cluster of silver or iron, or melted tin or wax; and sometimes makes these tools small and large, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Therefore, the ones that are brought in the treatment of infants and those who are weak and suffering, are small.
The form of a clister (small or large) is above wide, where the bellies are tied in this manner:
and there should be an opening where the bellies are tied, as you see, and the cheeks should be pierced from within; and on one side there should be two holes, and in the other one;
and let the belly or ointment for the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment be placed within, and it should be pierced all around with small holes,
And fill in each wound, that is to say, it should have some space between them, then push into these wounds, that is, a strong thread made of twisted thread in ten or twelve [stitches] around, and bind the belly as if it were a goat's pouch. And when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then apply a plaster; and this is the shape of a circle.
Let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and oil or egg yolk should be applied to the head of the plaster, or something similar, then gently insert it.
Then the ministers should grasp the patient's two hands together until they are fully visible, then pull out the plaster, and wash the patient's legs at the opening.
And if the medicine appears to come out, pull it as much as possible; and if it does not move for an entire night, it is more beneficial.
If you plaster the patient with belly distention caused by intestinal blockage and the medicine starts to come out, renew it until it becomes healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are founded or abscessed, or even the rectum [cleansing], let it be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the shape of the subtle enema where the skin should be stretched:
wounds (plural)
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; and we shall tell you about the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by piercing with a spear, cutting with a sword or knife, or a lance or mace or similar objects;
or according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with wounds of the head, as the remembrance will come in its chapter.
If the wound is simple in the head and the bone is not broken, beware if it comes from an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large. And if you have doubt about the abscess, let it rise: if it is filled with pus from the wound itself, cleanse it immediately from the head side of the wound. If on the contrary, it fills with pus from the injured part, cleanse it in the opposite direction of the injury;
And let the patient empty himself of wine and heavy foods.
If he does not want to urinate, his food should be reduced, and he should neither drink wine nor eat meat.
Place cotton soaked only in rose oil or vinegar steeped on the abscess if it comes.
And if there is no abscess formed yet, place it [the substance] on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not affected by air or powder, I shall say a little more about it shortly.
And if the worms have moved it [the substance], place some ointments upon it until it is healed.
If the wound is large like a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by pressing, bring them together by stitching, as I shall say about abdominal wounds, in stitching.
If the wound is exposed of the bone, and it gapes, and does not hold but only slightly, then press [it]; afterwards, treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. Instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as cooked heads [of animals] and bread, also pulses, and similar things.
And if you find or suspect putrid flesh, not touching the bone, press it completely, and pour boiling water over it, then treat [it].
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without stitching cannot be stopped, you may need to tie it off; and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if that does not help, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light; place this powder on it as soon as the arsenic has made it harden.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take an equal part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; four parts of quicklime and grind them finely together.   ~= And the manner of making the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; four parts of quicklime, and grind them finely together. And apply the wound, and hold it open shaped, until it heals well and joins with all its blood.
Then bind it well, and let it heal by itself if it does not swell; for medicine is not removed while it is healed.
And sometimes they do this with only calcined substances, when they do not have incense or the blood of a dragon, but the wound has not healed.
If the wound has already healed, in any case do not put this powder on it.
But put on some digested ointments, or poultices made of barley flour boiled in water and honey, until it drips. Then heal with other treatments until it is healed.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, pull it out using fine tweezers.
Hereafter I shall tell you about fractures of the head.
Of the neck wound
If the wound on the neck is simple and has no distinction from that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is no other remedy but to leave the healing and not apply any restriction, for it harms nerves and makes them retreat. And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
However, the medicine should be boiled, as clear water washed with sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and then boiled again in sweet water. And other stones of similar kind should be prepared in the same way, and anointed with oil. (Note: The original text mentions "pieres," which can refer to a variety of things including minerals or rocks, but without additional context, it's hard to determine exactly what is meant here.)
If the wound is large, tie and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, pierce or make an incision lower down.
And if the artery is cut, bleeding will follow, so you must stop it, tie it, and cauterize as necessary;
And if the spine of the throat is cut or pierced, and the windpipe guarded, so that the flesh goes, If the windpipe is cut above the neck, do not touch the throat but instead reset it according to its natural shape; And then apply traction, let it rest for some days, then heal with discarded ointments until it heals;
and if the wound presses on the bone, squeeze it. and if there are bone fragments, pull them out as much as you can, and those that you cannot remove, leave until the wound heals. make the opening even and aligned.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the sword or knife wound
If it is a thrust wound from a lance or knife and the wound is perforated, examine whether the wound exudes pus vents (ventosa) so that you know if the wound is mortal.
And if it's not complete and is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it in the first hour, nor tie it for the blood that dissolves it completely. And return to the heart, and cut open the patient. but apply attracting ointment, and tie it twice a day;
and if you don't have ointment, place thick cotton on the wound to draw out moisture.
And make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. If there is no spasm, nor severe trembling of heart nor drawing of the bowels. If you see good progress, know that the wound is healed. Treat the disease and other treatments, as long as he is healthy;
And if it cannot heal, and an abscess forms, immediately make incisions to let the pus out, and treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple (or deeper), on the front or back, treat the part in front of it;
If it is large, sew [the wound]; if it is small, apply powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, take pieces from it, whether the wound is open or the flesh torn off [by force], pull the pieces out if they are dislodged. And if they are not dislodged, leave the wound to drain, align the extraction [of the pieces].
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
The dislocation of the abdomen
The dislocations of the abdomen are large, medium, and small.
From a large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude due to insertion.
And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one.
because if one puts them in again slowly, they are not put back in place properly. because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and as a result, they enter more quickly.
And because the middle wound is more important, it is better to reset the intestines in their place than with the other two (large wounds).
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four ways:
the two common ruptures happen in the rupture of the abdomen,
and the ruptures of other body parts and two other specific ruptures are common in other wounds.
Moreover, these are more closely related to the rupture of the abdomen, and I will explain one and clarify it.
I say that when the wound is small, and no part of the intestines protrude from it, and it is easy to treat, this is through one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it gently: [The sentence is referring to an object or a body part which needs to be warmed up when it's cold.] dampen a sponge or a thin cloth in warm water only, [The sentence suggests using warm water (damp sponge or wet cloth) to gently warm up the cold object or body part.] or you cook in hot mustard and cypress and pepper. [This sentence refers to using a mixture of hot mustard (or another hot liquid), cypress, and pepper to warm up an object or body part.] and stir the intestines until the swelling is removed; [This sentence suggests massaging the swollen intestines in order to reduce the swelling.]
And sometimes this wine restraining makes it move, and it is softened so that it can be opened.
And when you see the swelling separate, if the intestines are cooked with too much water or poorly cooked, because in this way, the entry is closed off quickly.
And if it cannot enter (the joint), make a small incision with the instrument used for hemorrhoids.
and the first remedy is made of leeches. we should not cut it unless it is absolutely necessary.
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
If it is cut within the hollow and does not protrude, then look at its shape:
And when the wound is widened, and the intestines escape, put it back there according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power to do so, for it is useful.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the stomach. Then you must make the patient lie down on their back. and put his legs higher than his head; And if [it is] in the part below the belly,
and likewise, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts. align the injured part to be higher than the other.
And thus, it is necessary to treat this as in large and small wounds.
In small wounds, apply what is appropriate.
Then take a kind and compassionate minister in your hands. close the lips; and this is the common method of stitches,
and this is the common method of stitches, and you take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, leave one finger's space at the head of the wound and insert a needle with one strong thread. And pierce the 2 cheeks of the hide with the 2 cheeks of the knife,
then tie a double thread around the needle of 2 parts, Then assemble the two heads of the wound together.
and then leave one thumb's width of space, and insert another needle. and tie the thread as you did for the first needle. and continue in this manner according to your need for the needles. Until all the wound is bound;
And let the needles be moderately thin, between fine and thick. because very thin needles pierce all the skin, and very thick ones cannot enter well: because they should be narrowed;
and it is not good to insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin,
that they do not open and cut the wound before the joint.
And then close the heads of the needles, so they do not prick the patient while sleeping. and place bandages or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them closed. and leave it until the wound is healed.
This method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, For him there is a needle or two. (translated from Old French to English)
The second stitching is common. (translated from Old French to English) and it is that you join the two skins of leather and the two skins of silk together with a needle having one strong, middle-sized thread; (translated from Old French to English) and when you have sewn all the pieces four together,
and when you have sewn all the pieces four together, If you straighten the needle at the part where you have begun, in the manner as they customarily do with the thorns;
and put distance between each stitch, the thickness of a small egg;
this stitch binds the man,
I sewed a wound that one man had in his belly,
Who was wounded by a knife, and the wound is more than one palm in size, and it exposed the intestines for two palms in length.
and the wound was within the abdomen. I brought back the intestine when it had been twenty-four hours.
and the wound was sewn shut for fifteen days, and he cured it, and it healed.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle.
and did not treat him with medicine because I was in one place where none could be found, nor any medicine. And apply cotton wool frequently over the wound, and wash it with water of honey until it is clean.
I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
Take the needle and thread it from the outer part to the inner one:
When it has pierced the heart straight through, place the thread's end where the tip of the needle is or where you have put the needle:
And make it pierced from the inside part through until the outside bends.
And the meaning of this stitching is that you sew as pelters sew fur. and that you leave the seam open once on one side, and then close it from the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
The second method of stitching, which Galen calls specifically,
It is like those who put together two parts naturally. and apply one of the bone ends to the other bone end in such a manner:
drive an awl or bone end close to the next bone, and pierce that place only, leave the two bone ends. Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part to that within. 2 shoulders with arrows.
Then pierce one and the other from the outside part to that within, in 2 other shoulders with the mirror that are opposite each other.
and this is the common method of sewing.
Galen said this word, and no one testifies against it.
one should sew the stomach with two needles, where there is thread in each.
and one should insert one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
and know that when the hernia is in the stomach, The stitching is more severe than the other parts of the abdomen.
The judgments regarding the wound are as follows, similar to those of other wounds:
and it is that when you open the fresh wound completely with all its blood, then let the herbs move it. If he reattaches the intestine and sutures it, then put powder stimulating flesh on top.
If he reattaches the intestine and sutures it, then put powder stimulating flesh on top. and if it has moved (the intestine), then put any ointment that is present, until the wound heals. and sew the flesh, and bind the sutures, and apply the plaster. then care for the wound as with others, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, place it immediately when it begins to emit pus, old cotton. and stir it twice a day until it heals.
For you have no need for other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt whether the wound might spread to the main members, It is necessary that you soften thin linen in warm oil or rose oil. and place it around the swellings, and beneath the armpits;
if there is pain or purulence in the belly, which often occurs, if the cleansing with black wine is hot, and similarly when the purulence reaches the intestines;
And pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when perforated. and it is due to the inflammation of veins therein, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the hernia jumps out of the wound, replace it as you would an intestine, while it is still fresh;
And if it is old and has turned black or dark, you must cut away the black part, so that no blood flow comes from it. For there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the ligament. And place the two shoulders hanging from the part under the wound on the side opposite the fracture to align the extraction as the splinters fall and the wound bows outwards.
Of the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some men,
Because I have seen a man wounded or pierced with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and in it were excretions and flatulence;
I treated it according to what I knew, and I did not stop subtilizing until it was healed, and the wound closed.
And when I see it sewed (or sutured), I suspect that the patient has pain in his stomach; and he had no ill-being but remained in better positions, and food and drinks;
and some experimentalists say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: take firm twigs with large heads, then gather the lips of the wound, And when the convulsion has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips,
then place another convulsion after in this manner as before, until the wound is completely captured;
And dress the wound. If the head has become inflamed in the intestines, and brings no harm to the patient,
And it can be tied up the intestines with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal.
In this manner: take the end of this intestinal thread that is sharp and pointed. then tie it to the sharp end of the thread, that is, a fine twisted flax cord. then insert the thread into the awl, and sew the intestine and reset it in its place.
And this method of stitching fractures is not beyond the path of trust and hope;
If the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the great intestines, there is no remedy or health, but rather subtlety.
of a fistula or Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", And likewise when it is swollen and curved.
A fistula is like a hard, nodular thickening or swelling that does not cause pain. And it is swollen like a bird's feather.
And sometimes clear jump, and other times thick jump; Sometimes thin, and other times rather thick;
And I spoke of it in the section on wounds, that every wound which is not healed and there is no flesh, is nothing but one of the eight causes:
It is to know, by the small amount of blood or body. or for its illness. or because there is hard flesh within and above the lips that does not allow it to grow flesh. or if there is too much swelling. If the loosened joint is of bad quality and torn apart, if the medicine is not good in the treatment; because corruption is a manner of pestilence; because the property in the region causes slow digestion and slowness of health, and swelling by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and treatments of medications in sections.
Also, I will explain to you the treatment for fistula that is made by manual work.
Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves. or to the bladder, intestines, bladder, or any of the ribs. For the spine of the back or for any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this way are difficult to cure, and there is only labor and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the level I have said, and you are confident in the cure, And you recognize it, if you take a thorn or iron splint, if the fistula is straight, pierce it.
and if the fistula is twisted, seek a fine needle of wood, for the wood bends with the twisting.
And if the fistula (an abnormal passage or connection) at the hand is pierced and you cannot find it by probing with fingers, If the fistula by one of the wounds is
because moisture is so short from one wound to another, and it cleanses (the fistula);
then seek it cautiously with your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve in it, and whether it has penetrated to the full depth.
Ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and the location where they feel it.
and when you know truly the location where it is, whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein. or in any of the locations that I have told you, if the pain follows what I have said.
or in any of the locations that I have told you, if the pain follows what I have said. and cut open the wound and the rotten flesh that is inside. and then the cure until it heals,
and if the fistula is properly pierced straight through, you must cut through as deeply as possible, then put wet tents soaked in astringent medicine at the top of the fistula,
then put wet tents soaked in astringent medicine at the top of the fistula, As long as the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then apply liniments of healthy fat, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this means, cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, break it. If vein or nerves do not obstruct or main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, let it heal until all decay is removed, then cure with warm ointment until it heals;
and if not healed, make a pouch as before, Know that you are not going to the fountain:
cover it up and stay as deep as you can be. remove all the corruption, then reset its place;
if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too advanced, that you cannot reach it. if there is no other remedy but to let nature take its course.
and if there is a small bone that has rotted, which you can draw out with the pliers. if it is necessary to extract it by one instrument.
And if there are many bones, draw them all out, leave none of them behind.
If the moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, strike and press and warm the flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something warming on the wound. And let the limbs be set apart around the bones,
And then the bones will have more easily.
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, hold the corruption only as long until the blackness is completely removed, Then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of corruption that reaches the bone marrow; it must be cut off and covered up to the corruption, and then it should be cured until it heals over.
I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg; If you take example and help in your work.
A young man of about thirty years old had a pain in his leg due to something coming from within the body.
The matter kept coming into the leg and it developed a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it.
But they opened it due to their foolishness until the abscesses were opened. And it becomes full of matter, and turns into a fistula, and much pus comes out that all fall down weak and wet with the body.
And for two years they put various remedies around it, but there was no healer skilled in the art of hands.
until I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which it was being treated, And those who ran through wounds with great force; And the body of the youth became red and had a golden hue.
I erected a tent at one of those wounds, then searched for all the wounds.
and found that one came towards the other from all parts of the leg.
I quickly went then, and dug into one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone. and found it rotten and pierced through, and the corruption came to the bone within;
I was the one who appeared to be rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I left.
And it begins to heal the wound with salty medicines for a long time, but does not heal.
Then it is reopened, and the bone is exposed as before,
I found continuous corruption in the bone, and I cut it out, and then I left it, and I tried to heal the wound.
but I could not because I covered about one palm of the bone, and it broke off in all its marrow, Then restore it with medicine; and it heals and strengthens quickly.
and no need to continue the work except due to the frailty of the patient, who could not endure it. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For he often bled, but he was completely healed.
For he often bled, but he was completely healed. And in its place, a hard cyst was born on the bone, and it had good alignment and no harm or contrary effects to anything, neither in the air nor in coming.
stretch the head so you draw the rotten skin underneath, uncover the skin on the place where you wish to be, let the skin not blister the char. And put [something like] a splint or a board beneath the bone to cover the decayed flesh. It must be as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and also be checked again.
If the bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, If the decayed flesh is exposed, put [something like] a splint underneath,
And then, from one part to another, there should be corruption, and the length of the corruption shall be a finger, as we have said;
If the corruption is at the joint, strike the corrupt joint and break the bone on the other side of it;
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, there is no remedy but to crush it;
And if the corruption is at the hilt of the hand or foot, this is a serious matter, But always it is necessary that you investigate that corruption, how it opens. and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or the nerve harm you.
and know that there are many saws and files to cut these bones according to their placement and the appearance of them. and their thickness and thinness, their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; And because, it is necessary to equip for every kind of operation, its tool.
Know that the operation will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you consider the tool that you need, according to what is required.
hot fire The head may burst open from within or due to pressure.
and when you have applied the corrosive treatment using medicines but it does not help, if it is necessary to cover that member up to the level where the corrosion occurs, If the patient is scorched by this (cautery), it may lead to death or a greater evil, which is the damage to the member.
If the patient is scorched by this (cautery), it may lead to death or a greater evil, which is the damage to the member. And the signs are that the limb becomes black as if it were burned by fire. And afterwards comes blackness followed by the corrosion of the member to member, And takes hold of the whole body; if you hurry to cover it.
and if it is by the sting of some poisonous animals like sea scorpions, vipers, and similar,
if the corruption is at the head of the tooth, cover it, and give it no space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the wrist, strike at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm.
If it reaches the elbow, strike at the joint; if it goes beyond the elbow, it is death. and nothing else should be used except for the quantity of its strength.
and so do as follows when corruption or pus arrives: if it comes in the first joint, strike after the other joint.
And if it comes or falls, strike the whole fall. If it rises in the leg, strike at the knee joint.
If it comes above the knee, there is no other device for the patient except to kill him.
And the manner to cover or to dress a limb is such that you bind it above and below. And stretch one minister one of the lower cords, and another minister the other cord above. and you separate the flesh that is between the two cords about one thumb's width wide, so that the bone is exposed.
then cover or dress it, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the dressing does not touch healthy flesh. And comes to the patient another injury and abscesses swollen.
And if bleeding comes when you work, then cauterize the place immediately. or put some powders restraining on it; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
then bind the limb with a removable ligature, and cure it until it heals;
And I will tell you what happens to a man lying on his side:
there comes a blackness that looks like a burn by fire,
and this corrosion began first in his lower back, until it consumed all the lower back;
And when the horse sees corrosion, it pierces its hoof with copper and becomes clean;
And for a long time after that, the corrosion or pus comes back again from his hand, and it came to me,
and I put him on things that would reflect after the cleansing of the body, but the corrosion could not stop.
and I said that I would cut his hand off, and I did not want to unless I had hope of reflection (of the disease). And also he doubts if I am to cut his hand, that he will not die. for the virtue of man was weak; and he gave up all hope, and returned to his land, and struck her with a sword on the hand, and she was well.
and I have not heard this story for any other reason than that it is used when it is necessary.
An abscess sometimes appears in a charred place, and stays so long that it causes a large swelling of boils. Then they run and pierce, causing the boil to burst, and the wound remains open like a wound of a soldier. and the skin that is above is as thin as one layer of linen cloth. and they do not pierce all the way to the bone or to the nerve, and such disease is called "sain".
But if it extends so much that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called "fistula";
And the cure is that you cut through the entire hide, as well as when it is subtle, just like a cloth. and does not heal due to its corruption.
And if you have suspicion that the flesh is hardened, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with pus, cure it with cleansing in this way:
check if the breasts are large, and the boil which is there is of bad smell, Then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is made in this way: Take asafetida, oil, and liquiritiga, equally, and cook in one vessel over the fire. until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from this according to your need, and make it into an oil and honey mixture. and apply as a poultice to the breast, and constrict the hernia. And let the medicine remain for 2 hours, then extract it gently.
Do this several times until the breast is softened and the pus is removed.
And at one time it is cleaned with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, then you take vine ash and pour water over it,
Then clean it and anoint with ointment, until you know that the breast is healed.
if the patient cannot bear it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, if the anointment is made of water and honey or has a little litharge powdered. or you anoint with honey and sweet wine, as the honey has properties to purify and wash, and the wine makes the wound heal.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleaned, if you anoint with that which causes pus to form in it,
And you are to take a plaster made definite, and make it with rose oil and wine. and you anoint [the wound or affected area] with some medicines and ointments, as I have said the properties for treating sores.
if the sore on the breast is small, and the size of the plaster cannot enter it. if the wound is about a thumb's width, cover it with an Egyptian ointment tent. Apply basilicon ointment, when it is diluted.
and if the wound is too wide, cut it to allow at least one league or the cautery to enter.
and if the ulcer that bows out is above, strike or hit it lower than where it is. For when the boil is fully formed, do not let any flesh grow into it. And if you cannot cover the chest beneath as you see, then arrange it in such a way that the belly presses at its lowest point.
et si tu le vois li bowe se tressorbe et s’il est mouilli de moisteur, If it appears in such a manner: that the thigh bone slides slightly downward, and leaves nothing of the thigh. and take medicines for strengthening to place on the breast.
and cover it with one linen cloth that covers the entire breast. Then apply force to the chest wound, which is slightly larger than the first one. Then apply anointment (ointment or salve) on top of the other bandage according to the size of the wound. and place it on the chest wound to align the ribs, but do not remove the large bandage for several days.
and he who is over the chest wound, removes it frequently to remove the ribs. And know what runs from the bowel, whether it is poison or food, or digested, or indigestible.
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been spread in this manner and you see the nature that rises above the breast bone, If you know that the breast is hard, approach the healthy ones.
And then dislocate it in the morning or at midday, and when you dislocate the wound, then change one bandage and renew the ointment.
And if the breast falls inward improperly after many days, know that the breast does not heal itself. And if subtle poison courts for a long time, do not despair of health,
For the health approaches. Because there are men whose wounds delay healing, and of those who do the opposite;
and if it swells indigestedly after many days, know that the breasts will not heal.
and if the breasts swell and are hardened, use drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect. As with an egg shell, for it contains much vitriol, and it is the last remedy;
Take an egg-shell made defined, make it with rose oil, and mix it with equal parts of old wine in substance;
then cook and use it; and the same thing is better cooked thickened, when egg-shells are not present,
Take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them together, and sprinkle the powder on honey when it is over the fire. Then place one cloth, and set it on the chest, and once in a while administer an aristolochia leaf. and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour and centory sometimes.
and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour and centory sometimes. and in the use of simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and sprinkle on the honey as I said, and use. And if the patient is healthy and not treated by this cure,
And if the patient is healthy and not treated by this cure, Therefore, know that corruption occurs throughout [the body], causing pressure on the bones or hard parts, or the ligaments; if the cure of the fistula cure, as we have said before.
of the abscess on the nail bed.
Pouches of the hand give rise to an abscess called Pararice. or it can arise near the foot, or by chance in other places;
and when it becomes swollen and no care is taken, one abscess grows there. And they will run and throw arrows until they reach the root of the nail, and by chance, they may hit it all.
Then comes the corrosion up to the bone, until it brings painful smell, and the shoulder is wide open, and the color turns black.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, but the treatment does not help. Therefore, you should cut off the entire superfluous part that remains of the nail. Then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail grows into the flesh and begins to itch, and swell; then you must put the medicine under the nail to prevent the flesh from growing; And raise it up, and strike the flesh gently and softly. and put on top of the remaining flesh the remnants of the burning and corrosive medicine to remove everything.
If the corrosion is in the bone, strike and pull out, as the more the bone is corrupted, the less it can heal.
And if you see the two (bones) to be misaligned, strike them with a hammer as previously stated, then let it heal while it is clean;
and if it is injured, lance it, and it causes great pain, then you must first let it drain. then strike the angle of the humerus bone with a sharp tool in a cutting motion from above.
And watch that the tip (of the instrument) does not reach the flesh that is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
If it happens, put something on it to soothe.
The boils that arise on some men's hands by chance are all fleshy. And by chance it has teeth or bones, and sometimes it has nails,
And any of them grow at the root of the joint, or the growth occurs in some of the fingers. The one that grows in a knuckle on the finger does not move, And the one that grows at the joint of the finger may move (or stop moving).
The belly of a fat person is light in this way: The belly of a fat person is light in this way: its root should be probed with a wide spatula.
If it is born in the root of the joint, it is difficult to cure; hold it covered.
In one who is born or about to die, you must cut the round flesh up to the bone first. then cut the bone with an appropriate saw for that, and cure it until it is healed.
The swelling that comes at the joints happens at the same time by birth, or by injury of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
It is necessary to cut the swelling so that it can repair according to its natural forms; Then place between two tents or dampened cloths oiled with rose oil, so that they do not stick. and you place between two thin wooden boards until the edges are glued, as required.
If one of its sides comes with the palm, then strike that joint as required.
The poor
The veins are large, swollen, filled with melancholic superfluidities, which come in many members of the body.
And it happens more in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore, you must administer purge of gall, and then the healthy from the basilica.
The iron cure is according to two ways: one is when they are struck, and black blood is drained out; And another way is that you open the vein and draw it out completely.
The incision method is as follows: first stretch the leg with very hot sharp iron, until the flesh is softened, Then bind the leg of the patient from above the calf to below the knee; Then open the vein in one place, or two, or three, of a large size,
Then slice and drain the black blood from your hand to the other, as much blood as the disease in the patient can bear.
and then bind it up, and command him to fast on black meat for a while.
and repeat the evacuation and purification when the veins are full, which benefits the patient.
The swellings of it (the patient) are as follows: stretch the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it, then place it in water and let (the leg) rise from warm hot water until it turns red and the veins swell;
and if you do not have water, heat it in the fire, and then press it against the vein along the length of the thigh or in the part below the ankle;
then peel the skin around it, and cut open the vein from both sides, until it appears when you feel it;
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters or skin appears as if a white cord;
Then push the rod beneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then prick it lightly at an angle.
Then strike it in another place nearby four fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein as far as it appears, Then lift the rod as you have done, and prick it at another angle, as you did before;
Then take another size, or more if needed, then heat it, and apply it to the base of the foot.
Then draw and heat it up to the second size; then file it down by size until it is entirely red hot, then apply it.
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, push an awl with thick, strong wire through it. And pull and tug, and push something underneath it (the dislocation), and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out. And ensure that it does not break, for if it breaks, one cannot pull or lift it, and this would harm the patient.
And when you have treated it (the dislocation), place on the wound of the injury linen soaked in wine and rose oil, and treat it until it heals.
If the vision is constricted, twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight as we have said, If you must cut it, do so crookedly, but do not cover it; drag it as we have said before.
If you must cut it, do so crookedly, but do not cover it; drag it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein should be curved and not sharp, so as not to cut the vein;
and should be large, because if it is too thin, it will pierce the vein; however, it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
The vein of the body
This vein is located in the legs, in warm places where no plants or trees grow, and in dry ground without moisture.
And it may happen elsewhere than in the legs, which is due to rotting coming from under the skin.
As it comes within the body snakes and worms, locate the vein between the skin and flesh.
If the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very large inflammation, Then change the joints, and start the vein to open out, just like a root of a plant.
When the head (of a limb) opens up, it is necessary that you tie around a piece of wood from 1 and a half to 2 cubits (in circumference), and sew it.
and leave the wood (in place), and every time it begins to swell, re-tie around the wood and sew. If it is too long (the dislocated limb), cut a part of it and wrap the remaining, do not cover it at its root, until it is all out. If you cut it (the dislocated limb), it will return into the flesh, cause an abscess and putrefaction or illness.
Therefore, it is necessary to treat it bit by bit until the head (the end) remains, and nothing in the body.
Sometimes this vein when treated measures from five to ten fingers long. And once a man came to me, whose [shoulder] was ten fingers long, and when you cut it open, press it with one pound or pounded iron, and pierce it to the bottom,
and let everything come out of it; empty the matter that is inside, and bring in medicines for rotting wounds every day, then treat it as an abscess.
And sometimes at this vein, many hands are placed, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or the ankle, And it often comes about with wounds, from which blood flows profusely; treat it then as we have said before.
From the worms that are born between skin and flesh.
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often occurs in cattle,
It is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, which travels through the entire body swelling and descending, and he feels it well when moving from member to member, until he tears the skin or jumps away;
and is burned by pustules of certain humors, such as those that come towards worms, snakes, lizards and ascarids (worms) in the belly;
and one doubts his malice, for when he goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it to cure and draw, one can force it out only when it goes:
Then you must bind the joint above and below with a strong rope tightly.
Then you must cut off above and draw out thoroughly, and if its head is embedded in the flesh, you must not pull it. If you cauterize with fire, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it causes is that it burns oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the oil, squeeze the scourge under it, then strike above it and pull it out.
and the patient must be treated with purifying body medicine for dissolving evil humors.
And if boils from spoiled meat burst.
Of the pain that comes from wind-inflammation This disease is called in our land "whitered", and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then it moves from member to member; and I have seen this which I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm to me, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and later, it rose like a worm towards the shoulder, sooner than anything else, just as living silver cuts from its source;
The pain spreads from that place and pierces the shoulder.
And a little later it runs through the entire body, until it comes to the other arm;
And then he told me that it returned again around the body, as I saw.
I wondered greatly how it moved thus from limb to limb, for I have never seen this sickness in such a manner. Nevertheless, I had often heard that pain moved from place to another, but I had never seen it happen, as I did in the woman;
And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins. and for this reason that condition appears constricted.
and it does not appear according to this reason to those who are luxurious, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
And when you see treating this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, If the ligament above and below presses together tightly, and then push up until the windpipe is compressed to its proper place. And cauterize the site; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
use medicines that help to move the windpipe, such as pills made from poppy seeds, and serapin pills, and similar others.
Arrows
Arrows are varied according to their appearance and the parts of the body where they strike.
The differences among them are that some have large points, small ones, pointed or flat-headed, and those that are bound. and of those with two prongs, and of those with tongues, and of those with splinters. and an arrow that strikes any member does so in two ways: either it strikes the principal member with its head,
As marrow, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it falls from any position of these organs, and the signs of death which I will tell you below will show you: It is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrowhead, for death comes in many ways afterward. and if this sign is not clear to you, and the arrowhead is not fully inserted, pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and the brain flees upwards which is above the skull, is when there is a hollowing out and softening and swelling of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and possibly without sweat from the nostrils or ears; and possibly losing speech and voice; And from the wound leaps white moisture resembling pus, and it jumps also like boiling oil;
If this sign appears, beware of the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not in [the wound].
The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces [the flesh] is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it has been driven into a hard thing, not empty. And by chance the arrow may become soft like pus, and it will bleed black blood, and bring coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore, one must know without doubt that death is near.
The sign of an arrowhead that has pierced the flesh is when there is no bubbling of pus from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient turns pale and sighs deeply and seeks cold air.
If the arrowhead falls into the bedclothes of the patient, it has passed through the ribs; and it causes great pain and sighing, and moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
If the arrowhead falls into the stomach, it may cause something undigested to escape from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes or pierces the belly, and it does not jump out through the intestine hole, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow strikes into the bladder and the urine jumps out and runs away, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other member, such as the hand and arm, neck, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, wrist, hip, legs, and similar parts, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, do this instead.
Once there was a man whose arrow hit or wounded the root of the nose: I pulled it out from the other side below the ear fat and it came out senselessly.
I took out a game arrow that hit in the fat under the oil below the paper (?). And the arrow was withdrawn, but could not reach beyond its shaft point. And the arrow was large, of a Turkish bow, with a sharp point suitable for ears; it pierced through, and no ill accident came upon it.
And the arrow passed from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with pointed ears.
I was barbered, and skillfully extracted it, and the Christian survived.
And take an arrow out of a man who was shot or stabbed, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, bent it, extracted it, and had no adverse effects.
If a man has an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sutured above;
And the arrow remained inside [the body], and did not change its position naturally. It does not find any harm in any of its natural functions.
And a man, to whom an arrow struck in his body, and the wound was sutured.
And remained thus without suffering great pain; and many other similar things happened.
And draw an arrow from a knight of the king who was stuck in the snow. and it was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely reversed.
I was called for treatment after it had been stuck for three days. I found the wound to be very narrow.
I probed it all with a thin probe, and felt nothing. And he feels sharp pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead.
I placed him on a soft cushion, as he did not swell. And the arrow appeared to be protruding from the wound.
And the arrow appeared to be protruding from the wound. I place the plaster on the wound daily, and heal the wound directly, and keep the patient for a long time.
until he feels the arrowhead inside his body for a day; then tell him this. I apply the wound with corrosive medicine for several days, until it is healed.
And I pulled, and felt the head of the arrow sticking at its place; then inserted into the wound opening with that medicine powder, until the head of the arrow became visible to me;
and he passed well beyond the four-month limit.
And then I spread open the wound that I had stitched, and stretched it from one side to another, but it could not heal.
Then I did not cease to refine and devise methods for tools, until I took a day to make the pliers well. According to its shape in the end of this chapter, while it heals, and I return the wound.
And they judge that the nose cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely healthy.
And I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may apply your remedy to this, for books cannot fully grasp everything.
but wise masters can easily understand a little thing and what is present and failing. True, nine works and new instruments are required for this craft, especially in dealing with foreign things that may occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of limbs where they are inserted except by two ways: or through the place where they entered, or from another side.
and that which goes out by the same place it entered is an arrow entering flesh, and occasionally comes out sometimes.
And if it does not come out, leave it until the flesh is swollen around it, and make the opening even;
And likewise if it [the dislocation] is embedded in the bone and cannot move out, leave it for some days and try to move it each day;
Then it jumps and if it does not jump, pierce around it all the way through with a sharp needle, only when the opening is widened, then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, search for it thoroughly. And if you feel it (the dislocation), pull it with any suitable instrument.
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, so make the wound large. pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears (the broad part of an arrowhead) attached to it like this.
pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears (the broad part of an arrowhead) attached to it like this. If the bone which is fixed through two parts at the end where you can pierce it, and then break or bend the arrows' ears (points), so that you can draw them out.
and then break or bend the arrows' ears (points), so that you can draw them out. and be careful not to break the arrow but rather to draw it more gently.
And if you cannot do it at once, press down the flesh around it, then draw it, as extraction will be easier. And if bleeding obstructs its progress, bring forth what we have said about its treatment in its chapter.
and guard against cutting the nerve and vein, and place devices to draw out the arrow safely.
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; put the patient in the same form as they were when the arrow struck them. because this is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, if it opens anything of it, or the skin is swollen in one place as can be seen or felt.
Cut then on top, as long as the tweezers can take hold of it, and then pull it out; if it leaps away now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for a while, and then continue with the extraction until it comes out.
And if it were of an arrow in it, push it all out;
and if it were a dislocation, and you wish to administer binding, then administer one instrument of hair, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then push it with force.
And if the arrow is hairy, push one instrument into the point entering in; to make easier the extraction.
And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. Then heal the wound as necessary.
And if the arrowhead falls into the abdomen or bladder or side and is close, and you can cover it, then do so.
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary. And let the treatment continue until it is healed.
The shape of the tweezers used for arrow extraction resembles an owl's beak, and here is its form:
And they come in many shapes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
handles with common bodies (i.e., pincers) Pliers for healing are 31 in number, of which the head is 16.
This is to know: 2 bands that are after the ears, which are called the double "herbech"; and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples apparent; and the 2 veins that are in the 2 inner corners of the 2 eyes, which are called "aspirers"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; And the two glands that are at the neck; And the two veins which are above the mouth, and these are called "augeherich"; And the two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins which are commonly known to be five in each arm:
The first one is the cervical, and it is on the left side of the neck, and the common people call it "vein of the head". And the middle one is called "fast" and is composed of the cervical and basilar. And the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilar is on the right side, And the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and it is above the abdomen, And this is the one whose wound clearly opens above the pocket.
The veinlet is located between the auriculary and anularia, and has two fingers' breadth.
and in the leg and foot there are four veins: one is beneath the hollow of the pocket on the left side, and the second saphenous vein that is on the wrist of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is on the other side's wrist.
And in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
The vein that is behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines. And the qualities of the bloodletter, as I tell you, are that you grasp the patient's head,
And the qualities of the bloodletter, as I tell you, are that you grasp the patient's head, And rub the joint or veins with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: then find the place where you feel the pulse below your neck, and press firmly there:
then take the lance, and push it through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein: And cut (the area) with a sharp knife and skin (it) well, making two incisions with the tips of the thumb, and make blood flow out until you see (it).
then strain and bind it, until it heals;
And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is worth ancient emigration. And sores, eye diseases, and tears of blood from the eyes;
and the qualities of a healer are as I say: and it is that the patient extends his neck, until two veins appear openly; And the pole is beneath your throat, then swallow it.
Then lift the cure on top of the vein at the throat indicator and push the lance underneath. lift up the vein and strike it, just as you have done in the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put a cotton cloth over it.
And then form the wound, and leave it until it heals; and we have spoken of its covering and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is as effective as the healing of the skull in ancient facial diseases that have spread and turned red.
And the qualities are such that the patient strangles his neck until the vein appears; Then take the instrument called "fosseur", here is its shape:
Place the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount that you see; Then cut the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is healthy, and never use a wide flame.
Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp, and the vein should be cut obliquely because the bone is near, and by chance the flames may break when they are thin.
The sinuses of the two veins that are in the two arms aid the eyes, and in the throat, and the tongue, and the ear in oil, and in facial diseases;
and the qualities of their sinuses are that the patient stretches his neck by twisting a certain rope, as before.
then put the hot iron, and let the sinus be the size of a finger length and a little wider, because there is no need for heat.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then correct the blood flow, as much as you need, and then cover it with linen, and bind it well.
The vein of the nose is beneficial for cough, scrod fever, and fevers of the face. as migraines and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old;
and the quality of the vein is that the patient presses his neck, then grasps his nose with his left hand, And take the subtle flame long, and thrust it into the mouth between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well thus, and the blood will start to flow now.
do not go too far inward, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then bind it for a night, as it is quickly restored.
The first joint of the two fingers helps in the straightening of the thumb and at the beginning of swelling, and in many diseases, abscesses, corrosion, sores, and ulcers.
And the qualities of the joint are such that the patient straightens his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on one seat,
Then open the vein along its length with a slight width, then draw out the blood moderately, as needed.
Then repair the other side of the vein, then untie the ligature, and hold the veins evenly in the middle. let the patient not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
On the treatment of boils. The sinews of veins in the mouth above help in swallowing and contribute to gum corruption, lip fissures, and teeth and surrounding issues.
And the qualities of the sinew are to make the patient sit in front of you and hold his neck as I have said. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. And one recognizes them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: Touch both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
Touch both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, If you touch the largest one from each side, and likewise do with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same way.
From beneath the tongue The evacuation of blood from the veins located below the tongue assists after the head incision, and this is when the throat is cut and the diseases of the eye and mouth occur.
And the quality of bleeding is that the patient swallows between your hands in front of the sun, lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side to find a black vein:
Therefore, one and the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins from which one commonly drains are usually drained according to two methods:
Or in pricking with all fire, either the large myrtle mordants or subtle olive oil as you know sharpening is called "anesil"; and are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirrin is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
It is necessary to open the large veins with bald heads that contain much blood and are disturbed. and this is the form of the olive oil flame:
and it is pointed more finely, and it is for thinning out the subtle veins that have a yellowish thin blood.
The sanctuary vein, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are under the throat, neck, chest, and belly;
and it is necessary for the lord to bleed profusely and let go of the artery that is below. And if the artery is touched, and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I said earlier; And the flame should not be pricked, but cut as an anvil.
If the cataract does not open naturally, then you must break it and change another one. or you want to get rid of it, or clean the vein in its place with the arm: it opens naturally. and strike the flame as an anvil, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the location of the wound, it is also necessary that you dislocate the arm, touch the place where the pulse is; then mark the location with a sign, and then tie the arm and burn the vein with fire.
and be careful not to wound an artery when you see it swelling, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it rise high like the urine of a child and it is red and thin, know that it is not from the artery: Hurry up then, and place your hand on it for a long time, afterwards cut your hand off without stopping, for this often happens.
Tie the arm and leave it like that, do not move it by the patient; let him be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not stopped and it bleeds, and no medication is present for you, strike the artery if it is open, because the head will retreat; stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of willow bark, and cut it in half, and tie one of the halves above the other for one day.
If it (the wound) stops bleeding, that's good; if not, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
And the stopping of bleeding is not always necessary in various positions due to the small size of the wound and the slender nature of the vein in the arm.
The opening of the vein in the middle helps to treat blood from the head above and the body below, Because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalica, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the lord to pierce through the nerve that is underneath, and if it pierces too deep, and it finds the nerve, and it swells and the patient becomes ill or injured, and in case it cannot heal.
and this nerve opens up many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument anesthetic; and cut the nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The incision of the head should aid, so that blood from the head and eyes is drawn out.
And it is necessary to make an incision in the point of olive oil or myrtle fire, for this is the safest of all veins, as there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Therefore, one must seek the lighter joint, and not worry if it is necessary for the first time, and one may begin again. And sometimes the joints swell in some men, when it is necessary for the first time, but do not worry about it. The quality of the urine is according to your opinion.
The first thing you should know about urination, is that it is brought forth only for preserving health,
And to avoid future illnesses; and let the bloodletting be performed in one of the four veins that are near: namely, cephalic, femoral, or basilic. and it should be done at the beginning of spring, in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
and it should be done on the first or third day, after 2 or 4 hours.
The salve given for diseases has no fixed hour determined, but it is administered whenever necessary, day or night, at all hours and in every moment.
And it is not necessary to salve children until they are 12 years old, nor women in childbirth except during the fourth, fifth and sixth months. Nor should the elderly who have passed 60 years be salved.
And when anyone wishes to be salved, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that their intestines be emptied with a light clyster. If there is much bile retained, so that veins do not expel the superfluidities from the principal members.
That one who is excessively salted with foods, or drunk, to such an extent that he sweats and is watery.
and if he is purged after a colic passion, vomiting, stomach disorder, excessive ejaculation with women, labor, staying awake, and fasting, or from the strength of weapons or from the body.
Then thin out the fluids, if it is fatty, with foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power to do so.
then immerse [it] in a bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin out the blood.
and heal the vein with the pus surrounding it, as we have said.
and keep that day from work, from pain, and from lust, and similar things.
And you should bind and squeeze, and let the bandages be higher than those who are bled, and rub the arm two or three times.
Then gradually pull out the ligature above, for if it is too tight or narrow, it cannot heal without.
and then rub the wound with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them.
then wet the bandages with a little oil from an old bottle, then put your left hand's fingertip on that vein under the wound where you want to bleed. That the vein does not open and fail when cutting. For there are veins which run like cords to be bled, and some which are full of venosity. for when you put the fire to it, if it takes flame, and cannot open the vein, then that is one of these.
And if it opens a vein, then the wound is too narrow; therefore, the surgeons should be aware of this matter.
And if it opens the vein again for a second time, that is good; but if not, then start anew under that place or cut more quickly if the wound is not inflamed.
And if the wound is inflamed, and the patient becomes afraid, he should wait one or two days and not bind the arm: In case abscesses appear, do not enter into water before starting anew with the surgery if it pleases him.
And if the piercings are small, or the veins thinly and subtly, and you doubt that much blood will flow as you see, put all the flame directly into the piercing itself.
And work it a little hastily, so that the flesh is inflamed; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh inflamed, do not start the bleeding again, and put a little bit of oil on it, for the oil alleviates the pain of the blood and is moistened in this place by the oil.
And thus administer the oil poultice on each wound that you open the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
And similarly, use a three-pronged instrument and forceps for removing arrows when placing it on the spot; make sure it is thin and split if it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens when the wound is not cleaned before that time or when opening the vein is small, If you hurry, place a moist sponge in warm water and salt for an hour, and then strain it.
and you must do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place for several days without any black or green discoloration, that is not harmful. and if you find (something), place some balm of aloes or myrrh in it, anointed with cooled oil or something similar.
And there are often abscesses and appearances at the sanctuary (hospital): put your hand on it then, and if you find it soft to the pressure of your hand, that is a bad sign. Therefore, you should not put anything on any of the things we have mentioned, for by chance without the artery; but he should be given one dry plaster to harden it, then cured with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its virtue, and from the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it drain until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it drain until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it is necessary for the one who is wounded and needs bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wider.
And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it is necessary to let him bleed little by little, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of bleeding is safe from contamination of blood and nerve damage, and it is more beneficial than long bleeding or wide bleeding.
And for the one whose body needs to be purified, it is necessary to give soft bread below pomegranate peels; if he is scorched, draw blood three or four times or more.
And if he is of cold constitution, eat soft bread in syrup before the purification, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and a pleasant-smelling syrup.
If he has diarrhea during the purification, after the passage of blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of meat and subtle scented syrup.
And apply other things as we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
If you want to burst open an arm, or draw blood another time, if it has been weakened by excessive bleeding, let it bleed drop by drop according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And whoever wants to burst open the arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong constitution, should let it bleed for 6 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to draw blood from another part, should draw it on the second day or the third.
Since there is much blood within the body which has already been heated and produces fever, it is necessary to draw out a large quantity of it and widen the opening until it comes through in a cloth. then you must observe all the signs of healing, and place your hand on top of the pulses to prevent death from coming through cloth. this happens many times when healers are negligent.
and it is not appropriate when you dislocate the arm, and make blood come out the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly. If it is curved, let him stretch out the arm as much as possible, for this would be bad.
but leave it until it heals the second time; or you prick it with the tip of the flame, until the wound that has congealed opens again. and put on it one piece of clean linen wet with vinegar and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, do not bind it at all until the abscess has been calmed.
And if it is necessary to draw blood again, do so in the same vein, or another one, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is similar to the vein in the head because they are composed of the same thing.
And the method of bloodletting is that the patient should insert their hand into hot water until the vein becomes red.
Then he should be tied gently so that the vein can be seen clearly, then draw blood carefully, neither too wide nor too long.
And let the wounds be wide open, and let them be well cleaned close to the joint of the hand; if it cannot be removed from there, put the hand in hot water and let the blood come out in the hot water until you have enough.
if it is cold, do not push the hand into hot water, for you put it more in winter than in summer.
and the cleaning of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are neither arteries nor nerves.
The salve for the sore on the right hand is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
hold the hand and apply hot vinegar until the vein is opened, if possible to see. and if the wound is transverse, and you cover it with something entirely, it will cause no pain;
and do not go too deep because nerves are exposed bare under all the skin,
And then place the hand in hot water, unless it freezes at the wound, and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as needed, put oil and silk on the wound to heal it quickly, and do this for each wound.
The salve of the left hand is good for the disease of the mice, and do it just as I told you on the right side.
The salve of sulphur is beneficial for all diseases that are beneath the chest. as marsh fever, retention of fluids, rain disease, thigh and leg ailments, and similar diseases.
And the properties of its salve are that the patient must dip their foot in hot water and rub it over the vein until it burns. and place it on the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and there are many rivers flowing over the foot.
Keep a clean bandage or cloth, wide enough or at the ankle, as it is useful.
And if you have a wound on the foot, be careful of the veins that are below it, and keep it clean in the same way as you would when wrapping; let the flames not touch it.
And if the wound cannot be removed, immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the saline is needed for the first time, start with the second one a little higher up because the wound is salted. Do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the tendon of the other leg equally.
The saline for the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its application alleviates the pain of the haunch when it is used for hot blood.
And the quality of its saline is that the patient immerses himself in it and stretches above the ankle four fingers width,
For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, bleed in all possible ways that you can, and across. And it is better that you strike it, for the shoulder is dislocated, and it is much restored by human hands.
And it is better that you strike it, for the shoulder is dislocated, and it is much restored by human hands. And if you don't pierce it, no blood will flow from it that opens or its back, and toward the little hole, and beware of nerves.
Make as much incision in the blood as you see fit, then untie the ligature, and put cotton on it and bind it; it is now healed.
From blisters of the bladder (or boil)
Blisters of the bladder (or boil) are made of horns, or hairs, or glass; and blistering is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
This blistering done without cutting also has two ways: either it is to be applied to any heat source, or it is heated with fire.
and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the vents (probably a typo, should be ventosation) under the chin; and the vents (probably a typo, should be ventosation) on the two shoulders; and the vents (again probably a typo for ventosation) above the ankles; And blisters on both arms; and blisters on both legs; and the swellings of the ankles; and blistering does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
and because it is not to be drained at all, as one does with blood from a vein; and it should not be given, neither by fire nor burning, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
And if, due to necessity or habit, it is required to administer cupping, we shall do so every hour at the beginning or end of the month, or in between and at every opportunity.
for there are some who, when they need to administer cupping, have a heavy head.
and if those who find swelling and redness in their face, head, and neck become blind.
and those who have a drop of blood in their mouth and swell the tongue and bleed. And if there are such [cases], who think, see by no blood, swell and die, and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, especially during the month, we order to bleed after three hours of the day.
The bleeding from the mouth helps with the headache that comes to the eyes, and it is not advisable that this be done after evacuating the entire body.
And this bloodletting is in place of the bleeding of the skull,
And it is not appropriate for someone who has a cold constitution or who has scabies to use [this treatment], because it causes them much harm.
And therefore it is not appropriate for the elderly to use [this treatment], nor those with cold diseases.
And those who often heal themselves become indolent, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of indolence.
Cupping at the neck is in the area of the brain and base of the skull, and for this reason it is effective in treating the lower parts of the body. And to cut the channel of the penis, and entirely, and to fill [it].
Then it must be pressed gently, for if it holds too tightly, it may cause obstruction or injury to the stomach and heart.
The ventosations at the two costels of the neck are equal to the pain in the head, and obstruction and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth,
And it is in the place of the basilica's safety; and you must instruct the lord to extend his hand to insert, not to touch the artery, and no bleeding should come forth.
Ventilations under the chin are good for mouth diseases and tooth decay, as well as similar diseases in the mouth; and they are located near the safety of the lips.
Ventilations under the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
The ventosations of the flanks are as much as three veins from the arms. for it draws blood from these large veins.
and instruct the lord not to pierce too deep, for the flesh is bare of skin, and it knows beneath black and arteries.
The ventouse located on the rump is as much as for the emorroid from its foundation and diseases underneath, and the ventouse should be large and made of lead, as it needs to drain well; and in case it is fine, it would burst, causing great wounds.
The swellings of the legs open widely because they draw blood from all over the body, and are like the old pains of the kidneys, and bladder, and vagina, and diminish the flowers; and are in the position of the two shins, and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after a long time, and bring pus in various dispositions.
The way to put the swelling is that you empty it first, suck it promptly, apply pressure immediately and move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the place become red and swollen, and the color of blood appears; then stop, and put the swellings, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are some who have loose skin and clear pores: it is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deeper; and suck gently.
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cut twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the bone is very thick, it must be struck three times; and when we wish to draw blood drop by drop, we should prick only once.
And if we wish to have much blood, let us often do it; and if the bone is thick, we should strike it through and through, and make sure that the arteries are pierced suddenly.
And for those with thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, you should anoint the joints of the shoulders with sharp and dissolving oil: if it is summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of cucumber:
And if it is in ivy, oil of watercress, or lilies, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balm of Gilead oil, anise oil, and similar.
And if the person you are treating has thin and narrow pores, do not put any oil.
But it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, cold water, blackberry water, cucumber water, or pearl-water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture should rise from asafetida or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And he who has large excesses should rise from old wine, or sour water of vinegar, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar.
and it is not good to bleed from a blister before the bath or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and he should not sleep after venesection.
and it is necessary that he washes himself when he must bleed and after bleeding. And guard that he who is recovering (or healing) is colicky, and that he is not too sharp (agitated) and inflamed; it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuces and similar things;
and eats pulses (legumes) and mutton meat, and moist foods.
and he who has cold constitution should take honey syrup and mild scented wine, which is between old and new, and eat barley, pulses (legumes), small birds and birds such as pigeons;
And on the day when it turns sour, he should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some men sometimes treacle or muscat before or after, for comforting the main members; and let the thin ones be purged, but it should not be drunk by those who are hot.
The wounds that are made for injury are those made on the liver, spleen, gout, belly, buttocks, loins and kidneys, as these members cannot bear to be injured under them;
And one does not make him fever except to draw blood from one member to another. as we put on the limbs when the nails are swollen; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, such as putting leeches on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the limb.
remove the pain when there is an abscess or stone, remove it by its attractive virtue in case of abscess, or dislodge the stone from its place.
and thus one does when he puts it on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness,
And these blisters are administered empty to be sucked only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold liquid.
as in diseases of the lungs, and thus the blister is filled with hot water or water in which cooked herbs suitable for this purpose have been steeped.
The shape of the blister administered with fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers' width and half a palm in length, and have one small hole at its center, like pushing an awl through.
and let it be of iron, soft enough that it does not scald the patient when placed on the limb;
have in the middle a rod of iron or steel to insert a handle;
and be large or small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
For the ulcers of children are different than those of adults, and thin ones from fat ones.
And this ulcer should be placed thus upon the member:
Apply the plaster of wax or linen thread and place it across the rod that is within the ulcer. So that the light is at the bottom of the bladder so as not to burn the patient
and place it on the member, and your fingers should be on the opening as we have said, so that when one looks, if steam comes out, then remove the bladder;
and wrap it with the linen thread as before, and repeat it often if needed.
In the blister administered for disease of pleurisy, there is no thorn or prick, and it is not applied unless when it is full of water, and it is placed only on the member.
and this is the form:
Blisters are not applied unless to members where blisters cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and in bare areas of skin, such as palms or soles, and other similar places.
And the qualities of the user are such that when you find wounds that are in sweet, clean waters clear to the touch, take them;
and place them in a fresh water bath until they become familiar with it, and have nothing inside of them; then let it be purged by bleeding and leeching, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the wounds back on it;
and when they are full and hot, if there is a place where leeches can be applied, do so, for it is very beneficial.
If not, lift the shoulder blade gently, then press firmly afterwards.
and if the shoulders are too close to the body along the back, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it there until the pain subsides;
And if the pain multiplies, place broken glass, or similar things on it to reduce the swelling.
or place half of the boiled and peeled beans on the spot, and leave them there until they harden at the spot, it will now stop bleeding.
and if you have more need of it, take other snares.
And if the snares do not want to be taken, rub the spot of fresh blood, or you poke an awl through it so that the snares come out. and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they harden.
And when you see them falling (the joints), sprinkle a little powder of aloe and crushed seeds or ashes, they will stay in place now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is frequently necessary in the art of medicine, and it is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear child, that the foolish fools who read this chapter will never see any of the ancient books or read letters about it;
And for this reason, knowledge of this kind is introduced into our land, since I have never found anyone skilled in it.
And I do not know it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied the subject, and by experience, and by the practice of my life.
And I have described it in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Therefore, it is necessary that we say the prologue of this book and the subjects where wise men put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or disfiguring comes to anyone, it is necessary for you to clean the patient from both sides, if anything does not stop you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or old people;
or if the time is not very warm or too cold; and avoid cold joints, that is to say cold meats, meat of chicken and shrimp, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about abscess heating or spreading matter in the member; if the patient returns to his first government as he used it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with meats that make thick nourishment or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water and rice, meat pie, beef, mutton, fish eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For prolonged nursing leads more often to fractures.
And know that the bones of the old and decayed cannot be properly restored or mended according to their nature due to the relaxation of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as a child's bones.
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with large splints that are held tightly and join the limb together, until it heals as it was before; and not to put any weight on it, and for this reason, you must nourish it with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the break of the neck is different from the break of the leg or foot; and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of breaks. There are breaks that heal by themselves, and others that grow worse if not treated, like the tip of a feather for writing.
There are breaks that heal by themselves, and others that grow worse if not treated, like the tip of a feather for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small crack.
And each type has its own tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes in its place.
And it is recognized as the fracture of the bone when the joint is twisted, and it opens widely by displacement, and it sounds at the pressure of the hand;
And if there is no twisting or touching, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture.
But it may have twisting, or a split, or a small fracture. Do not move the hand but put medicines that come after this on it, and then hold it gently now.
And know that the breaks which go towards the tree, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary to set them evenly now, so that abscesses grow not there.
and if abscesses come near, let it stay for some days until the abscess is soothed; then set it equal to the muscle that you can easily and wisely move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of where there are pieces; then tighten, as necessary hereafter.
And if the bone is broken into pieces and it breaks in two, whether it is hand or foot, or at your hand if it's a small member, or if there are two strings, or one string and at your hand;
then place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you align them using all means possible in their places and ensure that through your work no damage or pain comes to the patient.
then align well the two bones according to the best shapes.
And it feels well to the touch if it seems not quite right to you: straighten it properly, and do not strain it too much, nor force it as those who bring it by their work, abscess hot and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is healed, correct the patient so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, or turning, or in any other way. and watch carefully that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it should be placed in such a position that it feels no pain;
For when it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it should be placed in such a position that it feels no pain; and keep it straight, so twisting does not come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Know that the broken limbs can be various in smallness and size and shape.
Because there are small members, such as arms and fingers, etc. It is necessary to wrap them in linen cloth, soft and fine.
and those that are thick, such as thighs and legs: It is necessary to wrap them in a large and hard bandage, for the broad bandages bind the whole large member evenly on all sides so that there is no swelling.
then tie light bandages around it, 3 or 4 times depending on the member, and hold your hand slightly on the bandage, then go above the fracture and bind less than the fracture, then move away from the fracture.
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a great part of the healthy flesh, then take another ligament, and turn it around reversely on the broken joint.
Then return to the part beneath the fracture, and hold it moderately, neither too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above.
Then place stuffed linen or woolen ligaments between the ligaments, until they are all even, then tie it all with one bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing for the abscess on it, and let him who removes the swelling leave it alone for some days.
Then hold your arms steady, and they should be half the width of a thick cane, or of a beam used for splitting logs, or of palm branches, and shaped as follows:
but the arm that one places over the fracture should be a little larger and wider than the others;
And let it be as long as is necessary for the small or large member.
Then tie it up with the pegs in the same way you did at the first joint, then bind over it with thread coming together, as in the first joint for the break.
The cord is narrower now, and it must be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax thread.
because if the cord is thick, as I have seen from the work of fools who make their joints using twisted flax thread, and this is a great error, for the joint cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each peg.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the ribs after the resetting in healthy places, place linseed poultices or cotton wool over them to prevent bleeding.
When the wound is with fracture and the bones are broken, I shall tell the remedy afterwards.
Know that it is not necessary to reset all the fractured limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to set them with force except after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of the abscess healing.
And here is the method of ancient plasters for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: it is that you take flour that remains in the mill's walls, mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method of restoring a plaster for healing various fractures, and especially for women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Here is another method for plasters that heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: take barley meal, salt, vinegar, asafetida, and Arabic gum, in amounts of ten; myrrh and aloes, in amounts of five; alchil, eight; grind these ingredients into powder and mix with plenty of egg. If the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it has a good composition and quickly heals broken bones for many men.
Another method of plaster for twisting: take mugat and vismalve in amounts of ten; myrrh and aloes in amounts of eight; acacia wood in six; Armenian bolus in ten; grind it well, mix with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their places, and to relieve the pain occurring, and it is applied with cutting the bone and breaking: take new linen, wet it in water and oil, and put it on the place. This plaster does not restore [the condition], but it is good for relieving abscess heat and proper bones pain.
Another method of plaster to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to hasten the healing of an abscess: take root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of oats, from each one a part; grind them together, infuse with wine, and if the limb is scalded, use it with coriander water moistened or plain water.
Another method of poultice stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of mallow, and flax, balm, clover, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; and grind and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates wrote in his book that nothing should be placed on a broken member for restoration except a plaster made of wax and oil, and no other thing more, and he said it should be between soft and hard but not too much of either.
It seems Galen said that for restoring a broken member, dry and slightly warm things should be placed on it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have stated.
Another method of plaster that is good for injuries and pain: take mugath (possibly a kind of flour) and crushed bones from men or feathers of birds, also mallow, and mix it equally; grind them into a paste and apply the mixture.
Then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not dislocate it for many days.
And if pain or itching comes to the place, with no relief or swelling, hasten, dislocate it, and remove the plaster immediately; take light cloth, sea sponge moistened, dip in water, and apply to the place until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, wet in vinegar or rose oil, and tie it with a nut until you are sure of the abscess heating up.
And let the inflammation of the member rest, and let the pain disappear, then resume tying it gently, a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before; tie it delicately until it heals.
And if you see that the abscess has healed and turned red, swollen, and pain has disappeared, and you need plaster and linen, then resume tying it as you did before equally.
And if no injury comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it unless after 3, 4, 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, as one sees, until the break heals and the joint approaches the flesh above.
Then bind it more tightly than before and fatten the flesh, as I have said before; and if you see the joint dry out too much, know that nourishment cannot enter. Then apply warm moist heat to the joint, every time you dislocate it, and do so three times a day, and loosen the binding slightly.
Through this work, therefore, cut the nerves of the limb and repair as much as possible what the foolish physician leaves dislocated: it is wrong, and it is a fearful task, and I see nothing else but to ease and to work directly.
Of various ways of breaking There are various ways of breaking and different shapes, and their causes have specific purposes;
For there are breakages made by the impact of swords, and the collarbone breaks the whole bone up to the shaft which is beneath the bone, as a haw or club does; and for this reason, such a breakage is called "haw-breaking".
For the sword strikes the bone from above causing it to be broken completely, and such a breakage is called "complete break"; and these are the wounds caused by either great or small complete breaks.
And if there is a thrust-through injury, a fracture or falling on stone, or other similar injuries.
And if there is a persistent fracture, which reaches up to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is healed in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
and if the wound is made either by piercing with a stone, falling, or in similar ways, and drives a piece of the bone inside, and the limbs are closed as a cook does on top of pots; if the stone enters within.
And this happens more often in those who have or a moist skull bone, such as a child's head.
And it happens in all these ways of fracture that small parts are displaced as pieces, and I will speak about it in its place.
We know all ways of fracture by the distraction on them, and the examination with probing, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
The similarity of hair-like appearance is known by those who, when the bone is discovered and scraped over it, an opening appears black at the fracture.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the sick person's condition, and if you see any harmful symptoms such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, numbness, fever, pallor, and other signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any doubtful symptoms and expect a healing, then start the treatment.
And when the wound first comes to you, and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day if possible.
And if this is the case, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue underneath the bone is not corrupted, and the incidents mentioned will occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches to the tissue that covers the brain, you must cut the broken part as follows: and it is necessary that you take hold of the patient's head, and expose above the bone in all ways possible, and on the figure of the wound more gently than possible.
and if blood corrosion occurs when the bone is exposed or an abscess forms, help with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with linen soaked in rose oil. And make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed and you are assured of the flow of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the shape:
And then make another incision larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made with an iron blade; and work lightly, so as not to cut the tendons.
And if the bone is out of place and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, in such a way as you administer incisions with trephines, but not so much that they cut through the bone to the other side, and there must be a margin or circle above the point to prevent the tip from passing beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each comes into its place along the width of the bone, so that you have trephines for all sides; and this is the form of the four kinds of trephines.
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one trephine on the bone, and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the trephine a little farther away, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone between the perforations as subtly and gently as possible, following what has been said, until you draw out the bone or any of the tools you have such as pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the tightness remaining between the bone and any other tool resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors.
And if any small bones or no scales remain, gently remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and salves as we have said.
And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, who was very skilled; and he holds it in high esteem, and this is his saying. First, you should expose a part of the bone where the break is open, so that when you have exposed that part, place the lenticular anvil on top of it as shown by its form:
And do not cut it from one side, and the parts are sharp in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly chip away at the bone all around, and take care of the cloth that is underneath.
If it is near the bone, chip away lightly at the bone, for one chisels well with harm and with fear.
If the bone breaks through to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only from above, and there are small fragments, then it is necessary to smooth over the roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp scraper of different sizes, in order to bring the most suitable one for each place, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
The patient should shave himself with great razors, then with more subtle ones afterwards, and should not cease until it is well done.
In each other kind of hair cut and subtle breakage, it is necessary that you bring the cause according to his guidance; this is not a matter for anyone who has put his study into this art.
If the wound is exposed, you must take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled either in 2 or 4 layers, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this more gently so as not to burden the wound, then administer another string over it but do not tighten it any further than covering the wound.
And let it remain for one or two days until the abscesses calm down, then release it, and administer medications such as marshmallow roots, barley flour, incense powder, arum, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and immediately administer trustworthy medications without harm.
And ensure the wound remains always clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to accumulate, for when pus accumulates on the brain tissue, it corrupts and rots, causing great harm to the patient; for when something bitter is applied to it, it burns through from above.
Therefore, take care that no bad accident happens to the patient as we have said, for it is doubtful with a doubt.
And if blackness does not come violently except through medicine that we have placed there, which has this property, you should take a part of honey, and 3 parts of rose oil and one piece of cloth and mix them together; then heal it in the manner of treatments that are needed, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or just one of them because they are two bones; and the one below is cartilage, and does not break but only bows or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must put your little finger or thumb into the nostril, and insert the breakage into the index finger of the same hand, and into the hollow part facing outward, until the nose regains its natural shape. and do it gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain due to your work.
If the breakage is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, then you must insert a small splint into the nostril.
And if the break is in two parts, then you should set it again, and hurry to restore it as soon as possible, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then apply the dressing of linen to the head of the needle if the break is in one part.
Or you apply another to the other side, if the break is there; and let the dressings be as thick as they fill the openings of the needle.
And they said that any remedy should moist the dressings with butter and change them every day. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a mixture of egg yolk and flour powder; then leave the dressing until the bone is hard and the cartilages harden.
And sometimes feathers of goose are inserted in place of tendons, and if one side is wrapped with a thin cloth, and the breakage is held, breath is blown through it; do as you see fit.
If abscesses come up while you are working, put either wax or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little bit of quicklsilver.
If abscesses do not come up, put an ointment on the outside made of sizemant flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light poultices on top, but do not tie the wound shut.
And if the fracture of the neck is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract them with appropriate instruments, then make an incision, and treat the wound with suitable charms, plasters, and ointments.
If there is no wound within the neck, treat it with bandages and place planks until it is healed.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the lower jaw is dislocated and there is no wound outside, and the break is only outside but not broken through, if one knows it easily, it means there is a curvature within.
If the break is on the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the break is in the left lower jaw, insert your index finger of the right hand, and gently push it inside, then adjust it from outside using the other hand, and make it even.
And if the break in the lower jaw is dislocated by .2 (two fingers), you must administer an extension of .2 parts to make it equal.
And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place a broken bit gag on the mandible and put one double cloth on top; put a large, well-made splint or equal piece of leather on top, long and wide according to the mandible, and attach it where you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light food.
If you see the figure changing, dislocate it after a day, then reset it to its original position; put a plaster on top, with flour from the mill mixed with egg or oatmeal after removing the gag; put a light linen bandage on top, and if the plaster sets, and the dislocation does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in four weeks.
And if an abscess appears, apply what we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, make sure no piece of the bone has been removed; if necessary, remove the splinter with suitable tools.
And if the wound is narrowed, stretch it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all the pieces and none remain, if necessary, close the wound if it is wide and apply one dressing suitable for that purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
of the forceps (instrument) The forceps break multiple times towards the shoulder, and the fracture is in four ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two parts, split into pieces, and is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is when the fracture has a wound, you should have two assistants, one of whom holds the shoulder that feels the forceps broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then align the fracture in your hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or deformation.
And if you need to stretch more, put a round cushion of cloth or linen on the patient's shoulder, and make it as large as necessary; then extend and raise the forceps, and press the cushion with your hand so that the fracture is aligned as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out by force because it comes in fully, then the patient must lie on his affected side, and place one pillow under the shoulder, and push the ministers to move the shoulder downwards until the bone of the socket is raised.
Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you see debris, then it is necessary that you cut across; and separate the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, hit it in one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to prevent dislocation.
and resemble a spoon, but not concave, and be of such size as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two prongs, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the groove of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
And when you are certain of the abscess being heated, if it opens, and if the hole is small, or you doubt the abscess has opened, then use cloths and bandages on the wound, according to its size.
And if hot irons come for it, moisten a cloth with rose oil, asafetida, and wine, and place it on top.
The tightening of the bone, when it feels sore and swollen, is to place a plaster made from flour of mill and egg white on the bone, put light packs on top, and insert a splint beneath if needed. Then take a very thick bandage of one palm's width, then put a double cloth dampened on top of it and roll it up; then take a thin needle three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the edge of the bandage is hanging. and place the needle on the fracture, then turn the bandage around the neck, and below the patient's jawbone, and below the patient's cheekbone; and roll it from each side, and when you see that the bandage is in alignment with the fracture, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then hold it every day, and when the threads slip, restrain it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under his jaw, to raise the shoulder; if the fracture aligns due to the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it except for a bad accident occurs, until twenty days.
Then repeat the treatment, if it is needed, and hold it in place until it is restored; and it is restored within 28 days at most, and less for some men.
on the fracture of the shoulder
If the shoulder is broken or dislocated, it will not heal on its own, and one should only try to put it back in place through touch; if it is aligned according to the shape of the fracture or dislocation, and reset according to its natural form in all ways possible; then apply powder from a mill with plenty of egg whites and light ointments, and cover with two layers of cloth; then apply a broad and thin splint, about one finger wider than the shoulder, and if there is any gap between the splint and the shoulder, fill it with linen ointment so that the splint fits evenly; then tighten it firmly to keep the splint in place and observe the ligament every day; whenever it loosens, re-tighten it and adjust the splint if it is off its place, and let the patient rest on their side; and the shoulder will be restored within 20 or 30 days, and when this number is completed, remove the splint carefully, as it is not bone that moves easily.
And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not beneath the skin, lift it up, remove it, and follow what was said earlier to heal an abscess with hot cautery.
of the fracture with fish
The limbs are sometimes broken in the middle, but this is rare; however, they often break at the joint. And when it is broken inside, it slips downwards, causing the patient great pain, and lack of strength, and immediately vomits blood, and the wound opens in the broken bone, and it feels badly.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back with one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of both sides to your hands, and subtly puts it all in equal alignment in every way possible until the bone figure is as required; then put a plaster and bandages over the broken bone, or a lighter splint, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it on the bone so that it does not move; then turn the limb round and round, and tighten it gradually, and check each hour whether it heals, and if it swells, tighten it; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or pruritus at the joint, or pain or abscess, hurry up and dislocate it, remove the plaster, and direct the one who has come there in ways of treatment; then reset the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the broken ribs
Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in large ones behind the back and near the neck, and they do not break unless they are slippery; and it hurts greatly upon examination at the joints.
And the restoration is that you set it even again, as required. Then put the splint and hold it with a stick, if needed.
If the fracture of the rib is slanted within, the patient feels great pain and swelling, as if from pleurisy, for the bone points to the skin; and the fingers become hardened, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, which is a grave illness, and the ancients have made great effort to treat it.
And if among those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the abdomen, to push the fracture outward.
We do not bring hot irons unless they have come (to be used). And if they have come, then let them be heated.
And they said that one puts vents on the side to suck out pus, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the vents do not attract the superfluidities to the side due to weakness in position.
And they said that one should cover the side with damp linen dipped in hot oil and place bands between the ribs to make the wound equal on all sides, then it should be cured with the cure of pleurosy (inflammation of the pleura), meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone which does not penetrate the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision over the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath for support; and then you must cut the bone, draw it gently, and then sew up the two edges of the wound if it is large, and dress with plasters until it heals. And if pus comes, place moistened linen soaked in rose oil on top, and cover the area; cure the area as necessary for the abscess, and lie still on the side where it should be, until it heals.
of the broken collarbone
Never does a break occur in the bones of the collarbone, and it never bends; and similarly in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take notice if their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel nothing. Know that they are mortally ill in many positions, and if they do not speak and feel well when you squeeze and prick them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be healed if care is given to it.
If similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it will recover or not, take notice if the feet are softened, and if there is an injury that is in the hands, and the back arches involuntarily and emits a sound; and when it is placed on its stomach, it arches involuntarily. And when it is placed on its back and wishes to straighten, it cannot. Know that it is mortally ill: do not labor at its healing.
If this event does not occur to them, then the situation is easier.
And the cure is that you soothe if there is an abscess that burns hot, put on top of it rose oil or egg yolk oil until it calms down; then put on top one of the soothing and drying plasters, and tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed. If any bone dislocates, it is necessary to cover it with a cloth; then remove the bone, next join the two edges of the wound together with stitches if it is large, and heal it with soothing ointment for as long as it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken (which is called "the head of the cow"), push your left hand's pocket into it and hold it equal to your right hand strength, then put on an plaster and a dressing, if you have them; then tie it, and if there is bone dislocating, make it go back, and remove it, and heal the wound until it heals.
of the break of the shinbone
It happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there is only a slight reduction in mobility at the hip; it becomes long, bends toward the outside, and causes pain at the site where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above [the break], until you are above the broken area; and recognize which [bones] are broken and their shape; and if the break is only at the hip, set the break straight, until it is in its natural shape.
And if the break is long or bends inward, place the patient on his back, so that the restoration of the break can be seen. And when you have set it straight, place the plaster on top, then put a stick or a splint on top, and hold the fracture in place so that it does not move; apply the [medical] solution under the ribs until the fracture is healed.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess appears, do not touch it until the abscess has calmed down, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to the treatment, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad incident; and this is the manner.
Of the shoulder breakage
The shoulder joint is between the neck and the chest of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a large splint made of wood or bone, in this shape:
And tie the two shoulders with two ropes, and place them high up, and make the patient lie on one seat; then lower the broken arm onto the splint, so it comes to rest, and have a slight curve of the splint in the middle; then place a heavy object or the assistant holds it down below; then have the assistant hold the breakage equal with his hands until the breakage returns as it should.
And the other method is that you lay the patient on his back and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds above the breakage with both hands, and the other holds below with all the ropes, extending each rope to its side.
And if you see that the extraction is forceful, hold one ligament beneath the break and another on top, and extend each of the attendants to their part. And if the break is close to the shoulder head, you must place one ligament in the middle beneath the fracture and another towards the skin, beneath the break; and similarly if the break is towards the skin, you should place one light ligament without labor, as long as the break is level with the surface, and with the skin; then make it level, as required, and hold, unless an abscess does not come.
If an abscess does come, do not hold it for more than seven days, and place a soft cloth in oil on top of the abscess to soothe it; then you can hold it, and the method of holding is that you put the clamp on the fracture, then bring the arm towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; place the bandage, and hold towards the shoulder and towards the arm, such that the arm remains in a straight position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
If you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints and place a larger and stronger splint than the others on the fracture, and let there be one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the break two inches from each side; then hold on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, stronger and less in alignment.
And if you see the abscess of the wound and the constriction, as we have said, during the time you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt about the suppuration heating up, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then look every three days at the suture, so that inflammation does not swell or come to the place where the new flesh cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If it becomes infected, do as we have said.
If no such accidents happen, do not undress it for more than two days or less, let the patient lie down on his back and put his hands on his stomach; place a linen cloth of equal thickness underneath the wound and observe every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or is not softened; treat with medicine to help it heal and give the food as previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is initially subtle; when it starts to recover, it should become thick. It is customary for the wound and the leg to be redressed every forty days; and then undress it and administer baths and ointments to aid healing. If the constriction is ugly and swollen, wait one day or two months before undressing it.
of the break in the arm
The arm is made of two bones, which are called the "two shinbones". One is small and it forms the elbow joint; and the other one is large, and it is located below, near the little finger. Sometimes, only the large shinbone breaks, or sometimes both break together.
When the small shinbone is broken, the restoration and healing are easy; but when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more difficult than when both break together. If it's only the small shinbone that breaks, you should gently extend it slightly and align it properly.
If it's the large shinbone that breaks, it must be pulled harder; and extend it by one cubit, raise the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller finger lower than the others, and cross the patient over himself, and place a cubit in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then stretch the assistants' arms to the area below his arm or one link, and have another assistant at the top. And then align the limb as best as possible according to its best form.
And if it is broken into pieces, place each one back in its place, and if any of them cannot be held straight and you cannot restore it to its place, make a bone splint, as we have said before.
If with the break into a wound (i.e., fractured open), I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; take care.
If in the beginning of the setting (i.e., during the healing process), abscesses arise, apply one cloth made from lard oil and white beeswax, neither too hard nor too soft; and stick one cloth subtly on top, until the abscesses subside. Then remove the wax, and put on the dressing of powder from the mill with plenty of egg, then place the sticks, and let the sticks for the fracture be more prominent, and slightly larger than the others; and know that it should have 7 sticks or more depending on the position of the fracture: whether in one bone or two. Pull up more on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less in aligning, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor harsh; and let the thread, which holds it, be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And observe the member and the ligament afterwards after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as prurit that happens to the limb, you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itching is alleviated; and do not let the limb rest. Then begin the setting again, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, as well as similar things, give advice accordingly.
If the narrowing of the anus cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it for a little while, and leave it for some days until the narrowing passes, and then set it.
If none of these things we have mentioned come to the patient, do not loosen him for up to twenty days. Or around that time, he should put his hands on his neck and make his necks even, and guard against movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; know that this fracture will be restored in thirty or forty days, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
Of the break of the hand
The back of the hand and fingers rarely suffer breaks, but it often bends multiple times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, the patient should lie down crosswise, straight in front of him equally; then place his hand on a cloth spread out, and extend the broken bones, and align them with mirrors, until they are well joined; and apply a poultice and lint, if an abscess does not develop, then apply a splint according to the size of the limb; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture occurs at the front near the abdomen of the foot, make a bandage from rags, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken foot; then bind it with a long strip of cloth, and ensure the wound is covered as well as the hand's palm, and bind it as needed.
If the fracture is at the back, it is necessary that you place a bandage on top and another under the foot to keep the hand straight, then bind it all around the hand, and tighten the lace between the fingers.
If the fracture comes in any of the fingers (such as the thumb), make it straight as needed and bind with the palm; if you see that a splint is needed to lift the fracture and keep it from moving, place a small straight splint there; if the fracture is in other fingers, such as the index or another finger, make it straight and bind with the healthy finger that is next to it; or bind them all together in one place, as you would for a thumb; take care in restoring its position and proper healing of the abscess, and watch for any signs of infection, as I have said.
of the broken leg
The bones of the leg are often broken, and one can see it when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is such that one tie is placed above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister evenly to their respective positions; and this is when the break has been set in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the leg, one tie should be towards the ankle and the other ties below the break. And similarly, when it is near the knee, then the ties should be on the side of the knee and the extension below; then the surgeon should align the bone with both hands according to its natural figure, and then apply the splint, and tie, but do not use an arrow if there is no abscess present.
And if there is an abscess boiling, let it calm down before returning to your work and care; the treatment is made in this manner. You must place a bandage, thick and doubled in two or three layers, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the calf, and insert one long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; then turn the leg and the thigh over the bandage, then put two bands across the break, and place a band on the bone of the leg; then use soft cloth between the leg and the thigh to keep the straining equal, then begin to tie four or five turns around the bandage; and as you go higher on the bandage, loosen it; then hold the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie four bands that are above, then return to below the head of the thread, until you come down to the foot; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, so that neither abscess nor swelling nor any similar thing appears.
And if there is a fracture, dislocate it and treat the part that is injured, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone protruding, they must be cut off, if possible; and if not, the limb must be broken and marrow extracted; and cure it as we have said until it heals.
And sometimes the thighbone is broken in such a way that pegs are inserted, as in the shoulder or arm; however, in restoration of this kind, the patient does not experience any pain.
Know that the thighbone is restored in one or two days, depending on the different complexions [of patients].
of the groin [area]
Know that in the knee joint there is little damage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is not just a fracture, or a wound, but all injury, and there is pain everywhere.
And the restoration is that one puts equal traction on what is round at its ends, as long as it can be assembled; then place the splint, and put a round bandage, if necessary, and tighten it as required, then check all the dispositions as we have said in other fractures, such as abscess or other similar things; place whatever is needed for each accident until it heals.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called correctly "shinbone" (tibia), and the other is called "fibula"; and it breaks just like the arm does, and for this reason, the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the treatment is all the same.
If both bones are broken together, the leg turns in every direction.
And if the thin bone is broken, it bends forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; then turn it back. Then apply extension, make it even, and tie the limbs equally; however, if the fracture is misaligned and there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; align according to your judgment.
When you have completed your task, take two fists full of straw that will bind the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down to its end; then wrap it in two layers, one above and one below, and tie it in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to either the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should bind one arrow-length of the leg, and it should be made of straw, and put the leg for protection from movement, and properly apply it at the fracture where there is a wound; move the leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; cure it until it is healed.
of the bone fractures of the foot
At the ankle there comes no break, but the bones of the foot sometimes suffer a break and also the toes; no fire is needed except in various positions.
If the bones of the foot suffer a break and you see them overlapping each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wants to walk, and now place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they align again; then put a splint and padding on, and put a small table under the foot with two flat cushions, then tighten the splint towards the affected foot, then when you have wrapped cloth around it, and other things that you may need.
And when three or four days have passed, loosen the splint, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two [bones] is broken, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to its length, and let it be slightly larger, then put a small board underneath the injured one that I mentioned, and tighten it accordingly; and if there are 2 or 3 [broken bones], or more, break each bone separately, place a splint on top of each bone wrapped in one linen cloth, and tighten the board beneath the foot; and let the protrusion be facing the abdomen of the foot so it covers it well.
Also do not neglect the other things I said about other fractures, after what we have said; and treat each accident according to its needs.
of the bone of the thumb
When the bone of the female's womb is broken, make her sit upright, then incline her towards the lower back and hold her from behind; fill the belly with cotton and put as big a wad as a fist inside it; then turn her, lift the buttocks little by little, and let the cotton protrude until it reaches the entrance of the womb, and the bone returns with the wad; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days: the break will be healed, and if you see, take a bladder of straw, tie one end to the wound, and push the entire bladder into the womb; then inflate the bladder with force until it swells inside: the break will return to its place; then fill it with cotton and leave it for some days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hand (or female) is broken, restore it as we have said in the case of a fracture of the thigh; and these breaks should not be concealed from those who study and practice this art and read my book. For the break signifies several ways to restore it: therefore follow them below.
In the shaft (long bone), when it is broken, put a goose's gullet around it; then wrap cloths around it and leave for 3 or 4 days, and it will heal quickly.
Of breakage with wound
To the one who has a breakage with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the shin or shoulder or similar, it must be set immediately, so that the settings we have mentioned take place.
And if the wound is healthy, clean it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, unless an abscess comes.
If an abscess comes, leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it for three days or four, because you would bring a bad outcome.
And if the bone breaks through, it must be set lightly by your hands, in a small extension.
If the extension is not provided for setting equal to your hands, it should be made with this tool that is made of iron, which has 7 or 8 inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and therefore, the mirror must grasp 3 or 4 depending on what is needed in each cure of breaking; and be round and slightly large, so that it does not bend during the compression on the member during your work, and be sharp before, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called "palainche," therefore the curved shoulders should be placed on top of the apparent bone; and push it once until it returns to its original position, making sure both are even against each other. If the break is subtle and the tool cannot properly grasp the bone, you must cut the top of the bone so that the tool has enough grip.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, to your power; then remove that which is stuck in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
When the bone has been reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Make it so that it is in its natural position, then moisten one linen cloth with black sticky wine, and carefully if it is summer; do not put any ointment or other thing over the wound where there is oil, as this will bring pus and corruption; then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not bound with a splint; and many times have fools made this mistake, causing infection or death or sometimes rotting; and let the bindings be softer and more pliable than other splints.
And if the wound is bad or large and you fear that some accident may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not apply ointments; instead wrap it with dry cloths in place of ointments and bind it. And when you see after one or two days that the wound begins to swell at the place, remove what you have put on it and apply healing ointment for wounds such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And you must release the member twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
The limbs should be set in such a manner that the bone moves downward lightly.
If it passes for several days without healing but the bone continues to break, knowing that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must treat the wound with care and remove all those dislocated bone fragments that cause pain.
If there is a fistula or any other form of corruption, you must treat it according to what was previously written in this chapter. When the bone is broken and opened on the member, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and similar major limbs; do not drain it as many times death may come; but leave it until it can heal by itself. After 20 or 30 days, if healing occurs, cure the wound if possible; otherwise, leave it alone.
The arriving bruises upon the sore
We often see it following the breaking of health, particularly near the joint, and it is displeasing to see the appearance of the limb's figure; and unfortunately, the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Therefore, be cautious: if it is fresh, administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and gum arabic, and similar things, so that you take one of these substances or all together, and mix them with a strong wine or with egg white or oil, and put them in poultices, and keep them on for a long time without removing them; and then loosen it, and start another, until the nodulation is removed; or you hold above a well-made piece of wood because the properties of wood are to remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already hardened like stone, it must be removed by cutting off the top, making the excess appear; or you shave it with any razor until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the bone fracture is restored and remains weak and subtle afterwards, this occurs for many reasons: one of them being that it was tied too tightly, but not properly bound as required; or because there were too many bandages, preventing blood supply to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to excessive movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, making it weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, make the body lean, until the blood multiplies in him; administer baths, and give joy and peace to him; then apply wax over the limb so that the wax attracts strong blood supply to the limb; frequently drain off the pus with warm water, until the blood flow returns to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
twisted limb after health
When a limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, yet it does not lose its natural function; do not believe in the foolish who say that one must break a limb anew, and many foolish men have done this in our land; this practice is condemned, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death; however, if the swelling and torment are fresh, you should apply hot water or softening herbs such as mallow leaves, root, medicinal trefoil, and similar things; and make a soothing emplaster, like dittany well made, and take the myrrh of mallow, mix it with ginger oil or sesame oil, and make an emplaster; or use figs greased, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that alleviate pain.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. Movement should be brought to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is growing hard like stone, it needs to be cut with iron, it must be covered up to the bone, with a subtle and gentle incision; and put dressing and study in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to anyone, it must now be reset carefully.
If one waits, the joint swells, and if it is set again at the same time, it should not be moved until it has subsided: many times this causes pus and other pain.
Furthermore, when this happens, let the patient cleanse himself, then let him rest until all the abscesses have subsided; then immerse the affected limb in hot water and oil, then gently move it, and heal each member according to where the healing will occur.
And I have organized the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
jaws
It often happens that the jaws are dislocated in two ways: either they are somewhat disjointed from their places and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and saliva flows out of the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with the speech.
When a small dislocation returns, it often does so in multiple ways.
And if it is complete and has reached its full extent, you must reset it quickly and not delay.
And in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient and pushes one of his thumbs into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is at two points; and the other hand should be spread apart, to straighten; and instruct the patient to soften, their jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the thumb is placed evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to set it, just as if it were two jaws together, warm them with hot water and oil, until they are easy to move back into place; do not force it to return, as we have said.
And when they [the dislocated limbs] are reset equally, the patient should close the mouth with mildly softened linens soaked in a mixture made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with many threads.
The patient should sleep on his back, with his arms between two pillows, so that they [the dislocated limbs] do not move to the right or left, nor force themselves in any way, but take light food until the pain is gone and the jaw bones are knitted.
then eat as desired lightly, and do not make an effort to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw bone is healed and well knitted.
And if the two mandibles cannot be set right within an hour and are not returned to their places, fevers and usual sickness follow, and perhaps abdominal distention, and perhaps vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times the person who experiences it dies within eight days.
of the noose (traditional English translation: neck)
The forceful cannot dislocate from the inside along with the ribs and it is dislocated once at the back, and this is felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back and extends his arms; then presses the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then place the splint and bandage on top and hold it.
And the head that is towards the side cannot dislocate; if it does, and if it dislocates once, reset it to its place as we have said; then place the splint and bandage on top and hold it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And similarly, the head of the shoulder is brought back when it is dislocated from its place.
When the shoulder is dislocated, it must be reduced first.
The shoulder can only be dislocated in four ways: the first way is when it dislocates to the hollow below the armpit; the second way is at the side of the hip; and sometimes it can dislocate above as well, but this rarely happens.
The shoulder does not dislocate behind or within the nerves, and it rarely dislocates inward towards the back, especially in people with little fat, because it jumps out quickly; however, in people with enough fat, it jumps out slowly and returns slowly.
And sometimes it happens to some men that they get struck or broken, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you should verify it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it moves towards the inner part of the shoulder, and you should distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. You will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder and under the inner side of the shoulder near its top, like an eye socket; and the sick person cannot return their hand to their body, nor can they make any movement.
And likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it should not be hidden, for you will find it clearly on the surface;
This method of dislocation is not only to reset when it is new, but also when the child is ill.
The method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places their thumbs under the dislocated joint and pulls it upwards forcefully to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, extending it upward, then places it back in; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in the hand within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and bring a soothing and calming ointment made from decotion of althea, fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and apply it.
Then let the patient lean forward on his back, and place a strip of linen equal in length underneath the affected shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the hand of the healer under the linen and carefully lift the head of the shoulder, pulling the patient's arm gently.
And another servant ties the patient's head so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it dislocates again in this way:
and it is that you have a man who is larger than the patient present; he should be straight towards the affected side, and push the shoulder of the patient down under the affected shoulder and lift the affected shoulder upwards so that the patient hangs in the air. And another assistant draws the hand of the patient towards the stomach. If the patient is too light, he can hold something heavy with him so that the dislocation returns immediately.
And one resets it in another way: and this is done by inserting a long thorn into the ground so that the head is as round as a pea, neither too big nor too small; Then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft cloth underneath, and the patient should be standing tall; then his hand should be stretched out flat on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, do this cure: take one tision of two arms length and four fingers width, which has its head rounded for easy insertion into the anus, according to this form:
then put the head of the rod wrapped in cloth on top, so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it inside the anus of the patient; extend one arm above the rod, and hold the instrument above the rod, and the forearm at the end of the hand, then place the forearm on a small stone of large width, and let the hands hang down below, and let the body hang down from another side: the joint will return in the meantime.
And when it is inside, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that you put a spherical piece of linen equal to the size of the instrument, then apply the plaster made of milled powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then tighten it below the anus appropriately, turn the string around the instrument, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
And it must be fed little by little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then feed more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it becomes firm and is not softened, it is healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has come or for other reason, you must administer cauteries at three places, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
If you do all this and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation which is towards the hip, and limbs, whether front or back, is made by force, and extension of hands, and some other means are administered; and it is treated until it heals.
And after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and late movement, the patient should use hot baths many times, until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost
Know that the joint of the thumb is dislocated at the knuckle, and it comes back at the knuckle; and if it has been dislocated from all sides, both front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected, for it can be clearly seen and felt; and it dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the thumb of the patient with the healthy one, make sure it can be clearly seen. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all.
And you must reset it in such a way that the abscess does not come back, for if an abscess comes back, it would be difficult to reset; and it may not be possible to reset it entirely, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death.
And the restoration is, when it can be returned to its state, you extend your hand towards his two hands; and his arms should be extended, and his hands facing each other according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint at his fleshy parts together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in front, it returns when you fold your hand over your hand, and press the root of the palm that is dislocated.
If it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two people extend the arm, and they grip it with two hands so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from both sides, and when you have wrapped a cloth of double length and width around it;
And when the master joins the joint with his hand, he should oil it to soften the joint, then press the joint together until it returns to its place.
And when it is in its place, he puts on a plaster made with egg white and binds it, then ties the arm to the neck of the patient for some days, then releases it.
If the joint is closed in its place, release the bindings and leave it; if you see that the joint is not binding well, renew the plaster and bindings, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if it feels sore after the rejoining of the joint and it swells, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or place a sheep's fat pad on the jointure, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it enter bath. And when it oozes, rub the jointure gently, then place the fat pad back on, and then enter bath; and do so two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, place warm damp sheep's wool with butter on it and hold it there; it will return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the wrist occurs easily and more so than other joints; therefore, it must be returned to its place promptly, immediately when it is dislocated, before the muscles become swollen or an abscess forms in the wound.
Then the repositioning is to place the affected hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the minister (the one performing the procedure), and align the hand so that the palm is above the appearance of the jointure, and push until it returns.
In addition, you must ensure that it is properly placed; then position the patient's hand, face down on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on the table, and have them put their hand above it over the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
If not, press plasters or hot poultices to the abscesses and let them rest for a while.
If he cannot bear it and you are unable to put it back in place after any number of days, the dislocated joint remains.
And it is not necessary for the sick person to endure fire more than when his hand is disabled and cannot tighten anything: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; if there is no other means of force except by tightening through fire cautery in such a case, then it serves nothing else.
And when the hand is at the joint, place it in the plaster that we have mentioned, then tighten and leave for 5 days, then untie and leave so.
If it cannot move well and there is no inflammation, moisten with warm water and rub until it heals.
About the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm.
Then you should extend the finger and push back the dislocation until it returns, then hold the finger's head, and pull it towards the part where it is disjointed.
and leave it for 2 days, and then straighten it on the third day; and bind it as we have said, and untie it from time to time, and make it move, and tie it again; and do this often until it becomes tight.
And similarly, if it is dislocated from the stomach of the hand, do as you have done before, until it is healed; and similarly, when it is dislocated from another place.
the dislocation of the vertebrae in the back
When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, where there is none to cure, death quickly follows the patient.
And the signs are that the excretions jump involuntarily and cannot be held, and many times a limb becomes softened, such as both legs or both arms or one of them.
And often the spine is silent at the fourth part, which is called "kyphosis":
the treatment is that you watch if kyphosis has come from childhood; if it has not yet had any cure or healing, it will never do so.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the old ways of treatment used to speak in great words, where there is no benefit in all.
But I have bandaged it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the ulceration that comes before, there is neither instrument nor health.
and similarly the one that comes straight through in both sides, cannot be cured except for the one that comes to the back, as I say.
and it is that the patient should lie flat on his back in one even place, and have support underneath him, so he does not bleed.
Then insert a needle in the head (into the skull) and one at other limbs, and tie a thread through the patient's shoulders, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles.
And two ministers know the threads, one in the head and others in the limbs, among the two needles.
and be tightly closed, the needles as we have said, and the mirrors place their hands on the spine formed until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a beam of 3 cubits in length, and bend it under the patient's side, and place the head of the beam under the side. Then put the middle part of the beam on the spine. And place the limbs on the other end of the beam, press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see it, do so with the winch that turns by hand.
And it is that you insert two needles into the head of the patient, one arm's length long, and toward the feet, two others, with a palm's length of space between each needle.
And let there be in each splinter or fracture, where the splinters are firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between two splinters, let there be one turning splinter, like a lien [a kind of tool], and let there be in two turning splinters, two small splinters of a palm's length each, to turn the fracture.
Then tie the lien that is among the bones to the fracture towards the head, and another lien towards the feet at the other fracture, and each of the assistants turns their fracture with all the lien, and the master places the splint evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, place a plaster with desiccating agent and egg whites on top of it, then bandage it, then place a board of four feet in length along the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a lien as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nursing until he is healed.
If any thing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the herb that we have mentioned before; and sometimes they administer a piece of wood,
And sometimes the appearance of the back spine comes at the end, and it is thought to be a dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, for which reason there should be no presumption: perhaps death will come as a result.
the dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder come dislocated only by dislocation, not otherwise like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: within and without, front and back; and more within than out, and less dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, the thigh is longer and the sick person's thigh joint is more open than the healthy, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in fire. And it is the joint that is swollen with abscess heat, for this reason the thigh joint comes there.
And the sign of the one who it comes to discharge, is that this incident is contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one whose it comes beforehand, is that his leg is well positioned according to completion; however, do not double bend the knee due to pain, and if you wish to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and retains its urine, and when it goes, it passes above the heel.
And the signs of the one whose it happens behind, is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the calf is in place beneath the ribs.
The re-alignments of this type of dislocation are as follows: you examine whether the dislocations are old and remain according to their position without any treatment; and it is not necessary that there should be any presumption.
And in the one whose dislocation is recent, and it is of the four types of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, pushing it inward and outward, moving it left and right; by chance if it returns, there is no need for further treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must arrange for a strong assistant, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or one linked above the knee; and another attendant extends his hand over it in such a way that he pushes his hands under the knees, then tightens a strong rope above the thigh; and another holds the head with the rope;
and they all pull up and down at once, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common for the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If the head is not (dislocated), treatment should be applied to its condition. When dislocation occurs at the shoulders, you must place the patient on his healthy side, then tie a rope around the thigh, and attach it to the root of the pelvis, and pull it up towards the angle (shoulder joint) and towards the forceps (humerus).
Then take another attendant and grasp the large thigh of the affected shoulder, and extend it in a wide-open manner: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot tie it in this way as we have said, then you must bind the feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two feet more than the others;
Then let the patient be hung by the neck from a post, and be above the ground by two long arms; then command one minister to embrace the thigh, and let another minister hold with the patient, who will in turn embrace the thigh, as the joints are returning quickly now.
And when the dislocation is at its furthest point, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has sciatica, and stretch out one tie on the sick leg properly, and also on the thigh.
Then place two splinters, one at the neck and one at the feet, then insert one splinter between the thighs of the patient in the shape of a cross. And place damp cloths around it to prevent the patient from bleeding, then extend each of the assistants towards him, and the surgeon should hold the dislocation equal to his hand.
If it comes back into place, that's good. Otherwise, lay him on a table, press as we have said in the dislocation, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when there is a dislocation in front (of the body), it is necessary to stretch the affected leg immediately, and as I have said; and the surgeon should be on top of the injured angle, then press with the other hand, and pull downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is towards the outside, it should not be extended downwards, nor lifted up from the ground, but it should remain as when a person is dislocated in the same way as we have said about lying on the two hips; and it should be on its face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and pressure should be applied to the joint on the table;
and it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the knees, apply the splint, and fasten it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
And it rests for three or four days, then dislocate and place the splint over it; if you see they are even, tighten, as before, and leave it. Three days; then dislocate, and make it move well, until the limb is comforted.
On the dislocation of the knee
The knee can be dislocated in four ways: inside, outside, and backward; but not forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration is that you have the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their front, and place their foot on your feet.
Then take hold of their knee with both hands and pull apart the two sides of the knee, forming it into a V shape. Have another attendant extend their foot until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends at the knee lightly.
And apply the plaster on top, and make the leg stretched from the knee to the ankle, and leave them joined firmly for 3 or 4 days, then release it; and do not let the patient walk until the limbs are comforted.
If the limbs are not straight, then provide strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both within and outwardly.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it bends forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction (resetting) is easy, and it should be done gently when only swollen.    Here comes the translation of the next line:
And when the dislocation is complete (total), you must make the patient sit straight, and hold one minister on either side of the leg above the ankle:   Translation:
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then towards your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot upwards forcefully.
and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the work, for it will return.
and if it cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground, and make a firm stab into the ground between his legs, and tie rags around it so that it does not cut the patient.
Then the ministers anoint the thigh, and another minister extends the foot to its limits or to the knee, so that it lies above the foot on the neck. Then all ministers extend equally, and the patient's legs should be close together between the thighs to hold the patient when stretching him.
Then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation in their hands, and another minister anoints the healthy leg beneath, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the correct point, place the plaster and wadding on top, form it, and tie the foot to the leg. Be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, make sure the bindings are not too tight.
Let it be left for two or three days, and if the ligaments soften, hold them together; then release it on the third or fourth day, and order the patient to rest for four days. If it goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
If an abscess has come to a head, then you must open it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the hands
When the fingers are dislocated, they should be carefully stretched out without strain, and it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand or foot, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or table, and put your foot above where those joints open, then press your foot firmly until it returns to its place.
and when it is equal and there is no opening, you put two fingers under the foot's sole, then apply pressure and leave it for four hours, then release it; let it rest until it heals.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound occurs along with dislocation, and it is attempted to be restored, many times the patient dies.
do not be presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have long experience with it, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, do not be bold.
and at the beginning, you should use a warm poultice for an abscess, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you see no hope of health. And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess closes.
And when the limb is in place, administer remedies to soothe the abscess, heal the wound, as needed, with ointments of a drying nature.
And if there is a dislocation with a fracture and small bones are displaced, set the bones, and do as we have said for simple diseases.
And keep yourself from entering into fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and because of the knowledge of your weapons and body. Amen
