I have completed this book, my very dear son, which is the end of the knowledge of medicine together with its content, and I have ended it by its explanations and its declarations. And it has come to me in a vision that I shall complete this book with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is considered foreign in every way, science and knowledge are perishing and being lost, and nothing remains beyond small descriptions in books written by the ancients that have been changed by hands. And from this comes error and vanity; intentions are closed off and knowledge is removed.
It seems to me that I shall bring it to life in accordance with the arrangement of this treatise by means of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work along with the accompanying declarations and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands have been found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant. And he who undertakes it should be versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to such an extent that he knows the judgment of limbs, their forms and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of veins and arteries, and the location of their outlets.
And Hippocrates said that the hand without a finger is not much, and with work it is nothing; and the same applies to the art of surgery.
We tell you in the beginning of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned matters, let him beware of making mistakes and cutting men; thus I have often seen more than those who undertake this science and abandon their learning and experience.
For I saw a madman who lanced one abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck and lanced the arteries therein; thus so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her own hands.
And I saw another madman who drew out a stone from an old man's body, and the stone was large; thus he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within four days.
And I had been called before to treat him, and saw the state of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
And another man who took care of one of our land's dukes, who had his leg broken and with the break had a wound; and the ignorant men closed the break above the wound using strong ligatures, and did not leave any space for pus to drain, leaving it thus in one piece; and he commanded that it should not be loosened; and it remained like this until the leg swelled up completely and the toes perished.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg; and when I undid it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But the corruption had already settled or spread to the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to advance through the member until the entire member was lost.
And another mirror which collapses and thickens an abscess, and then burns it with the wickedness of its power.
For when an abscess is pure of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in a place where one can remove all that has been corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: one where there is danger in many ways; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you take care of yourself, so that the foolish person cannot speak ill of you.
Take care of your weapons and attack your patients gently and firmly, and use the best way possible by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; leave aside diseases that are full of great suffering; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can depart from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of bad disease, lest you be called foolish."
I have designed this treatment according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and removal of medicinal cauteries for ague, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and iron tools for cautery, and of everything necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, lancing and wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered for the head to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid, and the harm, are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and many wise men have spoken of this, and they agreed on it; but their words were not enough for me, because I reduce the lengthiness.
I say that the cautery helps universally in all complexions, whether they are hot or cold; this refers to two complexions: namely, the hot and moist complexion, and the dry and hot complexion.
In the hot and dry complexion with matter, some said that the cautery is of great help; others said the opposite: that the cautery is not beneficial for illnesses arising from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases with heat or dryness; but he who said the opposite said that the cautery provides great help for hot and dry illnesses arising in the body of men. When you perceive the body of the man and his constitution is with heat, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it once by experience.
And every way, do not interfere except for those who have tested it and who know by long experience the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their occurrences and the time span; we are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the observers assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Know, my son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and more powerful than cautery from burning medicine.
For fire is simple and does not affect any other member unless named.
Burning medicines come from one member to another through displacement, and they bring diseases of great suffering to the sick member, and possibly cause its death.
The fire for its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not do it if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experiment and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is true in matters; therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, since I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is hidden concerning fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; receive this in your thoughts.
And know, my son, that they agreed on when cauteries should be performed, and chose companions.
And I say that cautery is useful in all times, because the harm happening is kept under control by the help of cautery; and similarly, if the cauterization is necessary for pain that cannot wait for a time when greater malice does not come to the member.
And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; for the illness that is cured by cautery will have no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is not just a medicine that changes the complexion, but dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine in speed of action, and due to the power of its work and its dominion.
And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virulence; and the superfluidities are collected in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, except if cauterization is administered in that place or there is little superfluity and moisture, as in the case of dense cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, but this is true; however, they do not believe that cautery is useful after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it does. Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish men.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; and they said that the lead of a cautery does not cause necrosis, but this is not true, as I have experienced, and found it to be true in some men; and golden cauteries are more effective than iron ones, just as they said.
And always when you heat it strongly with gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it soon cools down; and if it is overheated, it burns; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And for this reason we use the fire cautery that we have found suitable for our work.
I order you this chapter on the head down to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
Hot oil cautery
This cautery is beneficial for coldness and moisture on the brain, and it is used in the case of a disease called "soda," and for various humors that descend from the eyes and ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed for all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine clearing the head, for three or four days according to the strength and age of the humors and the accustomed condition of the patient. After that, you should perform the incision on the head of the patient.
And then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on a low surface; after that, place the base of your palm over the base of its neck between its two eyes; where your thumbs will meet, if it bleeds there, heat the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
Then place it on the neck, draw your hand down and pull in a twisting motion; then quickly remove your hand, and look at the jawbone if you see a small bone; and if you do not see it, continue heating the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after that take a piece of linen, wrap it around soft cotton, place it on the neck, and leave it for three days; afterwards put damp wool over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when a wound remains open for a longer time, it purges more; and therefore aid in healing.
And they said to one of these that the fire cautery should be allowed to rest so much that a part of the bone is burnt, and then reset the burnt bone part and heal it.
And they said the other that the fire cautery should be allowed to rest above, and push so hard that it reduces a hole as large as a vinegar barrel because women put in their fuses for this reason since the humors come out; and the wound should be kept open for a long time afterwards; then it should be healed and closed.
And these two types of cauterization do not seem good to me altogether, except in some men where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should let them go; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and even when the head of the sick person is naturally weak, the first appearance of cauterization seems more healing and beneficial to me, and I use this method in such cases.
From the ancient pain of the head
For the chronic and long-lasting pain of the head, the patient should use wormwood and pillwort which are called "cochie", and purgative for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they do the cautery as we have said before, it is not worthwhile.
Take care if the patient's pain is of strong nature, and not too cold; then cauterize under it a small amount as we have said above.
After the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery that is called "vaselz"; and there is one vessel in which air is put; hold your hand so you do not see the bone: the patient feels more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is their form:
Fire cautery for the head When pain suddenly comes in any part of the head and the disease extends to the oil, and the head is purged by diverse medicines, and the other treatments mentioned in the division of diseases are performed but it does not help: then you make cauterizations according to two ways, that is to say with hot medicine and fire.
The cauterization with hot medicine is that you take a piece of alum and remove the bark, and then you cover two pieces of it with wax at the temples or where the pain is, so that you can place the alum under the skin; and when it has been placed in this manner, you hold it there for twelve hours. Then you remove it and rub the alum gently and leave the wound for two days or three. Then put on cotton soaked in butter as much as it will absorb.
After the ointment treatment until it becomes healthy; and if you see that he uses any of the burning medicines that I have written or treat with ten medicines burning.
The fire cautery is as follows. Heat the iron as follows:
And it is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a clo or has .1 inch of curvature and has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and slightly move the iron a little while half the thickness of the iron is burnt; and remove your hand so the artery does not burn, which is away from it, and let out an abundance of blood.
After putting cotton on the wound and leaving it for 3 days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and later treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the tool called "cultellare" at the tip, be careful not to hit the artery in this migraine that is not old.
of the migraine
When curing migraine as we have said in the divisions of diseases and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned before do not help; then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and place your hand on the side of the wound for half a finger's length, and press once, making sure not to hit the artery and ensuring you do not go as far as the bone; beware of the jawbone which moves when one eats, and let the nerves have no sight but the moved jaw and let spasm not come upon the patient, and beware of a decrease in blood flow from the artery when it is hit, or excessive fear and especially for those who do not know it, and who are not students and experienced; leave the operation in progress; however, I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is hit, and I will show you where it should be done in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness and the patient is suffering, cauterize near the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter of artery extraction, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
of the cold pain in the ears from frostbite
When the ear is painful from frostbite and it has been treated with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", which is shaped like this:
After marking all around the sick ear, or around the two where pain is present in both, move away slightly from the root of the ear since you have signed the place; and place 10 points around each ear; after curing the place until it heals.
of the torture of the mouth
The torture that is to be cured with a cautery is not for those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform a cautery on similar conditions that come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
When you treat this type of torture which is caused by a flow of bile and purges of the head and gargarism, and it is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little distance from the temple, and the third in the angle between the two lips; place the cautery in the open healthy part, and make the cautery burn towards the top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a fist; leave the cautery there until half of the coal is burned; this is the form of the cautery:
The type of surgery I have described earlier is somewhat more subtle and the blade should be slightly thicker; after curing the wound as I mentioned previously, let it heal completely.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve and the patient does not have a fever, then administer four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one through the top of the head, and one in the region called "waist" as we mentioned earlier, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; heal it as we have said before.
of litharge
For this disease, give the patient large years and round pills made from cerebrum; then wash the head of the sick person thoroughly, and put above the occiput the plaster of mustard (sinapi) which is written or treated as plasters; and this is the method of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If it is healthy in this way, it is good; and if it is not, they do four cauteries of oil on the head from the nape to the neck, with a distance between each cautery of one fingerbreadth; and treat as usual, and if you see it heal, and the patient is enduring, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns (of the skull), and continue treating until it is healthy; and let the cautery called "olivare" be as I have previously said.
Of the coldness of the head The head should be cleansed for years and as previously stated; after that, anoint the patient's head, then apply the fire cautery to the head and on each horn, and one behind and four on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; let it burn until the most painful spot is burned, then wash your hand; after that, cure until it is healed, and remove the cautery called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Epilentics should not use the cautery forcefully except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to modify the skull with other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is grown and endures to take medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give him gargling and frequent mastication to modify the skull with good foods; afterwards, rub the head well, and perform one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is out of place and endures, perform cauteries as I said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterized place be oiled according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, perform one subtle cautery as follows:
When due to melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then the cautery of such cauteries should be performed on him who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluidities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink to purify the brain, as it was before in the division.
After the king [physician], make one linen tourniquet well made, just like a circle, and put it around the patient's head; cross the patient, hold him tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, which is good for burns of old age; heat it gently so that he can tolerate it; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool; do this to the patient once a week with good governance until he is cured.
If you wish to perform cauterization, make several points all over the cautery. This method of cauterizing strengthens the brain greatly; then place dampened, soft cotton on it with linseed oil.
of the eyes When the eyes come first with the signs that I have said in the division, then you begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
Afterward, the patient is instructed to bend their head backwards, and fire cautery is applied to the back of the head, and two cauterizations are made on the two temples in the same location or one on each temple if the injury is on one side; and strike all the cauterization with a force against all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and be careful not to discharge blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it by your power as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in cutting the cauterization how to stretch it; and sometimes fire-cautery or hot iron is applied under the two bones at the back.
tears of the heart
When the eyes' tears are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or if they flow from the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees it is cold, fleumatic superfluities, then do the cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of this treatise: that is, a cauterization on the head, two cauterizations on the temples, two cauterizations where the eyebrows are under the bones; and if necessary, cauterize wisely above the eyelid with small cauterizations.
When the tears of the body are within the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient four night hawks to drink; afterwards, cut the head of the corpse and make olive oil cauterization or apply a small cautery of olive oil; also, do two cauteries called "clavilis" on the temples, a little under the hair; beware of the artery that you do not cover. And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is made soft due to disease and moisture, then apply this cautery which is called "olivare." This is its form:
And if you wish to apply two cauteries on the two serpents that are as long as the sorbents themselves; do not leave the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
of the hair which points the oil Sometimes, the hairs of the eyes are converted into eyelashes and prick the eye, and then a cautery is performed according to two methods: either with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and become even, then put the patient in a healthy state; afterwards draw a figure on parchment of the eyes similar to the shape of a thistle flower, and mark the beginning of the hairs; then place damp cotton soaked with egg glair and musk oil on the eye, then heat the cautery as shown in this form:
After cauterizing the figure that you have marked multiple times, let the scabs be burned at that spot; and the signs of the healing process are when you see the papyrus retracted, and the hairs raised at the end of the oil; then lift your hand and leave it for 3 days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; after that, apply ointment until it heals completely.
And if after that the hairs grow again and the papyrus is softened, then start cauterizing on the same spot as before; and if the hairs are curling, cauterize until the papyrus returns to its natural level, and becomes smooth and does not prick the oil with the hairs.
The medical cautery is to instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the mirte leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, one of each, and grind them together well; and quickly heat it up, so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the parchment as you did with the mirte leaf, and place the patient's hairs on top of it; and if the patient has pain in only one oil, you should work on just one, and if both oils are affected; and put cotton soaked in egg white under the oil, and hold the patient's head over the medicine and press for a short time whenever the patient feels burning from the medicine, because it burns like fire. When you have done so for a long time, give the medicine at your shoulder. And when the biting is over, lift up the affected limb and check if the paper has risen as it was raised by burning or incision; if so, it is good. If not, apply more medicine on the shoulder or no medicine has worked yet, while your efforts are equal, and hairs trimmed; then place damp cotton wool on it until the blisters have healed, afterwards heal the limb with ointment called "diaphensis" and other, until it is healthy.
And if you need to be careful with your efforts so that the medicine does not stick to the hairs. If the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hair pricks in the oil, resume the medicine on the affected limb which has been properly treated, as you have done before; afterwards heal until it is healthy; this is the shape of the myrtle feather:
And know that the eye of man is diverse in size and smallness, and according to this your constraints should be applied; and do not deviate from the correct path for the one who practices this art.
On treating a fistula with cautery.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head in a secure position; and hold the patient's head between your hands so it does not move or turn; after that, put soft cotton in an eggshell or under parchment on the oil; afterwards, heat the cautery which is ready; and direct it towards the head as if it were the beak of a falcon, with the cautery also directed; if you see, it should be pointed from one head to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but regardless, the one that is directed serves for your purpose.
After pressing the fistula if it is opened, drain the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, open it, and pull out the bowel; afterwards put hot cautery on it in form, and hold your hand on the cautery to the part under the oil, so as not to make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fat of the oil and corrode it.
If you perform the fire cautery up to the bone at first, it would be best. But if not, continue the cautery once more, and if necessary, wait three days; then apply soft cotton soaked in butter and allow the ointment to dry until it is healed, and after forty days if it is still not healed, apply corrosive medicine over the exposed bone; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient men would say. To understand, know that it refers to fistula, and cut the opening; then place one thin camelot substance in the incision, as shown here: and make the amount of one camelot; hold your hand firmly on it and do not move it, so that the molten lead does not run to its side; it is necessary that you place cotton soaked in oil on the patient's wound: the camelot will heat the fistula's opening, and the wound heals miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we mentioned, it is good. If not, you must administer purgatives to heat, and return the fistula to the body's heat as required in its proper place.
cavities in lips Often there are cavities in lips called "hairs" and also in children's lips.
When you treat the cavities as we have described in previous sections and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel of this shape:
And place it urgently into those cavities until it reaches the font (spring or source); afterwards, treat the area with tar until it is healed.
of the abscess in the throat
When an abscess occurs in the root of the throat or the eye, or palate, or the roots of the teeth, after it becomes pus-filled and swells and becomes a fistula; you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not help: then you should have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after draining or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the font (spring or source) of the fistula, and close the opening with your finger; and do this once or twice, after treating it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; but if not, you must explore the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
The movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient in a warm place; afterwards heat the cautery so that its shape will come as follows: put a cane on the tooth; and put the heated cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand long enough for the patient to feel the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after letting go of your hand, restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and hold it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this manner the moving tooth is made stationary, the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture dries up.
From the pain of the teeth
When pain in the teeth comes from coldness, or there is cold or fever, and medicines do not work, then there is need for cauterization according to two methods: cauterization by lard (burterapi) and cauterization by fire.
The cauterization by lard is performed in this way: take lard from a pig, and the end in an iron or bronze spoon; after that, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a cloth, moisten it with boiled lard, and put it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it cools down; and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and cotton moistened in cold lard, put it on the tooth again and put hot iron on it until the fire comes to the end of the tooth.
1. The cauteries together consist of a rod of iron or brass, large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, its shape will come afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed the same day or the next.
When scrophulas are of inflammation and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery as described below, make two openings for smoke to issue from the other part; place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to its size, and leave it like that for three days; then put soft cotton soaked in butter until the pain is relieved; afterwards cure the place with ointments and tentes (bandages) until it heals.
When the mucus prevails on the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold constitution, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, but do not go beyond the throat and do not apply it too deep; afterwards make another cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavile" as we have described before; and heal the place as we have said earlier until it heals.
tooth When all and illness of the pormon are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and the disease is ancient, make two cauterizations on the forearm; and one other cautery between the breasts; and let the cauterization that is called "clavile" according to the form mentioned above.
And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking all the cauterization called "poins", as the form is mentioned above in the illness of the ears; and let the poins be up to 30, or in whatever direction around. After curing the place according to what was said before, let the cauterizations be at four intervals according to this form:
And because the cauterization is lighter, because you make them in pairs of two.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then the patient should be placed on their back and side; then warm the coal that is within the hollow of your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, heat the iron with these two nerves that are in this form:
And cauterize the skin until it perforates to the costal cartilage, and the figure of the cautery will appear together with four cauteries; and this is made using the cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of cauterization are called "cauteries"; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, and it is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves.
Sometimes it is sewn up on this one nerve, which is why there are eight cauteries.
After putting the cautery on, break it up with silk; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated upwards (the shoulder), this happens seldomly, then perform a fire cautery on the thick part of the caution claw or use many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is reconnected, and the moisture is removed, and the patient becomes healthy.
The pleurisy cautery
The ancient ones say that for pleurisy, one should perform the cautery with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, as large and as long as your thumb; moisten it with oil, and heat it up, then cauterize one cautery between the ribcage and neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the area under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth costal cartilages, sloping downwards a little; and one cautery on the side, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at the sides of the stomach far from the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand too hard, instead do it gently as when smelling.
And they said that some old man used a fire cautery resembling a razor, heated it and placed it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then the pain subsides as we have mentioned in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be cured.
For the mouse cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help, then they suggested four methods of cautery that are all good.
According to the text:
And another method of cauter is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the incision that is near the wound, where the pain of the patient comes towards the left, and raise the elevations that you are lifting the incision according to the length of the body, and the cauter should be according to the width of the body.
After the two nerves are inflamed enough that the incision is pierced from the other side, then pull out the cauter and thus there will be four. And if you see, cauterize the entire cauter at four nerves. After it has discharged pus for a long time, this is one of the cures mentioned earlier.
of hydropisy
Cautery is not worth for hydropisy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it must be that you make four cauteries around the abdomen, one on the stomach, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus; and let the cauteries be close to the thick part of the abscess.
After leaving the cautery open for a long time to drain pus, do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions (presumably referring to life and health) will be together with the help of God.
The shape of the fire cautery for the belly is like the cleaver that we have shown before; and for the back, it should be olive-shaped, as has been described earlier.
the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy and filled with sour citrus juice, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and hold your hand with the cautery without twisting. And do not enter too deep, so as not to burn the sour citrus juice, and let the cautery be in this shape:
Afterwards do two cauteries on both legs at the tip of the scalpel; and let the cauteries be long, one beneath the knee in front and the other outside the leg; and keep the cauterized areas open for a long time to heal, as is necessary; then treat the other wounds as we have said.
In the treatment of the dislocated shoulder:
When the swelling of the belly comes from coldness and moisture, as the digestive and retentive properties which are in the stomach and intestines are disturbed and cannot be cured by methods of healing; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong symptoms, then do one large cautery on the stomach according to what was said before or fire cauterization of the stomach, around the belly four subtle cauteries, and one small subtle cautery near the navel and two subtle cauteries on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauterizations on the stomach beneath it, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are based on foundation or multiple, and they are old and made of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, it does not help if you perform cauterizations: four on the spine of the back, that which is entirely away from the coccyx and moves upwards in a triangular shape, and one below the buttocks. Two times;
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and the meat not cooked, and swelling of the face is observed, then a large cautery should be applied on the stomach, as previously stated, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the heated irons; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After curing the place until it heals.
of the carnivorous disease called "thelul"
When you treat althelul, if the cautery appears to be similar to a razor, then heat it and apply it all around the althelul wound; leave your hand there so that the cautery comes to the opening of the vein, thus cutting off the blood flow. Do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each spot as we have said; after applying ointments, allow it to heal until it is healed; if you cauterize a large cautery on the skin, it will provide more aid.
From badly healed wound
When the patient cannot bear incision or opening, we will speak about it in its place; this disease can only be cured by cautery.
If there comes a fistula and it is swollen and filled with pus and corrupt matter, you should try to find the opening of the tent and make sure that you know exactly where the tent is located. After heating the cautery which seems like a scraper, insert it into the fistula according to the size of the tent hole, and continue the cautery until the flesh and corruption are burned, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the severity; be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestines, you should take care of those areas, and do not do anything outside of charnut, thinking it is not harmful; afterwards cure the area until it is healed, and if the area is infected and matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is healed completely; and if the matter is not removed, then know that the area is rotten, and burn the bone at its root. In this way, we will speak about one of them in its place.
Of the disease of the kidneys When pain in the loins comes from cold and bloating, and it does not take on female form, then you must apply fire cautery to the kidneys from both sides with the small-headed iron we have mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have 4 cauteries in a line, and they will be more effective.
Of the bladder When the bladder is weakened by cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then apply fire cautery on the part of the bladder located behind it, where the pubic hair begins, one on each side, and each cautery should be as long as your thumb; also make a cautery at the back, if needed; and use the small-headed iron in the shape described earlier.
of the marriage When the marriage is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it is necessary to apply four cauterizations around the womb, as we have said regarding the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterization be incision-like, as we have said.
of the itch
When the humors viscous descend towards the pit of the itch, and for this reason it moves away from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the place of the departure is found if it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the pit of the itch with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the place around the pit as it turns, so that the pit is within the circle; and let the cauterization be such as when the stomach has been cauterized.
And if this fire cautery is not present, make four large olive oil cauterizations instead, and let them be as deep as all the others; and let it heal when it is healthy.
of the pain from the hernia When pain comes in the area of the hernia and it is caused by coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, but the cure is not effective, and the disease is old; then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
After performing the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two ways: namely with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the boil of the hernia, four triangular cauteries together according to this form, and make a good depth and large, and have space between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is performed in the middle on the top of the hernia, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize at the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hernia; but do it in such a way that the circles enclose the entire hernia, and all the edges should be burned.
And this is the way it's done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hernia and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, two cauteries are made where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle 4 fingers, to the left a little; and let the cauteries be made with a knife, and burn the thickness of the edges; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to 2 inches or more on the foot or near it, cauterize there where he feels the pain 2 fingers or 4 in the cautery called "poins".
And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire cautery with a knife or circular cautery, but be careful in all your cauteries not to let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and not to cause greater damage and contraction to the patient.
I have also seen many who have made a cautery on the foot of the leg and let it burn too much, so that the leg became completely swollen and the toes as well, pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a belly solution in which he died.
And if the pain is in two places at once, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this method. // And the wise say that for the cautery of the ankle, this is the manner, make one rod of iron and let it be as thick as a small nail or slightly less, and be interlaced or have one interlace from one end to the other with a space equal to the size of a nut, and let the interlaces be two parts wide, and let them also be like nuts, and there should be one iron handle well made; and this is its form:
And heat it until it turns completely red and boils, then place it on top of the sick person's wound and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a firebrand. Let it rest for four days, then apply a plaster made of butter, keep the wound open for a long time; after treating with ointment until it heals.
Albuhasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance and those who rarely use it; however, it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured, and there where it cauterizes.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or from impact or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are worth cauterization, unless it is due to the influx of cold matter.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient be bled with pills or other similar things on the back where the pain is, three marked lines deep, and in each line 5 or more cauteries according to their power and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cautery should be made as the one called "poins"; and if you see, make 4 cauteries or 2 at a medium-sized cautery according to this form:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tightened throat when they are lying down, and fear; you will find it in the lower spine at the back and in the appearance that comes upon other spines.
When you see this thing and intend to cure it, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form.
The cautery should be applied to each part of the spine in turn, increasing it. And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .2 or .3 lines apart and the points should be close together. After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, make sure not to apply the cautery in gilbositeit (a type of ulcer) which may contain nerve tissue.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in joints is due to moisture that affects every member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which are called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by coldness and medicines cannot cure it, it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the patient sit with their leg bent at the joint, and the cautery should be olive-shaped according to this form.
And if it is necessary to press on the face of the foot, you make a cautery all over the cauter called "point". And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, you make a cautery on each knee. Four olive-shaped cauteries or four for each part, all over the cautery; and if more is needed, do more, but hold your hand only until the sharpness of the coal is burned off.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, you administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are at the hands, you press around the wrist for two lines; and if there remains no pain at the thumbs, you press on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, you cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and think about medicines. For if you treat him well and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
Of the rupture of the hernia sac
When rupture comes in hernias, and the testicles descend into the inguinal canal and this is new, if you wish to treat it, it must not be masturbated on that day; and it should use things which loosen the belly, so that the hernia descends from the belly; afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his flank until the testicles are repositioned, and you pull them towards you, and sign of the healing under the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at every sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the shape described here:
Let the cautery cool until it is white and drips solder. Then pull the testicles back into place; and the assistant holds their hand on top so they do not return; then work well the thighs of the patient, put one cushion and one sergeant under him on his thighs, and another on the foot which holds their hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your entire hand, hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the first time, repeat again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the testicles do not rise when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that through this the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing. The fire cauteries for children should be subtle according to their size, and for large people, they should be as big as theirs; after three days, cure the burn from the cautery with butter until the burn is removed; after that, use other ointments until it heals, and let the patient rest forty days on his back so that the wound heals well; and it is necessary to allow the urine to flow for a long time, so that the scabs do not protrude when he wants to go to his rooms.
After forty days, when he wants to rise, let him be provided with a well-made straw mat and keep it for another forty days; let him have good rest, so that he should not work too much or overeat and drink too much or shout too loudly; if he does this instruction, he will be completely healed. I shall say more about the cure of cutting in its chapter afterwards. of the rupture of the abdomen (lit: of the bursting of the belly)
When roundworms come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, make .j. fire cautery according to their size, and let it be burned the third part of the belly; after this, cure according to what has been said; and no ancient has said that it should be cauterized at four angles according to this form:
Draw a mark at the location and make a line above the roundworm, another below it, and hold your hand on the entire fire cautery but closer to the tip. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more movable.
of old pain in any member When pain comes in any member, either from falling or injury, and that pain lasts for a long time, and medicine has no cure, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be done according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness, and its virtue and location of twisting and its pain. If the first cauterization is healed, that's good; if not, repeat another cauterization on it, as it is customary for the pain in a nearby member to change, so you should do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
When the humors are out of balance due to moisture and heat, and one feels pain or discomfort, it must be purged through purgation. This involves taking a mixture of wormwood, myrtle leaves, and bread soaked in vinegar, which will help to cleanse and cool the body. After this, you should drink a cold water concoction made from crushed ivy, plantain seeds, or other suitable herbs, which will further aid in balancing the humors and alleviating the discomfort.
It is sometimes necessary to use cautery as a great help, and the same applies to diseases that come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what has been said in the division, and does not dissipate or remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the entire patient, then give it five cauteries on the head: one under the chin, another towards the front at the end of the hair; two on the temples, and one behind the neck; leave your hand such that the cauterization reaches the bone, and let the scabs come out as the vapors of the gross humors escape; and cauterize the mice according to what is in front.
And if the disease is scattered everywhere, it clearly spreads; therefore, you must cauterize with the cauteries we have mentioned at each point: one cautery in the navel, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and one smaller one, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware of nerves that are near the last calcaneum, do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the wrist, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you do, the more help it gives, and the better it benefits; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the art of ironwork. After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Of swelling
When swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils and plasters but remains unhealed, then cauterization should be applied to the affected limb according to its size and smallness; and if the cauterization penetrates slightly into the flesh of the area, it should be cured with poultices until it heals. Sometimes a cauterization is made on the hand, foot or back, at the nerve issue that immobilizes the limb, and in this way the swelling is removed; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the nerves moving the body.
Of ulcers or sores
When the disease called "albaras" is developed, and the medicine engine has no effect on it, then cauterize with a cautery of about half an inch deep according to the thickness of the skin, until the blister is removed and its color changes; then cure with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from a horse and crane, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it heals.
Cure syphilis by cauterization
When syphilis begins, and you see it stop, if you cauterize with the cautery that looks like a circle all around the syphilitic sore. However, wise people say that cautionery should also be done in the middle of the sore; however, this does not seem good to me because I fear that it will ulcerate and corrupt, and I have seen it happen once before; and a more direct thing is that it should be cauterized with the cautery called "circular", as we have said in the discussion on cauteries.
Of the swelling which cannot grow
If someone has a disease called "adubelati", which delays growth or due to the excess it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (meaning very old) and he has little blood, or due to the time; and you see that it needs to be hastened in its growth: then cauterize it with many small cauteries, poking around it; afterwards leave it as such. For it will hasten to grow.
And if you see that the wound is pierced completely with all the cautery, heat the cautery in this manner:
And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced through, and make sure the cautery is such that the patient feels it moving outside in such a way that the course of the pus is alleviated. Afterwards, heal until it is perfectly healthy.
the fire cure with iron
Another kind of disease it has which is called "corrodens", and nothing else but a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs just like fire dries up dry wood. If you see this disease in a place where it can be cauterized with fire, then heat the cautery small and large, according to what is needed at the place where the disease is; after the cauterization of all parts until you have reached all the corruption, and there remains nothing of it, that everything corrupted not remain. And then leave it for three days, and put on top the cauterized wounds soft ointment with oil so that the burns from fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure of the pustule producing char.  And if after three days you see that no healthy char grows, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization on the place where the corrupted parts remain. And this consumption is sometimes cured with ague medicine in place of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for ague medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
The growing hairs should be allowed to remain long and equal on the feet;
Often there comes a disease to the feet called "clos" according to our understanding, which is a large thing that bites the foot. The cauterization of this disease can be done in two ways: cauterization by fire and cauterization with hot water. Cauterization by fire means heating one cautery comb like a quill of a feather, made from good iron so it can pierce the nail completely and have fine edges; then place it hot on the nail, turn your hand around the nail as it enters the nail hole; leave it there for four days until pus starts to come out; then apply an emplaster of coarse herbs boiled with oil, leave the emplaster on all night, and the nail will become soft and be removed from its roots. Then heal the skin with soothing ointment until it heals.
And if the body is turned inside out by foreign objects, and often this happens in hands and feet, you should bring hot water cauterization; it is done like this: take a copper or iron tube or a quill of a feather, place it on the nail and apply verruca powders (or any other corrosive substance); then put the tube so that it surrounds completely, then pour some hot water in, hold your hand tightly and press your hand while rotating so that the edges of the tube reach the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to find its way deep into the root; allow the patient to bear a little pain from the hot water for an hour; leave it like this and it will remove itself along with all its roots. Repeat the process until you soften all parts inside the body, then heal them with ointments that soothe skin.
The cure for trembling
For someone who is trembling due to cold or quarter fever or something else, you should perform four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one in the buttock, and one on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten recovery from the illness.
pus-filled boils
Sometimes, the body appears swollen with boils or pus-filled sores that come from corrupted substances. When they appear, it is necessary at first to perform a cauterization on each chief of the pustule: a subtle cautery made from mirte stick, so that its point may be immersed in fire, or from a long aristologue root, or with a lenticular cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, following this method, and they cannot grow any further, but the superfluous matter from which they come is dissolved, and they become healthy; however, it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
when an artery is cut Often, there is great bleeding from the cut artery that comes out at the wound or incision of an abscess, or during cauterization of a member, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to bleed excessively.
And whenever this happens to anyone, quickly place your thumb on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is calmed beneath your thumb, and no more gout exits; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large until they are all red; then take .i., either large or small depending on the wound and the location where the arteries flow, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your thumb, and hold the cautery in that position until the blood is coagulated.
And if it jumps fiercely when you hold your thumb on the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hastily another one of the cauteries that are by the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is coagulated; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and let no other harm come to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be coagulated well if the artery is large, unless this is done by one of the four methods that we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated otherwise, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which can coagulate blood; and let it be tied and constricted accordingly.
Whoever administers constriction tightly with fabrics or placing hot things on it, or similar things, does not benefit from it unless otherwise.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have medicine present, they should place their finger on the wound as we have said, and stretch it tightly until it is constricted above the wound and the vein; and it should not move but it should be moistened with cold water often so that it becomes very cold, frozen, swollen and constricted; and make inquiries in advance about those who need cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where fire cautery or burning medicine is required, and we have discussed their causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed with this chapter by the same way because it is easier to understand what follows.
Furthermore, as I begin this, it is necessary for you, dear child, to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to attempt folly, for many ways of men come for treatment. Some come who are so accustomed with their illness that they die easily due to the foolishness found in their disease, and from the great wickedness of it; and this should be feared. And of these is one who gives you advice and says: "wait, I am cured"; but the disease is deceitful. It is not advisable that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly but wisely from those of whom you are certain, and from which you can take knowledge; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dear child, our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness; if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, come.
I have divided this chapter for your convenience, speaking one topic at a time, as the cauteries were previously described from head to feet because you will find it easier to understand what you need in this manner.
The head full of water.
Know that this illness often comes in children during childbirth and when the head of the child is forced too hard; sometimes it occurs for reasons unknown.
And I have never seen this disease in adults, except for children; and all those that I have seen hastened towards death; and because of this, it seems to me that it would be worth lessening the work in some treatments.
And I have seen one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew larger every day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture gathered under the skull bone between the brain and the skull; and if this moisture is under the skull and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can flow out; and here is the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see the joints at the head of each part open up when you press it from within with your hand, and this does not respond: then you must make four incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture outside. Afterward, hold the incisions with cloths and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days; then unbind it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head swell gradually, and give the patient dry meat of the moisture-soaked breadth as long as the limb is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look where the abscess is larger, and gather the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes to the right, and sometimes to the left.
Cut there where the abscess is open, and drain the pus; do as you can, and watch that you do not cut an artery; and let a vein bleed, so that the patient dies a natural death and from the evacuation of moisture.
of scrofula (a chronic disease affecting the lymph nodes, often in the neck)
When a disease called "cataract" occurs in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery with which they will cut the two arteries.
Then, when you see them (the arteries), you must make the patient lean back; then rub the area of a coarse cloth on his neck until the arteries appear, then restrain the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the veins are, and the left and right ones are after the ears, and they are tied together; then mark the places to be cut, then cut the left and right one with a sharp spatumile of two parts, until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be at the width of his neck.
And if you see it (the artery), push the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting through as two fingers apart.
And when the vein is cut, it jumps up continuously without stopping.
And if the artery does not open up on its own, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then press and cut up to the bone; and as much blood as needs to be expelled is seven cubic centimeters, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without gaping, if the pus that comes from the abscess does not come in, then hold and bind the wound and heal with ointment until it is healed.
of migration
When the old migraine comes and the acute catarrh, because of moisture from tears and heat in temples and aged senility, accompanied by similar things, and it is treated with methods of medicine, but none of it helps him; then we must open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient bares his temples hair, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens well by its beating, and can be easily located except for some very cold men; and if it is located, the patient holds his neck with some cloths, then rubs the place with a harsh cloth, and anoints the place with warm water until the artery appears manifestly; then takes the spatula that has this form:
Then gently cut the skin so that you can see the artery, then pull it up towards the fingers and separate carefully the fabrics that are under each part; and if the artery is small, turn it at the tip of the spoon, then press from that side according to the quantity of the two heads. For if it is not pressed, it will not hold in any way at all.
And draw out the blood from the 7th vein, up to the 4th; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with a double thick silk thread so that pus does not come before the suturing of the wound, and bleeding comes; then cut away the excess that is between the two ligaments in the same hour, and if you see, cauterize the wound with the cautery tool up to the bone until the hairs are cut off; this is the moving operation, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a warm complexion.
For cauteries are aid to finish moisters (a term for boils or abscesses): therefore it is a greater help to those with moisters. Therefore, for the extraction of arteries it is necessary that one fill the place with old cotton and put on a well-made dressing; and when you pull them out, cure them with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and bandages, until they are healed; and if the artery breaks as much as you work, hurry to cover it with cauterization, or use vitriol and strain your hand so that the blood is coagulated; and if you don't have this available, put your finger on the place for a while until it becomes numb, then rub the place with cold water and keep straining as necessary; and those that are moving (referring to the broken arteries) and easier to extract should be cauterized with this sharp cautery of 2 parts, but they should be thick enough to hold their heat for a longer time. For when the straw is too thin, it holds less heat. And it should have between the two knives one thickness of a finger, and when you have pressed down on them for three inches, and you heat the iron hot enough so that it reaches the bone, and strike the vein in three inches; and they should be separated by two fingers because it is not always welded to this cautery altogether; and this is the form of the cautery:
tears
When the eyes are flowing down from veins that are above the testicle of the head and no medicine cure helps it, and you see the patient wrinkle his face, and his forehead trembles like with chills; and if they are tender and moist so that the hair of the scrotum falls out, and the scrotum is inflamed, and burned by the flow of tears, this requires this treatment.
And it will be called the "contused cure" by the ancients, and you must do this to the patient who has this disease on his forehead, then make 4 even incisions in the forehead; one of the incisions should extend as 2 fingers below the jaw, and the others 2 at 2 costal areas above the scrotum, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on the 2 costal areas above the scrotum; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jaws, and each wound should be the size of 3 fingers joined together.
The incision is from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts right up to the bone, then continue from the middle incision to the other second, and then pull out this spur.
Insert into the first cut the instrument called "culter," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and its shape is: And place the sharp edge of the instrument towards the cartilage and the soft edge towards the bone, and press it until it reaches the middle cut. And remove all the vessels that descend from the eye socket to the cartilage, until the incision is complete up to where the cartilage opens, and then continue in the middle cut towards the other end; and equalize the bleeding and express the level for the blood taken; then put in each cut a piece of thick cotton cloth, and put on top moistened linen drenched in vinegar, oil and asafoetida, and make sure no pus comes out; on the third day, untie the thread, and apply a large plaster of strong astringent, then treat with ointment made of basilicon and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
The root of the hairs
Whenever an acute catarrh comes, it usually affects the thin and small hairs, impairing vision, burning paper, hair falling out, and headaches with pain at the root; and the patients cough; therefore, recognize these signs that those materials and this catarrh do not come from anywhere else but many veins, and the medication used to cure it should be this.
And instruct the patient to lean their head backward, then make a large cut across the forehead and another below it. Begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; once the bone is exposed, drain all the blood with a sponge, then clean between the two edges of the cut and place old cotton, then linen threads; then cover it with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and avoid hot abscesses; once the bone is removed, you should massage the bone until char begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote char growth.
In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flower and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them; administer it to these wounds as an ointment to promote healing throughout.
for the stopping of ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar things like iron; seeds, beans, peas; or something flowing like water and ashes and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or any other thing that does not fit in the ear, does not grow in the ear, place the ear in the sun. If you see a stone, distill a little purple oil or camphor oil, then introduce extraction; and make him cough with medicine, and stop up the nostrils when coughing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold it above. Often times comes pus by this cure; and if it does not come pus, introduce extraction with subtle tweezers as shown here:
If it does not come pus with the tweezers, introduce extraction with a thin wire of double curvature; and if it does not come out by this method, make a cane of beeswax and thrust the head of the cane or the opening of the ear strongly, stop up that which is around the cane with soft wax so that the pus cannot enter with the cane; then draw it out forcefully, for often times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take bird's glue of whatever kind you find, and put on some instrument pointed for this purpose, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw it out. If it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then quickly make an abscess incision in the ear where pus comes, and spasm. The manner of the incision is to first make the patient purge himself from the cephalic sinuses, and draw blood according to the measure of its potency, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or flesh depending; and make the incision like the moon, so that you come to the stone, then remove it as much as possible, and quickly suck out the pus into your mouth; and heal it until it is healed. And if it is an abscess that swells and inflames, administer extraction; and if it cannot be drained, administer a thin, soft spatula according to this shape:
But do not make an incision when you think the abscess is moist due to ear moisture, as long as you have made several pieces of it; then extract it with subtle forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is clean.
In water that falls into the ear, the patient should use warm water with first condiments, and fill the ear with cotton wool. The patient should lie on that same side where the water has fallen. If it jumps out by itself, that is good. If not, take several thin, light pebbles according to the size of your finger, heat one lightly over fire; then make the patient hold a piece of cotton or cloth in his ear and press down with the heated pebble on another side, and strike another pebble against the one in the ear; and do not stop hitting pebble with pebble until the water jumps out completely, and then it should jump out completely; and if you see, take a string, and insert one end of it into the ear, and grasp the other end with fire as hot as possible; then repeat this process with other strings until the water has jumped out completely, as we have said before.
In the removal of a small animal, such as fleas and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and can be felt, bring the extraction tool with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the removal of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and treating with distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, take them out with fine tweezers; if none appear, take the thread of this form:
And make it narrow inside and wide outside. Insert the most delicate tip into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then firmly pull the entire thread; do this often until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, insert cotton wool around the thread as I have said in the previous section; if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, as you can see from the form:
And make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; and use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose, and if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube, and place the tube in the ear; then push the rafer into the cotton completely, and press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; and the patient will smell it, and the distillation should be heated with fire just as one would distill it in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
Make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose; if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube; place the tube in the ear; push the rafer into the cotton completely; press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; heat the distillation with fire as one would distill it in the ear; ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
No child is born without any perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens with adults due to ear infection or pus inside the ear, and this ear infection sometimes penetrates fully into the ear if it cannot be seen; and sometimes one side of the perforation heals, and this can be easily observed.
Therefore, if the illness comes on suddenly and cannot be seen, it is a grave issue in many ways, and in such cases you must put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflammation clearly, then open it entirely with this spatula as shown in the figure.
And be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so that it does not prick the ear; if the inflammation is of soft flesh or corns on the ear, then hold fine tweezers, and gently press until all the soft tissue is removed.
And if the inflammation is deep in the ear, then take a fine and gentle scraper, heat it slightly over the fire, and place it on the corn of the ear. If you feel the inflammation that causes the patient pain when hearing, make a small incision gently; be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put a linen patch according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, take a linen cloth and soak it in rose oil, and powder over vitriol (which is broken); if you see the ear swelling, then pull out the first linen cloth and insert another linen cloth soaked in rosin oil and beeswax, until the swelling disappears; then heal it until it heals completely.
If there comes discharge of blood, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the blood discharge which are either distillations or cauterization.
of paper pulp
This remedy is brought on paper for the eyes when they are moist and dry; it is necessary that you stretch them with tweezers and forceps, and strike the root of it with a spatula; then place vitriol powder on it.
If it is not removed by the remedy, then cauterize it with the subtle cautionery lenticulaire, and cauterize again after the incision heals; and many times they will heal again, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
from the hailstone
Often times in papers come things that appear like hail in form and hardness, and because of this is called "hail sickness", which is a gathering of large moisture in the paper above and below; the procedures are as follows: keep watch over the hail to ensure it remains motionless on both sides, and this is an easy thing to know; then make a wide opening, gently scrape each part, then take hold with pincers and squeeze. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, it does not harm the patient; if the tear is large, assemble it with stitches, and cure it until it heals; and if it is small, do not exert force because the ointments will restore it soon and cause pain.
If the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and take hold of the hail with pincers, squeeze and press it from both sides; if the paper moves away due to the incision, it does not harm; when the hail is squeezed, apply oil of salty water, and cure the affected area until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the hails
Exinach is a grease that is infused in cloth made from paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it causes great discomfort to them, and they have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their eyes water rapidly; therefore, they lie down on their faces immediately, sleep on top of it, and their papers are damp underneath their eyelids that the exinach has spread over the oil. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of work is that the patient places their head on the healthy side; then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach contained in each part, then place it on top; and press with your fingers from one side and another, so that the exinach is collected within the circle; then make a small incision in the middle of the moisture using a pointed spatula and not larger than the wound made during vein opening; and cut through the skin until you see the exinach; and in various positions, exinach comes out from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Then take hold of a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand to the left and right until it is spread out; and ensure that you do not push in the incision, that you do not reach the oil, that you do not pierce it.
And if the exit opening does not open at the beginning of the cut, lift up the cut slightly; then stretch it as we have said, then wet cloths in water and oil, and place them on it, and hold them with straps.
And if such men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt the moisture that remains, then heal it until it is healed. And if an abscess appears hot at the location, then treat with ointments soothing it until it is healed.
hairs of paper
When paper lice are born with hair unlike nature and grow, they harm the eyes and bring on various diseases such as persistent tears and softening of the paper lice, until it is a cause of their destruction; and the cure is in four ways: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine for ague as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and this can be done by incision and stitching or by caustic, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper louse from oil with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, push an awl through one filament of the paper louse from its margin where the hair grows or protrudes from those hairs, and pull one filament above the entire paper, then shave the area beneath the paper where the hair is located, from the large tear to the small one; then extract one filament, and place a small tent of cotton and wool underneath the paper where the figure of the hook will be, then mark on the paper a figure like a mirte thorn, but it must be according to the quantity that you see will raise the paper which is prescribed for all.
And if there is one who needs a large quantity of paper softened as specified; then make the paste over all the bladder on the two lines you have marked, and start from the great incision up to the small; and let it be one of the cuts near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then push the onion into one of the two angles of the wound, then peel everything; then join the two edges with a stitch of a needle with one thread of fine wool, draw out the blood, and make the superfluous threads adhere to the two scissors with anything that glues, if you want to do this; and if not, do not care about it, then leave the stitch and the threads for 2 or 4 days; then treat the wound without a stitch with dry and binding things, because the paper revives at the end of the wound and the joining of it, but the stitch is rotten (as they say in ancient times), and this is labor without fear.
And in another way, you should shape the paper as a fig like the myrtle leaf, as we have said, with four incisions separated according to the following form:
then make it even on top of the small powers according to the following form:
And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not even, take a needle with one thread, and put it through the figure; and take another thread from the large opening, and another thread from the small, and arrange the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin thus signed, as we have mentioned, then sew up the edges of the wound evenly by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar calming substances.
Sometimes the hair of the paper is converted: it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision, but sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of canine wounds is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and place it within according to what I have said, and then make two sacks by hand, and two thin strings as long as the paper and the thickness of the spatula; and tie the four corners of the sacks with the strings; then assemble the two sacks gently on top of the oil-soaked paper, and tie the two sacks from the four corners to form a knot; leave it for some days, and the skin that is tied will die, rot, and turn black, until it falls off.
If it delays (healing), if the wound is forced open, then cure it until it heals; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper is lifted, and the hairs will not grow; this is the form of two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
Take a fine needle and attach one thread of silk, then assemble the heads (of the dogs) carefully and put them together gently, and let the length of the threads be one palm; then attach another fine thread of silk briefly, and sew the heads; then place the patient's head in your healthy hand and expose the work to the sun so that it is clear, because this is a subtle and small work; then insert the needle all along the chase (stitch) in the root of the hair adjacent, and make it pierce through the paper as soon as possible until you pull it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and insert the hair into the chase if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out of the chase with the natural hair.
And if the stitch is treated and the hairs do not come out, then you will pull the stitch down to the thread that you have arranged, until the stitch comes out of the wound and you see it with the eye; then you will pull the stitch and the thread, and close the eye and let it rest for two or three days, until the hair adheres in its place and the flesh grows over; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural hair, and let it grow with that which you left, until it is elongated and then cut it.
of the corruption of oil
When this disease known as "aleacrati" or corruption comes in oil, there are two ways it happens: one is natural, and the other is unnatural. It occurs suddenly from a wound, an incision, or cautery, or similar things.
And the method of working with it is to cut that suture, sever its lips, and put within them linen bandages, and keep it until it is healed; and you should not use in its treatment any things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first; but it works with things softening, such as fenugreek; and the decoction of water or oil and flaxseed should be cooked, and immediately cooled and poured into one of the oils, and wrap it in a linen bandage, and treat it with these.
And the essence of your treatment is that you must take care not to suture it in the same way as it was before; these operations that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease and are not effective unless they change the form from what it was before.
the pus that comes in oil
This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, cuts, cauterizations, and similar things; and the method of treatment in it is that you take an awl, in which there is a double thread, and pierce it through the char (pus) so that the thread comes out in two places on the char; then the char is above the whole awl, and the handle is .i. spatumile wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take one rasp and place it in the opening, turn the paper, and make two openings where the costal cartilage is within the paper; and let the corners of the two openings be at the angles of the incision you made, and let a right-angled triangle be formed when they are assembled, so that when they are assembled, the shape should be like the letter "Y" Greek; then remove that cartilage according to how it is curved under the paper, then join the two separated parts with a linen thread; then apply the medicine for softening and healing, and tents, until it heals.
If the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, then you must make a flat incision under the hairs of the paper, as described above; then separate between the two sides of a tent, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare all kinds of instruments with every means possible to make the shape return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what work and tools are required in different positions.
quickly of the paper
When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper is sealed with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must push the tip of a razor blade beneath the paper, and lift it up; hold it with pliers until you reach the point where the spatula is subtle, which should not be too sharp or too rough, so that the patient does not suffer from the sharp spatula piercing the oil; and make your incision, from which you scrape the assembled tissue, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and heal the entire assembled tissue, and sometimes wash it with vinegar and warm water, and let it dry; then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and place moistened wool on top of the oil abundantly in egg white; and after three days use warm water and healing substances until it heals.
the tip of a razor blade
Know that the nail has two types: one is nerve-like and resembles a hard callus, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white frozen mucus, which when touched with iron and cooked in pliers, does not melt; and both types start near the large tear and grow gradually until they cover the entire eye and light and movement of the oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient places their head in your hand, then you pull out the hairs; dip the paper into water, then take the nail with small pliers and place it upwards; then take a needle, put a horse hair or ox hair or cow hair and a strong thread on it, double the point of the needle slightly and pierce through the nail, poke all the way through with the needle, tie the nail with a thread and place it upwards, and scrape off the rest of the skin around the nail's base, then chop the remaining part in the root of the armpit to all the subtle fatty tissue and small nerves, leaving the natural flesh or armpit as usual; and sometimes the nail is placed only at the onyx, and with thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the fatty tissue around it, which is shaped like this:
And be careful that the fatty tissue does not touch the skin and break it, and that the artery is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a little bit of boiled butter, and with lard make a poultice, and leave it until the next day; then heal it as necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not nerveous and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the onions cannot enter, this condition of the nail is often healed with medicines; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take a piece of the fatty tissue sharp according to this shape:
And grind the nail gently above it, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and the reason follows, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litarge and red collyrium powder and boiled, and instill the oil until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same procedure, until it is completely healed.
If nothing contradicts in the oil, as in an abscess, then milk it, and first treat the abscess with heat until it is healthy, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid harms the oil greatly, suspend it to the onion stalk, and cut off a small part so that tears do not come out from it; then distill in the red collyrium oil made of litarge.
of the flesh which grows over the eyelid
Sometimes a red flesh grows over the eyelid of some men, and covers it and presses against the upper lid and turns it inside out, and resembles a rosebud from a balustrade; and this work is that the patient puts his head in water, then he opens the eyes, and all that skin around it should be cut with convenient incisions, and held firm; then cut the first layer of skin, and go on cutting to the end with the razor, taking care not to wound the eye at the work; and let the incision be like the spatula we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and the small instruments by which one removes the nail, as the form following this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision is completed and all the skin is removed, use oil of sealing crushed or distilled red collyrium and resembling corrosive medicines, and place it on the inside of the eyelid with egg white, so that it is securely covered; and if something remains, and the eyelid swells up, and you doubt about healing, leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that cool an abscess; then return to your work when it is healed, and do this for all char that adheres to the eyelid by this means.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak place by nature's way; and for the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not push your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can endure that work.
veins of the eyes
These are red veins that cover the oil and weaken its function and oil all day long. Therefore, it is necessary for you to first examine whether the oil, in which the sebel is located, has any other disease besides the sebel; then follow this procedure: instruct the patient to place his head on your healthy side, then press those veins all around according to his wisdom, and let the pressure be subtle double as per this form:
And may there be two openings in one body according to this form:
Then may the openings be skillfully made subtle, and draw out the blood hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the oil; and ensure that you do not pierce the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so as not to burn except the veins; and when you have done this, if distill into the oily colander green and red for correcting those that remain blocked.
And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the oil with things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and is certain of an abscess healed, then resume according to this manner as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of force:
of the fistula from oil
The sore named "fistula": when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not cured, there is a trick in it that you cut above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, you should use the tool described here; it is called "sharp head," and it should be made of iron one inch thick, and pointed like a chisel as shown in the following form:
And place it upon the bone that is corrupted, then turn it between your thumbs and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption has been restored; do this once, then restore the joint with medicinal leeches.
If the joint is welded together and pus forms, and the body of the bone is also welded, and remains thus for 40 days and does not renew or abscess, and no evil accident comes about, know that it is healthy; if this is not so, there is no other recourse but to return the fistula to the burst duct according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines that burn, and when it is uncovered take .1 foret according to this form, and let the iron be at the four angles, and the shaft be attenuated up to the head as you see here.
then place it on the bone at the edge of the notch, and move your hand away from the oil .1 inch, then turn the foret completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if they hold their hand above the fistula; then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the pus hardens the joint, the matter goes to the burst duct; this is a more gentle thing for the patient.
From the flow of oil
When the eyes are completely open and there is no need to disturb the ship, neither reduction nor increase, you must hold the patient; then clean it, then apply poultices or ointments made of herbs without iron, then put oil (made from) acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strap it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one four times, and then place one on top of another according to the amount that the eyes need; then strain it through a strong binding, and renew the poultices to heal without iron; then remove the poultices and leave the strained oil for a day and night, and if the liniment softens, you must tighten it strongly; then remove the linen after a day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that's good; if not; then renew the linctus and the cloths and the linen and the poultices until it heals.
The breaking of a rotten cloth
When disruptions occur in the ruptured eye, it opens, and paper-like substances, like grains of resin, come out and are frightening to see; then, if you cover it, the treatment is such that you push a needle into the root of the affected part from below up to above, then push another needle with double thread from the edge of the wound; and make it pierce, leaving the first needle as it is; then hold the eye of the double thread and bind a part of the eyeball around it tightly, then remove the needle and put soft woolen oil soaked in egg on it; and leave it until the threads stick with the eyeball, then cure the oil with comforting substances until the wound heals; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the eyeball itself, each part of a circular piece of fabric, until it heals.
And if the eyes appear large, pierce them with a thin spatula that comes from the oil, correct the moisture and clean the eyes, and insert something immediately; then remove it when it is healed.
of the oil bowl
This disease known as "alcunnati" is not outside but in the oil, resembling a watery discharge that is not actually water; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a chair prepared and upright. Then take hold of his head with both hands and move it until you see the bubble come up towards your eyes; then pierce it, and let the light come out and clear the wound, and have the patient observe the things as he usually does; if it does not discharge under itself, know that it is watery, and if the discharge of the bubble is not prepared as we have said. If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatumile and place it on the corned membrane .1 finger-width along the continuation of the conjunctive with the corned membrane and the cornea, until the bubble issues; when it is issued, let it distill into hot oily honey mixture or watery/fenugreek boiled with honey, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
waters of oil (literally: "of the oil")
We have the appearances of waters in the division, and what is required to perforate; if you work according to health. You must make the patient sit with his arms crossed, away from the light due to the sun, and hold the oil tightly and firmly; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the hairs are on the left, or on your right hand if the hairs are on the right; then take in your right hand (if the hairs are on the left) or left hand (if the hairs are on the right), the instrument called "almagda", and place the tip of the instrument under the cornea by a distance of one finger along the white part of the oil at the lower eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" gently, and press your hand firmly until it perforates the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda enters the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be equal to the width of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris; and this is the cornea of the eye; if you see the bone in the paper due to the brightness of the corneal membrane, then place the instrument up to where the water is, then press it down through another way. If the water discharges now, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his oil.
After a brief rest, if the second vein rises again, apply force with the instrument, and when it is pierced and does not rise further, gently twist the hand back and forth a little; then put in a small amount of gemmed oil and let it flow out from within. Then place on top either oil-soaked wool or cloth dampened in rose oil and egg, and bind with oil from a healthy animal. We, and those from our time, put common powder with plenty of egg on top.
If the oil cannot enter due to its hardness, as there are some men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
And pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make one shallow incision, then put in the oil as previously mentioned; and when the work is completed, prepare the patient for sleep, having him lie on his back for two hours; and be attentive to all movements, and take light food, and move neither head to the right nor left, and bind him according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then rebind him for seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this during the cure or after the incision at that time, but it is necessary to let it heal because the eye rises quickly.
If an abscess comes to a head, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and direct that of those who soften the abscess; and when it is soothed, you should then lance the eye (the abscess) and place one orifice (a bandage) over it to cover for any duration of time, and be always in that dark room. And later go out little by little, and convert back to his case; know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his land everyone eats almagda (a type of food), causing the water to come out, but I never saw anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are properly:
And the head of oxen of this same subtlety shall have four corners pointing.
of the horn on the nose
Never are horns born or noses of different shapes without some that resemble scorpions in their shape at the tip; and if there are such horns, either with a curved horn of a certain color, or a hard horn of a good color. In this case for those horns that are not curved but straight, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, pour the oil into the horns and pull them out; then hold what you can grasp with the subtle and sharp spatula until you know that the entire horn is removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, you should burn it all with subtle and light instruments, so nothing remains; and if an abscess or pus sacks appear, give aid as needed; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then pour in oil, vinegar or cold water.
If no pus comes out and moisture spreads up to the palace (palate), know that it is healthy; if moisture does not pierce as needed, know that there is charred matter in the bone above, so instruments do not come to cut: then you should insert a large linen thread, coated with oil of Egypt between each knot about half an inch or less; and put the patient's cheeks into the thread on one hand, and the other end of the thread in his mouth on the other hand, and know which is which by us who are handling the thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted the char; then pull the thread, squeeze out the pus, wash the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the patient's cheeks as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the char; and then put a plug of wood in his nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, as one distills oils and medicines by heating.
And it should be of silver or lead, resembling an open lantern, and you should lead it as such; if you see, make it closed, and let the instruments be filled for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
On the flesh over the neck
Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the neck and grows larger until it can be seen with the eye; and because of this, you must cut it at the beginning and remove all of it, then place the fire cautery or burning medicine on it; and if it is not treated immediately when it becomes large, if it is hard, red, poor in sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an enlarged abscess, because whenever it is touched even once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch and not hard, you can cover it and treat it with fear. Cure the area around it with drying and constricting substances.
when the neck is cut and sewn
Know that when swelling of continuation comes in one of these cartilage joints, it is of little use unless in some men. Therefore, if this occurs in anyone, observe if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then align the two lips to a stitch, heal it as long as it is healthy; and if the lips have already separated from one side and another, you must cauterize all their parts where they are injured, then align the two lips to a stitch, tighten and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder and incense pulverized; and place a piece of plaster of strong or other plaster on top of the powders and let it dry until it dries, then heal with ointment as long as it is healthy.
The way of stitching is that you align the swelling: either with needles, as we have said in the belly stitch; or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
For men, it happens within the lips that an abscess occurs hard as grains of wheat, either smaller or larger; then you must turn the lips and cut open each side, take with tweezers and strike in each part; then apply the leeve of vitriol powder over the incision until the wound is cauterized; and then soothe the wound with dry things until it heals.
of the chin
Many times a swelling arises on the chin called "albulus"; you must hold it with tweezers and strike at its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying powders over the wound, and if the swelling returns after the incision, which often happens, strike it again and cauterize it; it does not return again after cauterization; these are the shapes of the instruments for covering.
of sores
Sometimes sores are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs; and sometimes the teeth become black and yellowish and decay, as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must make the patient sit in your hands, his head on your lap, and clean the teeth or scabs that are visible, until nothing remains; and in this way do with the blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other spots, as long as they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at the root first, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, as long as you have everything cleaned; and know that the teeth require different types of instruments to clean, according to the work that the barber demonstrates, because the razor with which one cleans between the teeth has other forms than that with which one cleans the root; and these forms and others should be provided for you.
When you cure the tooth of its pain, it is necessary to delay drawing out as much as possible, for it should not be done at all; because this is a very high substance up until there is no excuse to shave. Therefore, when the patient is constrained to draw a tooth, it is necessary that you are certain about the bad tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is a good tooth, and draw out the healthy tooth; yet the pain does not cease until the bad one is removed, as we have experienced before with such patients. When you are sure about drawing the tooth, you must first score around the tooth in all places using a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then pull it gently with your fingers or small pliers at the base, bit by bit until it is completely dislodged, then firmly hold the pliers. Keep the patient's head in your lap so that it does not move.
Once the tooth is drawn directly and if it does not fall out, take any of these instruments and gently push it from each side, as you have done before. And if it is pierced and split, you must fill it with cloth where the hole is; then hold it subtly with pliers so that it does not break while pulling; and be very careful working around the gum to extract the tooth.
And beware that you do not break it and leave a part behind, and return pain to the patient due to the root more severely than the first. Also, beware that you do not act like ignorant lords who sometimes break the cart, and fail to bring what we have mentioned; but they often bring great illness through the roots that remain or because they break the cart as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine or vinegar and oil; and if bleeding comes out frequently, as it often does, use vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with which you mute the teeth first, should be long points and large handles, so that they do not bend as you draw the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be large enough that they do not bend when drawing the tooth and made of good iron, and be pointed to hold the tooth in place.
of the roots of the teeth When the roots remain during tooth extraction, then you must place on top of it cotton soaked in butter for 1 hour or 2, until the butter is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri," making the head resemble a beak; and they should be made inside in such a way as a chisel, this is their shape:
And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, you must peel back the skin entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as a palindrome, in its place.
It should be thick and sturdy so as not to break, and if the root pops out with these tools, that is good; if it does not, help with all the instruments, as their forms are listed below.
And if one uses the instrument with two prongs, its form is as follows:
And other instruments that are in front of the teeth, for this tool appears to be large pincers. Here is its shape:
And this tool should not break, and know that many tools are used for teeth; also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters discover by themselves their instrument according to what their craft and illness require, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the variety of cases, and if it breaks a chariot or another bone that it can, if it seeks the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, here is its shape: And should be large and firm to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and remove; then restore the joint with appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone and it is small, grind everything with this tool:
When the teeth do not appear according to natural form and are misshapen, especially in women who have not yet borne children, you should know that if the tooth is impacted after the dent (wisdom tooth) and is not properly aligned, it cannot be corrected: then remove it; and if it is near the dent, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, made of sharp iron at the end, and remove it.
And the handle of the forceps should be used gently for many days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move the others, and if it is possible, file it down with a small file in the shape as shown here:
and is the same as the file used to make needles; and file the tooth gently for many days, so that it does not move too much when it grows; then plane it flat at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and bites the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth fall out.
When the teeth fall out, either by impact or falling out naturally, and the patient cannot force themselves to chew food until they fall out, you should treat them with medicines that constrict, but it is of no use; instead, you must tie them up with a gold thread, as silver threads turn green and rot, but gold threads do not change; and the gold wire should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice the teeth are shifting, take the gold wire and place it between two healthy teeth, then put the affected ones in between, if there is one or more; and hold them tightly until they do not move; and tie your knot close to the tooth root so that it cannot escape. Then take the gold wires with pliers and assemble them, and reinsert them into the healthy tooth, making sure they do not injure the tongue; then leave them in place as tightly as they can stay, and if they come loose or the wire breaks, tie another one; if they remain and serve for a long time, it is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy and two affected teeth, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, place it back in its socket, freshly and as we have said; and do not interfere if one is not skilled and patient, and sometimes a tooth-shaped bone of an animal is used, and placed in the place where it is missing, and tie it as we have said, and let it stay for a long time.
To cover the ligament of the tongue
This ligament sometimes comes under the tongue due to nature or an accidental wound; and the procedures are such that you open the mouth of the patient and hold his head steady, lift the tongue; then cover the nervous ligament with a large bandage until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or not, it is a sudden wound of the flesh, if there is an ulcer, cover it with a large bandage; and ensure that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have done, lift some rose oil and lard, or cold oil, then place a linen tent over the tongue; and bind the patient tightly every night so the wound does not heal. And if discharge of blood comes, apply vitriol powder; and if it turns black, cauterize with the slow cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
If you see it of small color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it is declining towards white and there is moisture, throw the onion, and cut it with a thin spatula from both sides; and if it turns black at your procedure, apply vitriol powder until it is burnt, then return to your procedure until you pull out all of it; then lift some lard oil and linen, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Abscesses of the throat
Sometimes boils called "godath" appear inside the throat which are properly called the two almonds. And when you cure them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess with small sense and pale color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let it be until it turns black, and then you will cut it open or it would burst by itself; and if it is white colored and the root is delicate, prepare the instrument to cover. But first check that the abscess is cold and calm. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, his head should be in your hand, and open his mouth and take hold of the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue under the whole instrument, as described here; and it should be made of silver or delicate iron like a knife:
If you press the tongue with the entire instrument and see the abscess, take a hook and pierce it into the almond, and pull it out above as much as possible; and pull any cloth away from it, then cover it with the instrument, as described here, which resembles something forceful; and although the head may be curved and one end to another, they are sharp, and made of iron or copper:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold it with pliers of this shape:
And if you do not have this instrument present, use pliers with the following shape: and when you catch one of the nuts (peas), hold the other in the same way, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot, sharp, and warm water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient again with hot water or cooked quince peels, or myrtle twigs, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then treat it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses than the two nuts may appear in the throat, if so catch them equally.
I treated a woman with an abscess located within her throat, which was small in size; and I had sewn up the entire throat so that the woman could not exhale through the blocked passageway, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she continued for a day or two. The abscess had risen to such a degree that it had filled two finger spaces through the throat openings. I then quickly pierced one side, pulled out the pus, and removed a large piece of pus; then I resealed the other throat opening, opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted a needle into the abscesses, took a part of it, and no more pus came out but a little blood; and in this way, I unblocked the passageway from her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting off the abscess for a long time; the abscess grew again, and filled up the space that I had opened, becoming very large; therefore, I trapped it and cauterized it within her throat: in this way, the abscess did not grow further; I left those parts and let God do what He would with them afterwards.
of the eye
When the eye swells and becomes elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; if it is large and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that abscesses are easing, and it is thin, then you must cut it; and if it is round but not long; and if it is red or dark or black, you must make an incision in it. There is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, depending on its size and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned earlier; then pierce the eye with the needle, and draw it out, and cut it at one or two strokes as I have said in the incision of the two amandes. And do not cut more than the superfluidity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it causes pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two amandres, and treat it until it heals. If the patient fears the cutting, then use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate fear. The method of cauterization is very painful. It is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then you press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply hot live coals, so it is not too thick or clear; and use the tip of this instrument, which has the following shape:
And have some hair or oil where one applies the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument fully with all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine without reaching the throat and the nose; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for the amount of half an hour, until you see that the eye turns white and the redness caused by the medicine is alleviated; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with the cotton on top of the vein above, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; do this frequently until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for four or five days. If you have to start the cauterization again with the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization, irrigate around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, clean what is around the medicine; and moisten with cold water, and treat with gargarismes until it heals.
This cure is more effective by fumigation, not by cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and chamomile, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and put them inside, and make it boil; and let the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and in the pot have one instrument comb-like according to this manner: And be it of silver or brass, and let one end be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the eye through the channel, until the eye is made lifeless; afterwards repeat often, until the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not start this procedure at the beginning of an abscess's heating, for many things may happen; and do not apply it frequently except when the abscess's heat decreases. And if this instrument is not present, take a channel and put an eggshell crack inside the patient's head so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell crack does not let the steam burden the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Many times it is necessary to insert a bone or fish spine into the throat, or some other thing; therefore, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument until you see movement in the object; and whatever does not open and remains stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will expel the object through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will adhere, and then you can draw it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of wood in this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; be careful not to touch the epiglottis, as nothing should move or push the bone in; rather, the patient should push the instrument, because they must move or the thing is loose; if it is pushed down, or pulled back, move it evenly along the instrument until it is out.
from the throat vein
Sometimes medicine is the throat vein, as I said in the division, by treating with medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the patient's throat in the sunlight, since you press the tongue against the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the vein, draw it out with a small scissors or fine pliers suitable for this. If this is not effective, take a hair string, and put it into the patient's throat, then push or pull the end of the string with a hot iron and do this often. Dye the patient in cold water all day. Then take a full ounce of cold water in a glass, open the mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with your hand frequently; and as soon as the vein feels the cold water, it collapses.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then subdue the patient with asecteticum, at the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this repeatedly, for it will persist. The method of the fumigation is that you take one pot or one containing charcoal, and cover its bottom with a perforated cloth, and in the center place the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and the patient places the head of the cane in their mouth, and closes the mouth so the smoke does not escape, but comes up to the nose; and the nostril will now open, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation repeatedly; and let the patient endure thirst, eat salty and sour things, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out under this governance.
The shape of the instrument used to treat the nostril is as follows, when it can be seen, resembling curved tweezers for entering the throat; and similar to a syringe tip, and it should have a sharp edge so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; and here is its shape:
The chapters of abscesses
Many similarities of an abscess, according to what memory comes after in this book from one and another, are diverse in perforation and cutting; and it is in .ij. ways, one of which is in its likeness itself, and of that which holds moisture. And the second way is for the parts where they are in the body. For abscesses of the head are others than those of the base, and abscesses of the charnut part are others than those that come in jointures, and each should have its judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses, one should not perforate them until the swelling has subsided according to its completion; and for those that must be perforated when they have become hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that come in jointures. For when abscesses come in jointures, and it is left until it bursts on its own, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the jointure are corrupted, causing contraction in that member. Or the abscess is from the main part, and if you delay the perforation too long until it has subsided, it will damage the main part; or it is from the base, if one perforates it before it has subsided; and it should not be perforated without digestion being completed, except for those that are from the base, which cannot pass through entirely, and should be elongated inside, and a fistula forms; and it will not heal in a long term.
And you should know the sign of the perforation of an abscess that is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, the disappearance of fever, the reduction of pain and redness, and the decrease in swelling and shrinking of the abscess's head, as well as other signs; and you should make the perforation sit lower or closer to the abscess, where it has started to move open; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places or areas without any pus.
In those that swell, according to the affected member. And when an abscess is in a charnel place, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, the body will be filled with much pus and may harden the lips and deeply penetrate it. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the length of the body, according to what the affected member needs. And you should bring small perforations, small openings; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many cuts according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess; and if it is necessary to cure such abscesses, cover them; when it becomes as thin as a cloth and softens, it is necessary to do as with babies: and if there are those that are cut into four angles, and if there are those from which one copes like the leaves of myrtle, as abscesses in the groin; and if there are those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar ones.
For superficial abscesses without a head, you should pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing wrongly; do this gradually over many times as long as the pus disappears. This is especially important for weak patients, women, children, or old people who are frail. For sometimes the body may jerk with the release of the pus, which could accidentally cause death to the patient, and you should be careful about it. Therefore, exercise great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and check if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a large wound, bring linen or old cotton threads; and for large abscesses with much pus, you should insert threads so that they meet each other; and if you have cut into the skin in the abscess and shaved around it, fill it with old cloth or woolen rags without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and salt, and moisten one cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.  If the bleeding persists, bring medicine and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, or the wound or abscess is very nervous, then you must put hot towels and moistened cloths on top of it; and if it is summer, and the wound is fatty, then you should place moistened cloths on top of it, or cold towels and moistened cloths, for two days, as we have said; and then drain the abscess and the pus and treat it, as necessary, until it heals.
This must be understood universally in the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
of sores
1. For small abscesses in the head, there are methods that we know of, which are in cloths, such as a joist of a vine, and there are many similar ones. Some of them are fat and moist like pulp; and some are hard and stony, without any doubt that arteries do not oppose it. And the procedures for the neck are as follows: you prove every instrument that is called "entromissoire", from which the following form comes, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, they make it through a long incision. And when the moisture is evacuated, scrape skin without leaving any remaining, because it returns immediately when left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; otherwise in water and oil, and apply to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and let those who are staying up take care of it. And repeat the cotton as before on the second and third days, until you know that it does not stay overnight; then cure the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains one nut-sized fat, cut it along this length; dip your fingers in and scrape all around, and apply all your care to draw out the pus where it lies; and if arteries oppose you, do what I have told you before. And similarly do for a hard and stony abscess, and treat and cure as I have told you.
And cut through the hard and stony abscess and the moist one, because they are filled with little blood. And if any of these abscesses in the head or neck does not contain moisture, and these were one of the abscesses that I have treated on an old woman's head; I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, could not be broken; and if any incision had been made, it would have caused as much pain as from a stone. In other abscesses coming from the head or neck, they should always be opened for as long as possible depending on the situation, to let pus come out; and treat them as appropriate.
of scrofulas
Often this abscess appears at the neck, under the jaw, and in the groin, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body; they are many, and some of them are joined together. And each scrofula is properly within its side, as we have said of the node and the abscess of the neck; and the appearances of these scrofulas are various. Some contain moisture, and there are also malicious ones that do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see a good disposition for cutting, and it is similar in color to the body, and silent on all sides and not narrowed towards the nerves of the neck or the artery or the channel, and not deep; then you must cut through it, and peel off each part, and hold the two lips of the scissors open as needed, as we have said in abscesses of the neck; and pull it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not use a spatula or lancet too much so that your hand trembles, and do not see too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not stop bleeding, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and hold the wound closed; and leave it until the abscess is pacified and the wound softened, and begins to purify. And when the blood is stopped, return to your work; then examine if there remain small scrofulas at the root of the wound, and if so, cut them off and clean them. And if there is a large scrofula at the root of the scrofula in the vein, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang down without damage; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment.
And if you cover the entire scrofula, you must bring together the two edges of the wound and sew it now since there is no excess to wait for due to the large size of the scrofula. You must understand to cover the root of it, draw pus, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold excess, pierce where it has become necrotic; and pierce in such a way as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things so that it destroys what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment made from fresh herbs until it is healed.
The meaning seems to be about treating a scrofula (a chronic inflammatory condition), specifically when it becomes necrotic (rotten) and needs to be drained and sewn up. The term "de squinance" in the following sentence is not explicitly explained in this text, but it could potentially refer to the same condition or a related one based on the context. Here's the translation for this line:
The ancient ones spoke and described the measure of the throat, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is their written words.
For those who have squinancy, the slit in the throat called "epiglotte" should be opened; and aid should not be given by these, because all the veins and the passageways of the sickness are for those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two glands. When the sickness is in the channel of the passageway, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglotte, it is necessary that we cut it between four circles or two small slits transversely, between the four circles or according to the size of the scythe, not in the cartilage.
And the neck, if it is contracted at the incision of the epiglottis, there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cuts open the vein until reaching the jugular vein; and removes the vessels of blood, if you see any thing, and then sews up the wound as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the incision of the jugular vein which flows through the neck that has been broken, and by the lack of voice.
And leave the wound open for a time.
When the hour has passed where there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and sew it completely through the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce heat, until it is sound.
Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the wings are cut off. Then cut open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe otherwise, and he breathes through the wound, and in this way he is kept from death.
And for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in 3 days or 4. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took one dagger, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe.
And I was called to heal it, and I found it just as dead.
I found the wound and saw that blood was coming out of it, and I knew that it had neither opened nor conducted air except through the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I quickly sewed up the wound and healed it until it was healed;
and nothing happened to the maiden except that her voice became hoarse, and she recovered afterwards;    Je ne le trouvai mie mort.
Because I say, have no fear in the swelling of the epiglottis.
in the throat.
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess of a bluish color, and it is common in women.
And it occurs according to two ways: natural and accidental; where the natural has no device.
The accidental is according to two ways, of which one resembles fat, and the other way resembles an abscess coming from us due to arteries. There is fear, and it should not be worked on forcefully except in the small one, and it should be proved and examined at the whole entrance. If you find it as one finds fat and it cannot enter any vein, if you cut it, like cutting the nose, and draw it out completely, if there is any. And carefully examine it all, and treat it as needed, until it is perfectly healthy.
from us
Many ways of ours are, which I will tell all the similarities;
And now I must tell the entire difference between dislocation and fracture.
Dislocation is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the swelling has passed and the fracture has healed; then the fever and heat subside.
A fracture does not have heat or fever or pain, and it consists of one sack, which is its own sac and is similar to the color of the body, and starts in a similar way to an abscess, and grows bigger.
And they are similar in two ways: they can be fatty or moist, and their colors are as I have said in the classification.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the newt, that you test and examine first everything in the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its shape comes or the chapter which follows.
The method of the inquiry of the abscess for us is that you take or more moist place than you find within the abscess, and turn your fingers slightly, little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then take out the instrument (entromissoire) and make sure it's not too hot.
If moisture runs out of a wound, let it dry as I have said for other abscesses;
If moisture does not come out of the incision, understand that it is fatty, then make a cross-shaped cut and grasp with the forceps, peel gently from both sides and watch the layer where it lies so you pull it out safely.
And if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it piece by piece so that there remains nothing.
For if there remains nothing, then the disease comes back many times.
And if there is a small amount left and it does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound closed with something hot, and put things that soothe the abscess on top, and cure it with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if it is large, cut the two lips of the wound and heal it with skin grafts.
And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is contrary to you, and you hurry and apply vitriol powder, let it lie for two or three days, until the wound heals, and allow the boil of blood to subside; then return to cover what remains unhealed with a new dressing.
Here are the forms of the incising instruments, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and among them, there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are also three kinds to encircle the abscesses with fistula: large, medium, and small.
And they are like the needles used to sew witches, and are of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are more valuable, and those made of black plastic are more expert for encircling the abscesses of a fistula.
And there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
The forms of the tumors are similar in appearance, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also tumors with two humps of four kinds each.
And there are also tumors with four humps, and they too are of four kinds; and there are also tumors with two humps, and tumors with a single hump, and these are all necessary in their places.
The head of these [objects] that are being cut is sharp, and from those who do not cut [it completely], only from one side, because we scrape the nails so as not to injure the vein or the nerve.
And of these instruments are the handles returned to loops, so that the patient does not hurt himself at the opening of abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
And it should not be used anywhere except in charned limbs, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar joints.
And sometimes another small instrument, resembling a scourge with fists, is used in this form, to draw blood.
and it is placed at the site that heals quickly, at the veins, and sometimes returns according to this large form.
Sometimes breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they resemble those of a woman.
And they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wishes to cure them, it must be according to this form of this line b up to the g: Then scrape the fat, and apply medication soothing char to the wound, then gather the two lips of the wound together for stitching, and heal it until it is healed.
and if the navel inclines downward and is rounded due to its size as it often happens with women, they should be made into two pockets, divided by two similar cuts: So that one is held to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to line g; Then cut the skin that is between the .ij. lips (or openings), remove the fat, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders, and whatever else is necessary in the treatment, until it heals;
and if it is not healed or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; And let it heal until it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then cure it until it is clean.
From abscesses of the saddle (a type of boil)
These abscesses that come under the saddle are types of hard scrofulas with ridges, and if they contain moisture within them.
Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut following this form, from line b to line g: And when the whole boil which is in the abscess is emptied, place old cotton on the wound, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment to it until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, make incisions in it as we have said for scrofula, and if pus forms in the wound, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
of the cutting of the artery
When an artery is ruptured and the skin over it is sealed, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with a vein that has burst and formed an abscess;
And if this is known for the artery, then the abscesses are long in duration. and when you understand with your hands, it is understood tightly; and when it is for the vein, it is reason to turn away from it.
It is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the buttocks and angles and near the neck and in other places, and it is very large. Firstly, the iron cure must be avoided in the case of the head, and similarly, it should be avoided in the case of a swelling caused by an artery, pierce it through the skin from above.
Firstly, the iron cure must be avoided in the case of the head, and similarly, it should be avoided in the case of a swelling caused by an artery, pierce it through the skin from above. Then open the artery incisions, cut it well from the tissues, until it is exposed;
Then push an awl beneath it, and make it pierce through to the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in 2 fingers' breadths, as I have shown you in the extraction of the 2 arteries that are in the temples.
Then poke the space between the 2 ligaments with an instrument until the abscess bursts out, and the abscess is to be broken.
Then administer the cure that causes the pain to cease. Then treat him with ointment following this, as long as he is healthy;
and if the abscess is near the vein, you must paint your hand with what you can of the abscess on all the skin; then put the needle under the place you hold with your hand and make it pierce, and have it one double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I told you, or sew one of its parts to the other with two threads;
And if you doubt that the thread does not come out, push another needle through all one thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four inches;
Then press the abscess until the superfluous in it comes out, then press the curdled superfluity and leave what is connected;
Then place one moist linen cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, then provide treatments with tent and liniment until it is healed.
From abscesses of the flesh
As in arteries and veins, abscesses come to the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
This happens more often in the shoulder and arm and all the joints where there are connections, which is very painful abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is in many positions causing pain.
and when it is strained completely, the patient feels pain, and it is not at the surface of the body but under the skin.
And it should be completely immobilized from all sides, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and the one in the joints should not be covered by iron; for by chance, there might be contraction.
And the one who is in the head or forehead, cut with the spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and strike at its root.
If it is large, suspend it to the onion, peel it, then cut and sew up the wound until it heals.
Heavy growths hanging Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has fine roots and large knots; and there are small ones and very large ones.
And I saw one man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them; they were white, had a small root, were cut open, and continually oozed moisture.
I cut them out and found one weighing 16 ounces, and the other 5 pounds; the growths in the incision are such that if you look at the patient, you can see that he is moist, and the color of the flesh is white and moist with a fine root.
If the neck is at the spout large [opening], and in your presence the fire cautery. For in cutting often comes too great discharge of blood, and if it overflows on you, hasten then to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the cut with iron, take one thread of yarn well made, tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then bind it, and do not stop tightening the yarn thread until it stops the bleeding and feels firm; and if the roots are large, be careful when pressing because of the belly, but you can certainly cover half of it,
Then burn him so he does not return; then heal the wound and be careful not to cover the black boil which is of a dark color, poor sensation and watery discharge.
For it is an abscess swollen, and I will come to the treatment for gonorrhea afterwards.
When the boil bursts out
If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or a tear in the bladder, as it happens in other cases, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries as described earlier, or from windiness;
and if it is by the rupture of the bladder and the discharge of the boil, its color resembles that of the body and is a light thing without much pain, and with multiple openings. And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse. When you press it with your fingers, it retracts and then comes back, and in some cases, it becomes hard, and greatly swells at the entrance of the wound, and due to much labor.
And if it's due to moisture, it is an easy matter, and it opens readily when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it's due to blood, it opens with these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and they are punctured according to a certain quantity.
And if it's due to wind (ventositeit), the patient should rest for a while and avoid any movement; the opening (ovraiges) will be evident if the appearance is due to the blood of the artery or vein, or wind. You should let the wound heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or belly, you must instruct the patient to bend over, and stretch out straight, then hold everything around the belly. then command him to grasp it between your hands, then go around the side that you have gripped with all the spatula. then stretch the half of the abscess above to the great incision.
Then open half of the abscess stretched over the cord, and insert your index finger, and search for the intestine. If you find it taken by the cord, undo it and push the intestine out through the opening of the abdomen.
and if you find the pus, take it to the edge, and scrape off the excess.
And if the artery or vein becomes constricted, it goes very well around, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two sharp threads, and place the two needles around what you have made in a cross that you make to pierce;
Then hold the abscess for four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as it is, and let the dead flesh rot by itself; or you beat it when it becomes soft and can be punctured, then treat what is necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said;
or you beat it when it becomes soft and can be punctured, then treat what is necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said; And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the place as necessary, and seal the wound.
of the abscess
We have said in the division the similarities of abscess, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one should administer fire-cautery; and we will say the abscess is in joints, and great caution must be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when abscesses are on a place where they can be shaved like an abscess which is on the face, or on the thigh, and in similar places, and it should all be removed when it is at the beginning; but when it is large and old, it does not have to be approached, for I never knew anyone to heal it, nor has anyone healed one before me.
And the operations, when they are in place and can be removed as we have said, it is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him urinate if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient. That is, shave the area to be operated on cleanly; then dip your fingers or a lancet in boiling water and cauterize the vein or artery you are going to operate on; then wait for all the blood to come out, and press the area well with your hand or something, and if the flow of blood opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then heal him by other means until he is healed.
And from the dropsy We have previously discussed the appearances of dropsy and how the collection of fluid is made, as well as the signs for each type, and the treatments by medicine and iron. In this chapter, we will only discuss the similarity of dropsy called "edema," and it should not be treated with iron in these two cases: tympanites and yposarche, because it is fatal. When you are treating the form of dropsy known as "edema" using medicines, and the cure does not work, look for signs that the patient is weak or has other diseases apart from dropsy, such as bloating and similar conditions; do not use iron, because there is doubt, and if you see a strong patient with no other disease except dropsy alone, who is neither too young nor too old, then proceed as follows: Lift the patient upright on your hands, and the ministers press the abdomen toward the lower part of the hip, then take the spatalmile with sharp spine according to this form: And it should be pierced through two parts. And it shouldn't be too deep that it reaches the intestine when inserted, nor can it bleed.
then check if the hydatid is directed towards the intestines: If it is near the intestines, you should cut underneath the belly two fingers' width straight above the fist; and if it is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side of the belly two fingers; and if it is due to the spleen, it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that superfluidities do not flow towards the weak place.
then pierce the entire skin with the tool, and push it out, and lift your hand to hold the spatalmile between the skin and the bladder in the same way as when stripping a pea of the amount of one nail or more around; then pierce the bladder until the spatalmile reaches the watery place, which is the water, then pull it out and use this tool as shown here: It resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of light iron or steel, and has a hole on the underside. There are four holes on one side, two on another side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes use to trim a pen.
On the head above is the opening of the alimentary canal, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then lower it now onto the instrument; empty then either half or one third, for if you see more than is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient may die from resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he will fall into a faint, or approach death.
but empty according to the strength of its virtue, and according to the disposition of the patient's condition and his pulse; then draw the instrument and hold back the water, and it is now held in check by the cautery that is on the sickness, as I have spoken about, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw a small amount of water.
Do this every day, and beware of allowing too much water to remain but only a little. And if you have doubts about the patient, and leave him with much water, cure him with burial or hot sand, and through sweating or bathing and in the sun, anoint him with wine; and heal him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize the stomach and the spleen and the liver after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Of the stopping of the vein A child is sometimes born without foreskin on the penis, or the foreskin is small or not in its place. If necessary, it should be pierced immediately with a very thin spatula according to this shape: then put a very thin piece of cloth on the foreskin and tie it, keeping it for 2 or 4 days, and when it wants to urinate, remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then replace it; and by chance, it may not be necessary because the urine that comes out does not close it. If the foreskin is small, it can be expanded with a cloth of flax as we have said, if it stretches out. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are circumcised, because no one is born with a foreskin at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis; and they cannot ejaculate due to this, as the material cannot come up to the meatus, and it is a bad disease.
And the method of the work is that the patient lies supine on their back, with the head of the penis and the tip likewise like the size of a feather, so that the testicles hang in the scrotum, as required; and take care to avoid leakage of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from the wound, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the genital sores Often this ulcer appears on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly genitals; and in it there are malignant and non-malignant ones; you should take them once a week with a subtly thin tool, and cut and clean all of them, then put damp cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; then cure it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the elbow is infected and putrid in color, it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have burned it, and if the elbow is filled with pus both inside and outside, it is necessary that you remove the pus that is inside first; and when it is seared, cure the outside. For when you treat it together, there is no assurance that the joint of the elbow will not be pierced, and darkness and corruption come into its joint and bone; it is necessary to clean all that is dark and corrupted, then lay it on a plaster of honey and flour which is made from the peel of pumpkin seeds and other herbs, then cure it with other treatments until it heals.
If the flow of blood occurs, apply the lunar cautery as follows: The cauterization should aid in two ways at once: for the discharge of blood and corruption; and if the joint of the elbow is corrupted and has receded, it is necessary that you introduce or insert a cane made of wood into the arm, making the patient urinate; when the skin has been peeled off at the top of the arm which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary therefore to shave one instrument's worth of hair, until the ligaments are separated, and the joint of the arm is relieved from all sides.
and if it is painful to speak of this, then shave one spatula-like instrument from the top of the arm and the skin; afterwards, squeeze well between two fingers, and put one thin linen cloth soaked in cold water on it.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of healing; however, when we perform this work on our own accord and specifically for children, it is necessary that we do the best job possible and make it as light a wound as possible to heal quickly.
I say that the ancients would not circumcise their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have wanted the greater part of masters and nobles who performed circumcision around age one day, and for all newborns; however, it was feared because there were two layers, and by chance if the upper one was cut, the lower one remained.
Now cover it with copper, and the pain is doubled; at the amputation which is close to the limb's point, the cutting edge of the iron may slip off, and ruin the work, and many times it grows in such a way that there is no need for amputation and I have seen this.
I have found the advantage of using ligatures in amputations, because the force cuts equally well above and below.
For when you press your hand, you should cut equally at all times; but the thread must be well tightened around the skin; and the method of the first work is that you make the child think that you are not going to tie the thread around him except for a while, and then let him go in all ways that you can. Then make it be between your hands straight, and put strength into your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see [it], nor any tool; then push your hand to the sheath and blow or cough, and pull it up until the head of the sheath is in; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the joint signet with a double thread, then tie it under one peg to another loop; and hold it with the second knot at the thumb and index finger, and press between the loops, then draw the cord quickly upwards and pull the head of the sheath out;
Then make it be between your hands straight, and put strength into your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see [it], nor any tool; then push your hand to the sheath and blow or cough, and pull it up until the head of the sheath is in; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the joint signet with a double thread, then tie it under one peg to another loop; and hold it with the second knot at the thumb and index finger, and press between the loops, then draw the cord quickly upwards and pull the head of the sheath out; Then let the pus come and go, for it is the moisture; put powder on it and above the powder, one piece of cloth glued with a mixture of cooked egg white steeped in rose water, compounded with fresh rose oil, leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the forces for cleaning is as follows: the two heads should be soft and pointed, and they should be as large as a finger equally:
The error of the mundification is when the cores within are at incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, so that the lews become abscesses; and strike it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, grasp it with pliers, and then strike.
If they pass more than three days and that which is below the worm is swollen, let it be until the abscesses subside, and gently scrape it; if you can move it, strike it as you can, and keep away from the part of the worm, this will do no harm.
Therefore, treat the limb with submerged wounds using the powder we have said or treating powders, and if you strike too harshly, it will go up, but this will not harm; treat it as we have said until it heals.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or blood coagulated, or pus, or frozen water, or snow, or similar things, as we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that it is retained due to a stone in the bladder or urethra, then the patient must be bent over his knees; and his feet should be placed on the back, and he should extend his abdomen from the area above the lower back, and hold him still as much as possible; and then force the urinary tract to express the stone upward, so that the urine is discharged.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must provide extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is its shape: and it should be made of delicate thin silver, like a bird's feather; and the tip should be one palm and a half long and delicate at the end.
The manner of the urine release is to take one double thread, tie its end to a piece of wool or cotton, and put the other end of the thread inside the syringe; then push the excess of the wool and insert it up to the head of the syringe, afterwards anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on one seat, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil of olive and cold water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upward towards the anus; then insert the syringe forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it come to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order for any other reason than because you guide where it goes; then the thread should be all the way to the wool piece, and the urine follows the wool, then draw it out, and correct the urine.
And recommence the syringe when the bladder is emptied, and the patient should urinate.
of diseases of the bladder
When scorchures or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydre," and its form is:
It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the upper part should be narrow so that the medicine comes out thinly enough to stop the flow of urine well, if possible, and to drain moisture and push when necessary.
And when you see that your medicine is thrown into the bladder, place the key-shaped instrument in the moisture, and pull back and forth which is inside; if you pull out the moisture with the key-shaped instrument, then push the key-shaped instrument forcefully back; the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle enema for bladder cleansing: it is as follows:
and it is made of silver or brass, and the head is raised; below, there is one handspan or fingerbreadth; then take a sheep's bladder and place the moisture that you wish to cleanse the bladder in it, tie it between two hands using a strong double thread, heat one spoonful of that moisture over fire; then put the head of the enema in the penis, hold your hand above the bladder with all the moisture coming towards it, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you don't have bladder, take a piece of parchment, make one circle and pierce it roundly; then insert a strong thread into the holes, assemble the circle like one would an arrow, fill it with oil, moisture, and water, tie it in the instrument; do as you did for the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from cutting into stones
We have already said in the division the ways of stone and extraction with medicines; and I have told the difference between a set stone in the rain, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one should work with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder, resembling water in its subtleness; it opens wounds, injures the patient's penis, pierces many times, then binds it; and at most these leaps cause foundation problems. And children recover easily until they are four years old, but it is very serious in adults, and it is mild to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes obstructs the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, tilt him upside down, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder and rises slightly towards the top. Then make him sit between your hands, his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards. Then press and touch it with your hand;
If you feel the stone within your body, hasten to cut into it now on top of the stone. And if it does not fall with the touch of all, moisten your left thumb, if the patient is weak or old, or your right thumb if the patient is young and strong; place it in its base, and press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it towards the bladder's neck; then press firmly on it, and push it to where you intend to cut.
Instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch his right hand upward and remove the skin that is under the scrotum in the part where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it, which is its shape:
And make an incision between the scrotum and the base, not in the middle but along the left side of the penis; let it be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be close to the base or on top of it, and let the cut be wide open at the back, and narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large:
In case the pressure should be applied which is the foundation, it shall jump without effort; and know that there is such a stone or angle, and edges: it is to be extracted; and if there is such one which is swollen, similar to a plum, and round, from whose issue the exit is easy.
Then in case there are angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not leap out, you must draw it out with pliers similar to a limer (a type of forceps) at the head, to strain the stone so that it does not slip away; or you place one subtle curved instrument under the head; and if you cannot do this, enlarge one small hole slightly, and if there is no opening, draw it out with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, first push out the largest one at the bladder neck, then strike and pull it, and afterwards the smaller ones if there are more. And if it is very large, it must be broken and a larger incision made. For two things can happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes immediately through the place where the lees cannot heal; but nevertheless make an effort to draw it out, or break it with forceps, until you draw it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then press and place on top a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then make the patient lie down on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen [the bandage], moisten the wound well with oil and water, then apply the ointment defyndicon and basilicon until it is healed.
If an abscess and rotting come in the wound and congealment of blood in the bladder occurs and urine is held back due to this condition which is known so that without jumping with urine, press your foot on the wound, and draw out the blood because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and rupture it;
Then raise the wound that is wet, dry and closed, and help in all ways you know, while it is healthy; and it is necessary that every herb that you cure him with, you bind two of his thighs together and apply the medicine to the place.
And if the stone is small and it is conducted by the penis, and pushed in, and the urine cannot come out; you should heal it with what I say next, that you cut it many times, and are excused from cutting for this cure. I have already proved this so.
Take one iron fork according to this shape and sharpened at four angles on one thong:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft of the stone inside the bladder, so it cannot return to the bladder; then gently push the drill into the shaft; and turn the drill bit slowly towards the stone, bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from another side; soon after, urine will come out, then press your hand on that which remains of the stone inside the shaft. Soon it will break, burst forth with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread around the stone and another one above, then push the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
of the woman's stone (meaning: uterine stones or ovarian cysts)
It often happens that a stone is inserted in women, and if it ever occurs, the treatment is grave, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to examine herself, especially when she is chaste.
The third reason is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is more deeply inserted than that of a man, for which it requires a deeper incision, causing great fear.
If you must do this (extraction of the stone), then it is necessary to take a midwife who knows well, and if one cannot find such a midwife, not even a chaste maiden should be asked for it; and present a wise woman in the knowledge of women's lives, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the incision of the stone.
And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then you must insert your finger or foundation and search for the stone; and if you find it, you must push it under her cervix, and recommend that she pushes her cervix or vagina with her left hand on the bladder.
If you find it, you must make her move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the uterus, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and be careful not to cut it too deeply.
Then push the root in the thigh if you feel the stone and cut the wound so that the stone can come out; know that there are many types of stones: small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and those with reins. Know their characteristics to find out the solution.
And if the wound gapes, put crushed vitriol (vitreous sulfate) on it and keep it there for an hour until the wound is cauterized; then return to your work, until the stone is expelled, and have instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone from people to help you in your task.
And if the wound gapes and it is an artery that has been cut, put powder on the area and bind it with straps and bandages, do not start again, leave the stone and do not draw it out, as the patient may die by accident; then treat the wound.
When the heat of the blood is relieved and the wounds have healed, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
Of carnous hernia
In other words, aquose is not something else but an assembly of moisture or white pus that is under the sac of the kidneys, which contains the egg; and it is called "white pus", and sometimes it is properly within the egg's membrane itself, if one believes it to be another egg; and it is the skin of the kidney between the white pus we have mentioned, and it does not happen often.
And the generation of this aquose is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and this matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from a blow on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: either descending to yellow, or without redness, or black, or white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is white and soft as we have said, then it is an abscess, that is long like the shape of an egg, and the eyes do not open, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very cloth, then it is an abscess like part of an egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the hide of the eyes and the white soft part, then one feels it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe with a blunt instrument to find out what shape it is, as described above. According to this which follows the intrusion, judge of what is within.
According to this which follows the intrusion, judge of what is within. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our power and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, on something slightly raised, and put many layers of cloth underneath him.
then lie him on his left side, and command the servant to lie on his right, and stretch out the rod to one of the two sides of the hips;
Then take the spatulum (spatula) and press on the skin of the coccyx (tailbone) in its length until you reach the tip, and your incision should be straight when dividing the skin of the coccyx up to a safe white level, and peel it off delicately according to one's ability.
Then make a deep incision of one inch wide and draw out all the fluid. After that put in your fingers (or forceps) and stretch the wound upward; do not touch the tailbone but only the wound itself; press all over or in pieces delicately, otherwise the fluid will return.
If the egg bursts during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of draining the fluid; then suture two layers of skin from the tailbone into a stitch, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupt with other disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, suspecting the flow of blood; then strike the cone at the entire suspended area, and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
If the egg is divided into two parts joined together, know that these are two branches; then strike the other part equally as you did with the first, then squeeze out the blood, and put moistened wool soaked in rose oil on the wound.
and put another wool soaked in wine and oil on the two cones, and put fabric over the top, and tie it above all the twine according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and employ woolen padding in this manner and sew them together into a band for the loins; one of the shoulders takes hold underneath near the base, and the other at the part of the elbow; the remaining two chiefs [straps] are placed on each angle, and the whole thing is tightened in the loop of the belt.
And sometimes this ramice of cautery is used in place of iron surgery, and it requires you to take a subtle cauterizing knife, and touch the hide of the kidneys, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the fluid is exposed.
if you take the cautery in this form, pierce the pus with the point, and burn it with this subtle heated cauter.
And the cup in all ways you can, until everything is heated; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salubrious; and be careful of decorum of blood, and be mindful of the works of incising.
And if anything happens to the contrary, whether it is an abscess or a flow of blood or something else, heal what happens contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work due to its terrible nature, you should perform perforation as I tell you, and it is when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that ramice aquouse is there.
Make the patient sit on a raised seat (or chair); then pierce the abscess in the part below the entire space of the thumb-width wide, and make the perforation along the length of the body; ensure that the punctures are large enough to let all the pus flow out.
Then put cotton on the wound and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed.
If the infected cloth does not let the pus flow out from the wound's mouth, you must insert a reed or tool for draining pus of hydropicals (this is explained in the previous form); enlarge one finger's width of the wound, check that the pus returns and collect it every 5 months or so; when it is assembled as described earlier, the patient will recover.
From the abscess of the eyes
It is said in the chapter on this subject that many people fear it, so I think it would be better to leave it.
And I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Therefore, many abscesses come from the body, and especially the eyes; this happens in many cases.
It is to be known by excessive sour and hot fluid, which is spread over the kidneys, or by percussion;
and is the color of the abscess according to the body's color; and finds no pain, but it is a severe abscess;
and sometimes it is a hard, rough, and friable abscess of this color, and occasionally it comes from an artery or swelling of the vein.
When it is from an artery, it can be recognized by the hot swelling of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; And you must not touch it.
A tumor of the vein is recognized by its swelling and the expression on the fingers at the touch.
And it can be well made the cut on this appearance, and on other parts; And you cut the core of the cyst, then elevate the yolk to the top, and slice through the white part, and release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the yolk.
If the egg is already softened with these hatchlings born, then it's necessary that you draw out the egg and crush the shell.
If it is hot on the inside with those vessels inside it, where the fetus is, then you must deliver the whole tender thing and crush the shell roundly.
If the birth of the placenta is on the back side, then you must crush the whole thing and draw out the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is done, apply the wound with dampened wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
Of the abscesses of the knees
This is an abscess covered with a swelling resembling a boil, accompanied by the softening of the knees, and if the patient speaks hoarsely when walking;
And the remedy for this disease is as dangerous as the ailment itself,
And yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then place the suspension device of the stirrups below your arms. Apply hot oil to all the wounds near the penis, and the masters will treat them, then stretch them out properly.
Cut the pointed spur wide across the wounds until they are exposed.
and then peel off from both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the head.
Then insert an awl with double thread and tie it at the first place where the vein has appeared, and tie it to the other end. Then press the shoulder straight, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then dress the wound as one does with other boils, so that no pus discharges from either of the eyes.
because if all the pus comes out, then it brings no harm, and if all the eyes have pus, then the eyes must be drained of all pus. so that the eyes do not lose their secretions due to the incisions made in the pus, and dry up and cannot be helped.
From the cutting of the siphac The events of this remedy are by the incision that comes or siphac, or the extension on the stomach in the part of the flanks, because the intestines descend from that incision to one of the corners.
and this incision is either of siphac or the extension thereof, and these two types of movement result from it due to causes: either by percussion, or by jumping, or by shaking, or by raising heavy loads, and similar things;
and the signs when it is of the extension of siphac are that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; And the abscesses are equal towards the complete part, because the intestines adhere to them next.
And the symptoms are when it is of the section where the intestines are cut open, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously beneath the skin near, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body expelling them through the opening of the incision.
And sometimes the intestines burst out from the anus and are retained within, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which it is necessary to escape.
The method of the work is that you instruct the patient to ream his intestines with his hand inside the wound, if it can enter. then he should be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the thighs;   Car il est de parfait cure qu'il otreit la matiere que li entraigne le col, et puis li fist le corte.
The heart is exposed above, and cut all the skin of the cheeks longwise; Then insert fingers into the groins of the lower back, according to what you need for opening the wound, and they should be such that the eyes can emerge.
Then scrape the scrotum that is beneath the skin of the groins, until the white scrotum becomes exposed on all sides.
Then insert your index finger into what follows the scrotum, in that which is between the white scrotum beneath the skin of the egg and the second scrotum.
and remove what is behind the egg, and between the second scrotum; then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and bring the white scrotum towards your left hand, and lift the egg along with the entire scrotum towards the lower back. And instruct the minister to extend the arm upwards, and dislocate that which is at the front behind the joint.
And if your fingers feel the intestine wrapped or white swollen matter, and if you find anything like this, push it into the stomach below;
Then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten strands, and push it into the back part of the swelling, which is after the skin of the tumor; behind the waist, then cut the shoulders that appear from threads, until there are four strands. Then gather them together in the shape of a cross, and tie the swelling (which we mentioned is behind the skin of the tumor) with a strong cord of two parts. Then wrap the joints of the fingers, and bind them together with strips, so that no vassals who nurse them can enter, only abscess cloth should come in. and put the ligature according to the first ligature of that length, two fingers' breadths long, and after these two ligatures leave some slack which is under the knee of the hand a thumb's width.
and after that, in the roundness that the egg carries, then strike in the part that is under the skin of the hand, so that it breaks and bends, as we have said before.
Then bring moistened linen in oil, put it on wounds, and there apply the thread that we have said. And sometimes the white ones are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding out.
For this happens often and leave the thread until it falls off by itself; if it takes too long to fall, it should be burned with hot water, and apply what we have said above until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
Of a fleshy hernia
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone who dares to heal by iron.
And the ancients said that it is made in the same way as the remedy for the bladder, by tying the vessels after cutting them lightly under.
Then press it in the middle, and heal the abscess of those who are working on it, until the pus stops; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
At times there comes rupture in the anus, as we have said, and it opens the lews; and no internal organs should be removed from the anus, and if some are removed, it is a mistake, and repair it every hour.
And if it remains for too long in this place, the wound or syphac believes that internal organs are being expelled.
And this happens by the extension of the sifac, which is in the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then the joints are softened and opened.
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
And it is that the sick lies down on his back between your hands, then strike the swollen joint with the flat side of the hammer according to the size of three fingers.
And then extract the fat that is beneath the skin, then take the iron and place it on the apparent spot of the fat;
and press firmly on the belly, then cut two spots apparent on the surface of the fat above the head of the iron, and press both;
Then extract the head of the iron, and do not cover it with fat or extend the egg nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the removal of the intestines.
Then heal by wound treatment. And when you bind the threads, if it festers and heals the wound, as long as it is healed.
The blister is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the knees
Many times the skin of the knees becomes soft in some men, because the charms inside are made soft and there is pus visible; and it is necessary, when it is seen to be cured, that you make the patient lie on his back, and bind the softened skin over the natural skin; then gather the two lips together into a stitch, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin in four or six stitches firmly; then bind between the stitches, and let the cure be as for other wounds, until it is healed, and bind the thread.
The correction or punishment
The chastisement is mentioned in our law, and for that reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is when the sick person responds when asked about his ailment and its cure; and the other, because we often have need of chastisement of certain animals to help us, such as cattle, sheep, goats, and others. I therefore say that chastisement is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we perform by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its genitals are softened; then we grab it with our hand, keeping it until it is calm and no longer struggles. The chastisement by cutting: you should dye the animal, press the skin of the genitals with your left hand, then tie the restrainer, and strike each testicle with one blow when you have properly scorched them; and leave a small piece of flesh and the subtle flesh that is on the vas deferens; and this method of chastisement is more effective than the one done by attraction, because in the case of attraction, something may remain in the genitals, which the animal desires lustfully; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism is of two types in humans: one type is when there are two openings like the figure of a woman's nature with hair and sometimes urine flowing from it. The other type is found in women who have something on top resembling a penis and two openings. Treatment for both males and females involves cleaning and caring for the affected areas as with other wounds. In the second type, however, men whose urine jets through the skin of their two openings cannot be cured.
of the tension
de la tentigene
Of the dislocated joints
Of the dislocated joints:
Of hemorrhoids
1. Emorroydes are openings of veins that usually do not require treatment without cautery, and when emorroidal masses become old, they become hard; and as we have said in the division, their resemblance and signs were described, and I will say here those which respond to treatment. I say that emorroids and the hardened masses, when they are full inside the anus, cannot be felt, but can only be treated with iron. Those which are at the opening of the anus, can be felt, are those that can be treated.
the abscesses of the anus
In various ways, abscesses come in the anus, such as boils, pierced abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and other diseases that I have said before. Therefore, it is necessary for me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the anus, which is not the same as those that close with a bowel; and if you want to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its appearance, filled with heat and fever, and turns red if it can be seen. Do not hurry to pierce, but let it heal until the pain subsides; then make the patient sit on one seat, and provide two seats for him or her to lean against, support his back and spread his legs apart at the knees; and have his thighs open, place his arms beneath his thighs, and bind them well with a strong cord; then press the pus towards the right side of the body, and bring the instrument that opens the anus; the shape follows from here. It is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you pierce first to know the depth of the anus so that what enters does not go further than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the anus with cloths so that the instrument does not hurt. It must be placed above, and marked. When the abscess opens and becomes soft, it must be covered with a linen gauze, or with a green dry oil; and place the gauze over the opening and over the handle clean linen moistened in vinegar or boiled herbs such as long-roots or Aristolochia. Then apply ointment for two days following this procedure, until it is healed; sometimes the anus and the wound are lifted with oil and honey enema, and then with cooked vinegar or long-root herbs and Aristolochia; return to the ointment afterward. If the wound returns in the anus, it is necessary to be careful of iron, but treat it as we have said before.
Of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the figure of natural childbirth and the signs when you see the woman urging downward, desiring to smell the anus; then hasten the infant to be born; then know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it comes out with its head, and follows with the second one; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the infant is born quickly; for when it descends upon its head, it is followed by the other, and the husband sheds his waste through good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For at times, it comes above the feet, and the body or the shoulders, or the hands, or above the belly, or the backside, and is turned accidentally on its neck, and by other evil figures; it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these matters, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist.
If the infant comes out upon its head by natural childbirth, and the woman labors painfully, and her strength is weak, let her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the small spatula between her legs in the form shown: And cut open the second birth canal, and hit its fingernail to expel the afterbirth which is inside; and grab the woman's stomach until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must plaster her with musk-infused fenugreek oil; then make her grasp and vomit of contraction, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour; thus the child will be born now.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, you must push it upwards. and then turn it gradually, until it is even;
then take one piece and stretch it gradually.
If he is able to jump up to his knees, when commanded, and makes him vomit with discomfort; if it can be done, God willing.   Here the author suggests that a patient who is able to jump up to their knees when commanded, and then vomits from discomfort, may have a fracture in the lower part of the leg or thigh bone. The text does not elaborate on how this could be determined, but the idea is that these symptoms could potentially indicate the presence of a fracture.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it bit by bit until it is according to the natural shape. Then it will be easily.
If it does not come as we have said, take musk-mallow of high quality, oil of sage, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar. and spread it on the woman's nature (or body) outside this ointment,   --> and apply this ointment to the woman's body from the outside Then make him sit upright in acute agony until below the ribs.
And when it is softened beneath, make one myrrh cataplasm and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour; Then make him sit on a chair, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose shut, and lightly press his stomach because he is farting now. of the child's excrement over its knees When a child comes in this form, put the poultice on its hands little by little;
From the delivery of the child that comes forth with one hand wide. It is necessary to use a device for pulling back the hand: if it cannot be pulled back, make her get up and walk.   --> If the child cannot come out naturally, the woman should rise and walk.
If it cannot walk, lay it on a bed or a flat surface, and bend its legs.
then administer the musk-like substance as I have mentioned.
and if it does not give birth, lay it on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand. and help the child according to its natural shape, make it vomit, and command it to hold on until the afterbirth is expelled.
Of the birth of the child on its neck, and if it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. The servant should touch the baby's hand, then turn it gently and easily.
And when it is even, put some muscle-relaxant of alum and oil, as we have said, then command it to move gently.
And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair or seat, and command her to take hold of it; then make her vomit. in the same way, support her all the second time.
in the same way, support her all the second time. When it comes to be in this manner all the second time, if you press the second time with your nail, until the moisture is voided;
If the intestines push up against its place and on its neck, if you press from the bottom, so that it is not retained, and the intestine dies.
Then push the child inside as much as you have placed it correctly, and command the woman to take herself once:
of the issue of twins It is known that twins are born frequently and sometimes even four; and this is not strange and does not happen rarely. Two are strange things, and do not live unless called by name;
I know these, that they are multiply and desire the one who creates them, which is bound to the earth;
and sometimes they come out naturally like a child born, as we have said.
And if it [the dislocation] occurs with a loud noise, then follow the cure as we have said, and let the balm be subtle, and do quickly and lightly whatever it does. and do what is necessary for salvation. of many children.
of many children. Some are formed in marriage, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, up to fifteen, and all are fully formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one.
And it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, for similar things happen by chance. This is a command, so the translation would be: Do as required.
of a dead child.
When you cure a woman of a dead child or fetus, as I have said in the previous section, and it does not come forth naturally, and you are compelled to perform manual labor; It is necessary to know if the woman is of sound virtue, and not have any accident or fear of death.
The woman should be placed on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
The minister should pull on the woman's hair by two handfuls, or tie her to the bed so she is not subjected to the delivery of the child.
Then rub the husband's mouth with moist oil mixed with musk and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then anoint his hands with these oils and musks. Then push it gently into the socket, then hold one level or place where it pushes out the bones that are suitable for this purpose.
and take care if the tendons are not prepared that they do not stretch upwards on the head. if you push the bones into his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the wrist or near the sides,
and if the dislocation is on the limbs, push or press them to the midpoint of the ribs.
And it is necessary that you press the opening with your right hand, and place the flat surface between its two sides with your left hand, and push gently with all your hand, and pierce the opening in any one of the places that we have said, until it comes to the hollow thing.
then pierce it against another opening, or one that you have at hand, if necessary, so that the extraction is equal.
And then equalize it by moving from one side to the other, so that it may move out again; and the teeth should be clenched tightly to hold it in place, as shown in the figure.
And if part remains, oil the hinges of some of his fingers with oil and push them into that part, and pull on the other part.
And if no part remains, place this finger or higher up, and do so until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned by the pulling, then you must pull on a bandage until it is out.
Then the heel in the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and similarly you must do in the other hand and with both feet.
And if the child's hips are large and narrow in the birth canal, or if the head is pointed and assembled tightly, You must thrust the pointed spathulum between your teeth, and bend the handle and extract the juice. You shall grind it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
And in the same way, let the patient naturally expel it with great effort; And then draw out the bones with tweezers,
and if the shoulder joint jumps out and is held by force, it should be cut, as far as the moisture which is coming from within;
and if it cannot come out, strike it with hammers where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture goes away.
And if the child is on its feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is gentle.
And if it is in the belly or feet, you must pull it out with one swaddled cloth on top of your hand; and when the belly or feet have been corrected, it will come out.
And if the other members are set bone, and the head remains, If the pincers should enter the wife's deepest part, and draw it out to the mouth of the wife. Then put in one or two fingers, and pull forcefully;
and if the mouth of the sore is narrowed due to hot abscess that has come upon it, one should not work on it. then one must administer moist and fat substances. and he applies plasters, and soothes in warm, softening, and moistening ointments.
And if the inflammation is on the side (costeit), and you can equalize it, then administer what was said earlier for a live child.
And if they do not have power over it, tear it apart into pieces and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done that, bring forth what we have said in abscess poultices that come in the marriage-box.  (This line is referring to medicinal poultices used for treating abscesses)
And if bleeding comes forth, let it be stopped with sharp restriction, and bring forth other remedies. (This line is referring to stopping the bleeding with constricting force)
I saw a woman whose womb had been dead due to an infant being born, then another one was placed on top of it, and the death of the other was prevented.  (This line is referring to the survival of a second fetus after the first fetus died in the womb) After a long time, an abscess came into the armpit, and swelled until it opened, and began to suppurate greatly.
I was summoned for treatment, and for a long time, I could not heal the wound.   (Literal translation)
I applied a strong adhesive plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one did. I marveled greatly because the stomach has no bones.
If I think it is the bones of a dead child.
I probe and touch the wound, finding several bones until the woman is in better condition; and the woman recovers for a long time in this manner, and then improves slightly by herself;
And I have not heard of this chapter except that when the master finds an unknown thing, he knows how to treat it.
To bring the dislocated joint back to its place
Here comes the form of the pressor, by which books are weighed; and at two turns, the heads of the two links. Moreover, the horns should be more subtle than the restraint, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the barrel should be one foot wide, and the branches of the tree one foot long, and half a palm in depth; And between the two limbs should be two joints of the same bone, which are joined together firmly in one and the other, half a palm long or slightly more.
And this pair of joints is inserted into the mouth of the wound when turning the two horns (or bones).
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made from ebony or boxwood, similar to the shape of pliers. and say to the patient, as you see, two shoulders, two dislocations, of a palm's length, and two fingers' width.
and when you see opening the woman with all the instruments, make her sit on one bed, her feet hanging and legs open. then push the two dislocations together in the woman, and hold the handle of the instrument underneath her thighs. then open your hand on the instrument, just like you did with the pliers, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the woman, until the bail makes her do what she wants.
This instrument is covered and multiplied in their similarity; and when the mirrors have arranged them, the work becomes more urgent, and higher for humans due to their quantity.
Do not disperse the instrument unless you have arranged it, for its necessity cannot be excused.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must command the patient to hold her anus closed, and then make her vomit with cathartics, and hold her hands at the mouth and nose. And if it jumps due to this (cause), it is well (true).
If it does not jump due to this (cause), then take a small pot and make a poultice or covering, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the sore, such as calendula, rue, anise, camomile, chamomile, and centaury.
Cook all these herbs or some of them in water over the fire; then place one end of the cloth or poultice from the pot into the mouth of the sore.
And let the plaster remain until the vapors come within the marrow; then make it vomit, as we have said. Then immediately apply the second one. And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal as expected, command the maid to wet her left hand in oil of roses or musk of aloes, then put it on the affected area.
Then find the second one; and when you have found it, take it and stretch it out straight, so that the marrow does not stick during extraction. But it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled out; if it comes and dislocates again.
If the opening of the anus is stretched (or torn), we have said the treatment for evacuation and fumigation with herbs;
If it does not have all the things that we have said, make sure you do not pull on it;
But it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the womb, you tie him to the woman's thigh, then anoint and clisterize with four-recipe ointment.
If it will open and return, and comes foul; however, when it becomes bad smell at the stomach and head, it bites the sick one.
Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigation for this: no one has proved fumigation of dill and dried figs in the past.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
And is shaped like glass resembling a cane, with a thin neck in the middle, and wide openings over the fire;
And let the fumigation be on the coals and the taint until it is destroyed, and begin another one.
To pierce the foundation.
Many children are born who have not yet pierced the foundation, but it has been stopped up by some subtle syrup. Therefore, in the bathing, it is necessary to pierce that syrup at its proper place, and do not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful that it does not touch (the child).
Then place a moistened linen cloth in wine and oil, then heal it with ointment until it heals.
If you doubt that it will not reform, then put or pierce a plaster of lead, and let it remain for many hours, and remove it when the wound appears to heal in rooms.
And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess comes; it must be covered. If it is healed, it should be treated with the lead plaster as we have said.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are swellings, and those that come out of the foundation are discharges, or in the gap between two parts,   (This is a loose translation of the original text, but captures the main meaning.)
if there is a fistula or more than one; and when this swelling is old, it should be operated on, and then apply moisture to make it white or fine boils,    (This is a loose translation of the original text, but captures the main meaning.)
And sometimes these fistulas are chronic; and they are known by those who attend them that there is either discharge or wind when the patient passes wind, and in some cases, it gushes out suddenly.   (This is a loose translation of the original text, but captures the main meaning.)
And if it is fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; they reach up to the knee joint, and up to the navel of the cow.
And so one knows the fistula perforating at the bottom, and not piercing through it: and is that you push your index finger or bottom, and insert a thin needle of ivory or iron into the fistula when it has no twisting.
and if it has twisting, then insert a thin tube of lead, or horse hair, until you feel the tube or hair at your finger tip;
And if you do not sense it, neither will there come pus discharge nor wind nor worm, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce at all; hurry to cure it.
And when the fistula is open up to the bladder or up to the channel of urine, if it gushes out urine and cannot be sealed with medicines.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the knee, if the tendon comes out at its place:   \n If there is no twisting or the appearance of pain around it, then it is straight, and neither medicine nor salve will help it.
And in these Persian blisters, there is no cure other than work, and the futility of foolish doctors who meddle with it.
In those that are not Persian and are not ancient, in hopes of health through iron, as I have experienced,
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and bends his thighs towards his belly; Then insert a tent of pitch (or a splint if there is a curvature), as long as you know where the tendon comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must insert your index finger.
If it feels as if the tendon has been pierced; and uncovered where you feel between your finger the skin or flesh, then know that it is torn. If one does not work it at all, it cannot be healed.
One should always say that some can be well healed, but this is rare;
and the aid that one does, it is to heat the cautery delicately according to the width of the wound, as previously said.  ; And push everything hot into the fistula until it comes out from the base; and do this two or three times as you know that these charred things should be burned, which are similar to an eye-feather.
Then cure the wounds with moistened tents in butter until the charred parts have healed, then cure it with a healing ointment made of char and resin.
If it is in such a state, that is good. Otherwise, it cannot be healed.   (The following sentence seems to be incomplete or missing some context, but I will still translate what has been provided.)
And if it tries to enter, and does not pierce as far as the base which is the foundation, and between your finger and the tent you put a thick covering of flesh or hide, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering was placed; If the tip of the fistula begins to push forward against the tent, and then apply the cautery after, until it reaches the head of the tent.
The tent will be released and will break apart; then take out the fatty flesh that resembles a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
And if the limb goes away by itself, and breaks through [the skin], you shall cauterize it with fire or medicine.
The cautery of fire combines two good things: burning of charred wounds, and stopping the flow of blood and the removal of moisture.
Then treat wet tents with butter or crushed cheese until the wound is healed and the charred areas are burned in the cheese.
Then treat the wound with onions, hard charcoal, and dry medicines.
And when it is restored, it heals and does not return.
If a fistula comes up to the full depth of the foundation and is removed from the body, push your finger or foundation into it, and examine it.
If you feel the tendon, and enter between two layers of fabric or leather or charcoal, where it is close to piercing, there should not be any obstruction except a way of faith and hope through one of the three methods:
Or you cauterize it as we have said, or strike it to the bottom, or if you can, set traction and treat it as before;
And don't go too deep that you hit the holding element keeping the base, and let the swelling come out through its own will. Then heal it, as we have said.
Then heal it, as we have said. By chance, if it is purulent, remove that covering and clean it as soon as it is cut off at the base, either by force or by some other instrument pointed. then boil the charcoal that is in the wound, as much as you can.
Then study to heal the wound and keep the fistula in the part away from the base; it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes the fistula is of this type: and it is when you bite into the fistula, and it is on one side of the base beneath the skin above. If a tent made of pierced leather is taken on the head according to this form: And insert one twisted thread into two, and push the tent with the whole length of the thread through the fistula as far as it reaches on the head.
If it is pierced at the edge of the base within, then draw out the thread of that one, so that you push your finger or base.
Pull the head of the thread and bring the two heads together, and bind one to the other, and leave it for one day or two;
And hold it without movement until the threads catch the charms that are between them, and burst.
then heal the wound as long as it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not burst on its own, make it burst in all possible ways, unless it is too deep.
For it should not be covered with a plaster if it is too deep, and then heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of a spur-like splinter from which a fistula is made is very sharp at one end and pointed; and from the other side not, for that reason you should not strike where you should not strike, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are within the foundation, like a drop of resin, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood, And if there is one or more [dislocations], and they are dislodged from the foundation and the head of the foundation; however, those that are dislodged have little moisture,
and there is always some citron juice or a little blood, and they have the color of the body.
and the treatment for those who have them within the foundation is that you command the patient to strain in order to urinate in chambers, until the foundation settles, and this appears in the sons. If you are in a hurry, hold it with pliers or grip it with your nail, then strike its roots.
and if the pliers cannot hold it due to moisture, take a cloth or cotton, or a piece of leather; and stretch them apart with your hands, then break and sprinkle some hot powders in their place as if for cautery. Or you cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot come out, then clisterize the patient with biting and sharp clisteria to clean that which is the foundation, so it can come out openly.
But if the patient is prepared and the thread is forced out from the foundation, then the treatment is easy. And you should take them by your nail or tweezers, strike them, and then heal them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
The stitching should be carried out in this manner: take one twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is wide, form a knot with the thread, then tie the knot, draw out the needle, and do this for all of them, leaving one to let excess blood flow.
Then place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or balm on the foundation (or base), and place it on the affected area, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave it until it bleeds, and when it stops bleeding, treat the wound with ointment and other treatments, until it heals.
the drying of the wounds or foundation Often the drying of wounds occurs in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps.
It is necessary that you pierce with a splint or your nail the bark above, so it does not become moist. then heal it until it is dry as needed;
and if it cannot dry, repeat the shaving more strongly than before, until it heals and is barked. then let it heal completely.
great trembling A louse is a small burrowing parasite on the body, and it goes very deep.
And sometimes the trout (louse) freezes, and it is felt as if one were dying from trembling, and it affects the entire body, but more in the hands than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a cane made of goose feathers or a strong bird’s quill and put it on the trembling, until the purple circles surround the trembling completely; Then turn your hand along the entire chain until you grasp everything around the limb, and place it in full, and pull the limb from its roots.
And if you wish, do this with a chain made of iron or steel according to this form, and be careful beneath and pull above.
Do not pierce (it), to keep the tooth in place, and press it. And if you wish, cauterize the limb as described in the chapter on cauterization.
of the shape of a clyster At times, they make a silver or arsenic enema, or molten lead or mercury, and at times they make such small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Therefore, when it is used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, they are small.
The form of the enema, whether it is large or small, should be above wide, or the belly should be bound in this manner:
And it has an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head pierced from one side by two wounds, and on the other one.
And put medicine into the opening of the belly with a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it all around with small wounds.
And have one space between each wound, then fill in these wounds with strong thread of twisted thread in 10 or so (number) around, and sew up the belly like a goat's pouch. And when the medicine is within, if it is tied to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then apply a plaster; and this is the shape of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and smear the head with a plaster of oil or egg yolk, or similar, then place it gently.
then the ministers should press it with their two hands together until it is completely visible, then remove the plaster, and have the patient lift his legs to the open air.
if the medicine appears, squeeze it as much as possible; and if it persists for an entire night, it is more helpful.
And if you cauterize it in case of disease of the intestines, and the medicine hastens to heal, keep applying it until it is healed.
If the hemorrhoids are ulcerated or abscessed, then use as subtle a cautery as for an infant.
This is the form of a subtle cautery where the skin is stretched:
wounds
We have said in the division [section] the treatment of wounds; now we shall tell you the treatment for hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and from how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the thrust of a spear, cut by sword and knife, or lance or club or arrow, or similar things.
What is done according to the body's laws, such as wounds that fall on the neck, or the head, or the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will start with the simple wounds of the head, for the remembrance will come in its chapter.
When there is a simple wound on the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it comes from an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large. And you doubt the opening of an abscess warmly: if it heals quickly from the head itself, even if blood comes from the wound, and healing is contrary to the injured part;
And you fumigate the patient full of wine and heavy foods.
If it does not heal, reduce his food, and let him drink no wine, nor eat flesh;
And place [something] over the wound, if an abscess comes up, put only cotton wool soaked in rose oil or in stiptic wine.
And if there is no abscess, place [something] over the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and not moving due to air or powder, I will say a little more about this later.
And if the wound is moving (infected), place some salves on it until it heals.
And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and cannot be closed with stitches, join them by sewing, as I will explain for abdominal wounds.
If the wound is exposed of the bone, and gaping, and does not hold but only a little, close it; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. Also instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as cooked heads and wheat, also as peas and similar things.
And if you find or cook meat putrefaction, and it is not to the bone, then cut off all of the putrid meat, throw away the pus, then heal.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, from which it cannot be stopped without cauterizing, then you must tie the artery if you find it dislocated with a thread. And if that does not help, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; it is that you put this powder on it so that the arrows have stuck.
And the method of the powder is: take one part of incense, two parts of dragon's blood, four parts of quicklime, and pulverize it finely.  --> And the method for making the powder is to take one part of incense, mix in two parts of dragon's blood, and four parts of quicklime, then grind it into a fine powder. And apply the wound, and hold it open, until it dries well and joins completely with all its blood.
And then bind it up well, and let it heal by itself, if it does not swell; for medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And sometimes they do this with just boiling water, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has not yet opened.
And if the fire has already caused the wound to open, by all means do not apply this powder;
But place some digested onions or peas made from barley flour boiled and honey over it until it boils. Then heal with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine tweezers.
And I will tell you below about skull fractures.
Of the collar wound
If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, without a difference between it and the one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it's the nerve, there is no other remedy than to let it heal and not to put anything binding, for it harms the nerves and makes them shrink. And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But the medicine should be boiled, as salt washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and also boiled again in sweet water. And other stones of similar kind according to this method, and always moistened.
And if the wound is large, tie it up with strips, then treat it until it heals.
If the wounds are deep and pus-filled, pierce or make a cut lower down;    --> "If the wounds are deep and full of pus, pierce or make a cut lower down;"
And if the arteries are cut, bleeding comes forth, then tie it off, and lance it, and cauterization is needed.
And if the spine of the throat is cut or the windpipe severed, and the air passage is preserved, so that the meat goes to the lungs. If the windpipe is cut above the throat and not touched, but it is replaced according to its natural shape. Then wait for healing, and let it rest for some days, then heal it with infusions of boiling herbs until it is healed.
And if the wound presses against the bone, bind it. If there are bone fragments, pull them all out if you can, and those that you cannot remove, leave until the wound heals. Make the exit incision straight and aligned.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I have mentioned earlier. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I said in its chapter.
Of a wound from a lance or knife   (This line suggests that the text is discussing treatments for wounds inflicted by weapons.)
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, look carefully to see if air bubbles are coming out of the wound; because then the wound is deadly.
and if it is not deep, but it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it immediately, nor tie it up so that the blood does not coagulate prematurely. And it returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but apply an attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you have no ointment, place in the wound old cotton to draw out moisture,   and when the moisture is drawn out, leve les plaies ou il a estatz desespeses et desloiez, si com nos avons esproveit;
Make the patient sleep over the wound for 3 days or 4, or more. If no spasm, no bad trembling of heart nor drawing of bowstring occurs. and when you see the good alignment, know that the wound is healed. Treat the illness and other treatments, as long as he is healthy;
And if it cannot heal, and an ulcer appears, immediately make sure there is a fistula; treat it as appropriate.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple (meaning not deep), or worse, or at the back, treat what is in front of it;
If the wound is large, sew it; if it is small, use powder; and if it has penetrated the bone and fractured pieces, treat the wound and draw out the fragments if they are dislocated. And if [the hairs] are not shaved, let [the wound] fester, align [the incisions].
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgements are as we have said.
The rupture of the abdomen
Ruptures of the abdomen can be large, medium, and small.
From a large wound, the intestines occasionally protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, due to this, the insertion follows.
and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one.
because one should put them in more carefully, if not from end to end. because the intestines expand quickly when they feel the cold, so they should be put back in more carefully.
And therefore, it is more important to treat the head injury, because you must move the intestines back into place for this one, rather than for the other two.
Know that the abdominal wound has four types:
The first two are common in the belly wound,
And the belly wounds have common wounds of the body, and there are two more specific types for other wounds:
And all of them are more appropriate with the suture on the stomach; I will explain one and declare it.
When the wound is small, and there is nothing from the intestines protruding out, And there are two ways to treat it: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or a piece of linen cloth in cold water only, boil it with squill and cypress and spikewood. and remove the intestines until the inflammation subsides;
and sometimes you will make this wine restraining, and it should be matured until it becomes sour to dissolve.
And when you see swelling parting, if you moisten the intestines with cold or hot and bad food, for this closes the entrance to nearly nothing.
if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with the instrument used for coping with piles.
And the first treatment is cutting (the wound). We should not cut it with great necessity unless necessary.
and this is the instrument for cutting it:
Cut through it in the hollow and do not deviate, observe its shape.
And when the wound is widened, and the intestines leap out, place it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you have the ability, for it is worthwhile.
When the wound is wide and it is in the abdominal area, It is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back. and raise their legs higher than their head. and if it is in the lower abdomen part,
and similarly if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if he directs his intention to where the broken part should be higher than the other;
and in this way, it is necessary to apply what I say in large and small wounds.
Apply small wounds with what you have prepared.
then hold in your hands the emollient ointment that stains the entire wound with your hand. and apply pressure with lips. and this is the common method of suturing wounds,
and this is the common method of suturing wounds, And take an awl or more, according to the size of the wound's width. Leave from the top of the wound, i.e., two fingers' space, and insert an awl with one thread of strong wire. Pierce the two shoulders with the two chies (a thin, pointed instrument) of the seifac (a leather-working tool or awl).
then pull on a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two chiefs of the wound facing each other,
and leave one distance, and insert another needle; Then tie the thread like you did the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to what you need with the needles. until all the wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium, between fine and thick. Fine needles pierce through the entire flesh, and the large ones cannot enter well: because they should be medium-sized.
and needles should not be pushed too deeply into the flesh and skin,
so as not to open and wound the flesh before the seam.
And then cover the heads of the needles, so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and tie threads or cloths to the heads of the needles in order to hold them. leave it until the wound is healed;
and this stitching method with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For it pierces an awl or two.
The second stitch is common, and you assemble the two shoulders of leather and the two shoulders of sinew together with a needle that has one strong, thick thread; and when you have pierced all four together,
and when you have pierced all four together, If you reinsert the needle at the part where you began, in the manner as they customarily do with threads;
and place a space between each stitch of the thickness of a hen's eggshell;
this stitching holds the man,
and I sew a wound that a man had or belly,
who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and it exposed the intestines about two palms wide,
and the wound was within the belly. I returned the intestine as it had been twenty-four hours before.
and the wound was sewn up until fifteen days, and it healed, and it became healthy.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not heal him with any treatment, because I was in one place where there was none, nor any medicine; And place old cotton above the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it heals.
I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle and push it from the outer part to within.
When it has pierced the flesh straight through, place the knot or stitch where you put the needle,
And pierce through from the inside part until it protrudes on the other side.
and understand this stitching that you sew in the same way as a tailor makes fur. and leave the seam allowance once on one side, then fold it back on the other, until the stitching is complete.
The second method of stitching that Galen calls
If one joins together, as naturally do, the two parts. and applies one head of the knife to another head in this manner:
inserts an awl or a head of a mirror-like instrument into that place only. and leaves the two heads of the knife. Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part to that within. As two shoulder blades.
Then pierce one and the other from the outer part to that within, in two other shoulder blades that are opposite each other on the same side.
and this is the common way of stitching (or suturing) and the most common method.
Galen said this word, and no one testifies otherwise.
you should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread in it.
and one needle should be pushed from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew shoes.
know that when the wound is in the belly, The stitching is more severe than other places on the abdomen.
The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds:
and it is that when you touch the fresh wound with all its blood, in the same way as the herbs have moved it, if you return the intestines and the coil; then place the powder of inciting charcoal on top.
if you return the intestines and the coil; then place the powder of inciting charcoal on top. And if the arm has moved [it], place any available ointment on it until the wound heals; and sew the thread, and bind the sutures, and apply the mummy [linen bandage]. then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, place old cotton on it as soon as it begins to heal. And move it twice a day while it is healthy.
For you do not need any other medicine in various situations where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound spreads to the principal members, you should moisten light linen in warm oil or rose oil, And place it among the thighs, and beneath the buttocks;
if there is pain or rottenness in the belly, and this happens many times, if the clysterization of black wine is too hot, and especially if the rottenness reaches the intestines;
And pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it perforates. and it is because of the inflammation of the veins present there, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the close proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the worm jumps out of the wound, place it back in the same manner as the intestine while it is still fresh.
And if it is old and turned or black, then you must cauterize the black area where blood does not flow. For there are veins and arteries.
Then, cut through the ligament (tendon or band of tissue that connects bones to each other). Then hang the two shoulders below the wound area to align the extraction as the flesh falls, and press on the wound to keep it open.
Of the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men,
because I saw that a man was pierced through the abdomen by a spear;
And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and in it there was discharge and windiness.
I treated it according to what I knew, and did not stop applying treatment until it healed and the wound closed.
And when I saw the wound closing, I feared that the patient might have pain in his abdomen; And there was no illness, but it remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
And some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: Take large thistles, then bring together the lips of the wound. and when the thistles have opened their mouth, put it on the two lips.
then put another plaster after in that manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered;
and dress the wound. If the head becomes inflamed in the intestines, it brings no harm to the patient.
and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal.
in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread and make it very small. And then tie the end of this thread (thread made of flax or linen yarn) to the head Thread the needle with the thread, sew the intestines and tie it at the wound site.
This method of suturing wounds is not beyond faith and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no tool nor health, but only skill.
of a fistula or when it is All wounds or abscesses that grow are universally called "fistula", and likewise when it is healed and burst open again.
And a fistula, according to the truth, is a hard and white swelling where there is no pain, And it is as hollow as a feather of a bird;
sometimes clear jump bowed, and other times thick; Sometimes thin, and other times quite;
And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, This is not other than by one of the 8 causes:
to wit, by the smallness of blood or body; or by his ill-humor; or because there is hard flesh within it, and above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow. There is too much swelling there. The joint is dislocated, and the matter is of bad quality. The medicine is not good in this treatment. because corruption is a manner of pestilence. For in the region [or area] it is slow the digestion, and slow the health, and it swells by nature. there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicines in the division.
Now I will tell you the cure for fistula that is made by handwork.
Note that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves. or in the stomach, or intestines, or bladder, or one of the ribs. or in the spine of the back, or any joint in the hands or feet.
And all these fistulas are of great healing difficulty, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance in them.
and if there is any fistula that does not reach to the level I have mentioned, and you are confident in its cure, and you recognize it (the fistula), if you take a probe of iron or copper, if the fistula is straight, then pierce it.
And if the fistula is bent, search for it with a subtle probe of wood. because the probe bends due to the curvature;
and if the fistula has been crushed and you cannot search for it with probes. cleanse the fistula with one of the crushed parts.
For moisture is cut from one place to another, and it is purified.
then you should cautiously search for bones or nerves, and if it is completely closed,
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press your hand there, and where the pain is located.
And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have said, if the head follows as I have said,
or in any of the places that I have said, if the head follows as I have said, and cut open the falsehood and rotten cartilage that is inside. and then heal it until it is healed,
And if the fistula is properly opened in a straight direction, you must cut it through completely, as much as you can. then you place moistened tents filled with healing medicine inside the fistula and push them up to its head.
then you place moistened tents filled with healing medicine inside the fistula and push them up to its head. until the medicine corrodes the excess matter that remains at its bottom.
And then apply soothing ointments on clean wounds until they heal;
And if they do not heal by this means, cauterize them as we have said;
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, crush it. If veins or nerves are not affected or the principal members (limbs), as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, let it remain until all the corruption is removed. then heal the adjacent flesh as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, it should be made to swell as before. know that you are not yet at the fountain:
If you uncover (or explore) and remain as deep as possible, and remove all corruption, then restore its place;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; If there is no other remedy but rest to nature.
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it with the pliers, if the extraction is possible with one instrument,
And if there are many bones, take them all out, leave none of them.
if the moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, if it is soft, moist, and full of flesh, free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something stinking on the wound to encourage pus. and let it be purged around the bones,
and then the bones will be more easily removed;
And if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, then press the corruption only until the blackness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of corruption that reaches down to the bone; If it needs to be cut (or cauterized) and covered completely up until corruption, then heal it until it is healed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg. so that you may take example and aid in your work.
It was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body.
As long as substances came to the leg, and it swelled from a large abscess, without a reason for opening.
but the people, by their foolishness, opened it so much that the abscesses burst open. and they corrupted a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and many pustules appeared that all collapsed and were wet with moisture in the body.
and many people applied treatment for two years without any knowledge of healing in medicine.
as long as I was called upon him, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and ran through the wounds with great speed. and the young man's chest became red, and had a yellowish complexion.
I pitched a tent in one of the wounds, then searched for all the wounds,
And I found that the veins come opposite each other from all parts of the leg.
Then I hurried and made an incision in one of the wounds as far as I discovered a part of the bone, And I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone within.
I appeared to be the bone corrupted, and I thought that there was no other corruption except for what I left.
And began to heal the wound with saline solution for a long time, but could not suture.
Then I continued, and exposed the bone as before,
And found the continuous corruption in the bone, and I removed it, then I tried to suture the place;
but I cannot [do it] until I surround [the area] with a palm of the bone, and pull [it out] completely from its socket. then I will restore it with medicine; and it was quickly healed and solidified.
and it no longer needs to be operated on except for the weakness of the patient, who could not withstand. and because of the fear of death I had for him. For due to evacuation it often bleeds profusely, but it was entirely healed.
For due to evacuation it often bleeds profusely, but it was entirely healed. and a hard cyst grew in the location of the bone, and it was well-placed and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither in appearance nor in coming.
stretch the head so you pull the corrupt flesh downwards, expose the flesh in the place where it should be, so that the flesh does not cut the skin. And place [something like] a splint or a board underneath the bone to cover the corrupt flesh. It must be such that it can be seen and felt the corruption, and should also be checked again.
And if the bone is corrupt but does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, If you uncover all the flesh; then place [something like] a splint under it,
And when the corruption spans from one part to another, and if the length of the corruption is a finger's breadth or more as we have said;
and if the corruption is in a joint, then cut the corrupt joint and remove the bone from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it has no other remedy but to cut;
and if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or foot, it is a very difficult matter, But in any case, it is necessary for you to investigate that corrosion, how it opens up; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve harm you;
and know that the saw and the files for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and smallness, and their size and hardness; And because of this, it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each kind of work.
And know that the work will show you the instrument that you need, according to knowledge in this craft. and the testimonies of the ways of diseases. if you think about the instrument that is needed according to what is required.
Hot iron The shoulder may dislocate from within or from outside.
and when you have given this remedy, the corrosion by the cure of the medicines will not help. if it is necessary to cover that limb up to where the corrosion occurs, If the patient suffers from death by this means (cause), or by greater evil (malice), which is lack of a member.
If the patient suffers from death by this means (cause), or by greater evil (malice), which is lack of a member. And the signs are that the limb becomes black as if it were burned by fire. and afterwards the blackness spreads, then there follows the corrosion of member upon member. and it takes hold of all the body; if you hurry to cover,
And if it is caused by the strike of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar.
If the corruption is in the neck of the toe, strike it but do not allow it to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, strike at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, strike at the edge; and if it passes the edge, that is death. And no remedy of foreign substance is useful except for its quantity of power.
And thus do as when the corruption comes or falls: if it comes at the first joint, then apply the remedy after the next joint.
and if it falls down, cover the entire area with it. and if it rises in the leg, cover at the knee joint.
And if it comes upon the knee, there is no other remedy for the patient but to let him die.
and the method of treating or healing a limb is that you bind it above and below, extend a minister one of the lower bands, and another minister the upper band, and you draw out the flesh that is between the two bands, about one thumb-width wide, until the bone is exposed;
Then place or sew (the incision) with linen cloth on each side, so that the raw skin does not touch the healthy area. And another wound and abscess come to the patient.
And when bleeding comes during surgery, cauterize the area immediately. or you place some constricting powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed,
Then bind the limb with a secure bandage and heal it until it is healed;
And I will tell you what happened to a certain man in my town:
There came upon him a blackness resembling burnt by fire,
and that corruption first came upon his foot, until it took all of his foot;
And when the wound sees corruption, he pierces it with a copper lance and makes it heal.
Long afterwards, corruption or decay came back to the wound or hand, and it came to me.
and I placed things that would stop the decay after the cleansing of the body, but the corruption could not cease.
and he asked me to amputate his hand, and I did not want to, as I had hope of stopping the matter. And he doubts that if I cut his hand, he will not die. because the virtue of the man was weak; and he gave up all hope, and returned to his earth. and struck his hand with a sword, and was healed;
and I do not know this story except for the fact that they do it differently if necessary.
An abscess sometimes comes to a charnut place, and stays for so long that it causes a large swelling of the bowel. Then bursts and pierces it, and makes the belly jump, and keeps the place open like a wound of a soldier. And the skin that is above is as thin as one layer of unbleached linen cloth. And they shall not penetrate to the bone or to the nerve, and such illness is called "healthy."
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in full, it is called "fistula";
and the cure is that you sew up the skin all around, and also when it is thin, just as a linen cloth. And it does not heal by its corruption.
If you have faith that the skin heals, and the corruption is not complete, and if the skin is thick with fat, you should treat it with enemas like this:
Look if the breasts are large, and the boil that is in it smells foul. Then, apply the Egyptian ointment medication that is made as follows: Take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, put them to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take from these [things] according to your need, and make it [the mixture] into vinegar and honey. and anoint the breast, and press the sore; leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by pulling;
do this several times until the breast is purified and the pus is removed.
And at times it is clisterized with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take vine ash and pour water on it,
Then cover it and let it be clisterized until you know that the wound is well healed;
if the patient cannot tolerate it, or the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes do not help, If the suppository is of water and honey, or it has a little crushed litharge; or you make the suppository of honey and sweet wine, where the honey has the properties of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound heal.
And when you have done this, and you have faith that the breasts are well cleaned, if the clustering of those who make it produce heat in them,
and you take a poultice made with linseed meal and oil and vinegar; or you clustered them with certain medicines and ointments, as I have said in the treatment of wounds;
And if the boil on the breast is small and the probe of the cupping glass cannot enter, with a small iron [tool] about a span long, and put an Egyptian plaster bandage on it, and apply basilicon poultice when it is well spread out;
And if the wound is too wide, let it contract and leave just enough space for a finger or a cloth to enter.
If the ulcer that is boiling over is above, strike it or press it down below where it is. For when the sore is deep, do not let flesh grow in it; and if you cannot cover the chest beneath as you wish, If the shoulder bone aligns so that it moves to its lowest point.
and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you see fit, If the shoulder bone aligns so that it moves slightly downwards, and do not leave anything from the bone. And take consolidative medicines to put on the breast,
and place a linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then apply force to the wound on the breast, which is slightly larger than the first one, then anoint another cloth accordingly with the size of the wound, And place it on the pierced chest to align the bone, and do not remove the large bandage except after several days once.
and he who is on the pierced chest, frequently removes it in order to remove the bone. know what runs from the bone, whether it is poison or blood or digested or undigested.
take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not.
And when your medicine is spread out in such a manner and you see the nature leap above the breast bone, know that the breasts have been pierced already, and approach the healing.
then undress him in the morning or midday, and when you unbind the wound, change one other bandage and renew the dressing.
And if the breasts sag due to indigestion after many days, know that they will not correct themselves. And if subtle poisonous worms come after a long time, do not despair of health,
for health approaches. For there are men who have delayed healing in their wounds and those who do the opposite;
and if the breasts sag due to indigestion after many days, know that they will not correct themselves;
And if the breasts are delayed in swelling, and they become hardened, apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in effect. As an ointment defined, for there is great part of vitriol, and it is the last remedy;
Take the defined ointment, and make it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine in substance.
Then cook it and use; and this very same thing cooked and fattened works better. When dew is absent,
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey when it is over the fire; and then wrap one piece of cloth around it, and place it on the breast, and at times administer an aristolochia root as a long-term medication, And roots of this celestial plant, which is also like flour of vetch and centory.
And roots of this celestial plant, which is also like flour of vetch and centory. and in the use of simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it. and if the patient is unwell, and this cure does not help him,
and if the patient is unwell, and this cure does not help him, Therefore, understand that corruption enters the joints and affects the bones or hard members, or ligaments. If the treatment of a fistula (a tract or passage especially between two organs), as we have said before.
of an abscess at the nail
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger, or the foot, or by chance it arises in other toes;
and when it becomes inflamed, and no attention is paid to it, a single abscess grows; and carve and grind bone until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may grind the entire thing;
And comes the corruption up to the bone, until pain smelling comes, and the shoulders are wide apart, and the color turns pale.
When you treat it as we have said in the section above, but the treatment does not help at all, If that does not help, then you must cut off any excessive growth from the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact;
and if the nail presses against the flesh afterwards, and begins to swell, and suppurate, you must put the heated iron under the nail so as not to burn the flesh, And push upwards, and gently and lightly strike the flesh. and place on top of the remaining flesh, the remnant of the medicine that is burning and corrosive to remove everything.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw it out, as the more the bone is corrupted, the less likely it can heal.
And if you see the two parts broken, strike them together with a piece of bone as previously mentioned, then heal it until it is sound;
and if it is wounded, and swollen, and causes great pain, then it must be drained first; then cut the tendon with a sharp scalpel across from above,
And beware that the incision does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
If it happens, place something on top to soothe it.
You should straighten the fingers that are born in some men's hands by chance, which are all fleshly. And sometimes there is bone or nail involved, and occasionally a fingernail.
Also, sometimes they grow in the root of the joint or in some of the fingers' nails. The one that grows in any nail of the finger does not move, The one that grows at the joint of the finger may or may not move.
The girth of one who is fatty is light, in such a manner: the girth at its root with a wide spatula.
One who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: keep yourself covered.
In one who is born or should be in the groin area, you must first cover the char roundly up to the bone, Then bind the bone with an appropriate silk, then heal it until it is healed.
Simultaneously, swelling in the joints comes from birth, or from injury of the wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
It is necessary that you bind that swelling so that it can heal according to its natural forms. Then place between two wet linen or cloths soaked in rose oil so that they do not stick together; And you put between two thin wooden pieces, until the joints are soldered, as it should be.
If one of its two (joints) comes with the palm, then strike that weld as necessary.
Poor ones
These are large veins enveloped with mucus and filled with melancholic substances that come in many members of the body.
And it often happens with legs of those who walk and work and carry, more than with others.
Therefore, you should sometimes administer purge of bile, and then heal the basilica (abdomen).
The iron cure is in two ways: one is to strike them and draw out black blood. The third way is that you tie the vein and draw all the blood out.
The length is as follows: first, raise the leg with hot strong water until the large vein becomes subtle. then pull the patient's leg from above the calf to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, of a large size,
then separate and draw the black blood from the vein to your hand, from one end to the other, as much vein as the illness can bear.
And then tie it up, and instruct him to bind himself with black sausage meat.
And repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, it benefits the patient.
The elevation is done in this way: lift the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it. Then put him in water, and raise the leg of the patient with warm water until it becomes swollen and the veins fill up.
And if there is no swelling, heat it with fire, and then strike in the direction of the vein along the long part of the thigh or in the part beneath the ankle;
Then open the skin with an awl and strip the vein from both sides, as far as it appears when you feel it;
It will appear red and black, and when it enters the skin, it resembles a white cord;
Then push the bone back in place, as long as it is swollen with skin, and then bend it gently at the angle.
Then strike the bone in another place three fingers away; then cut the skin over the vein as far as it appears. Then tie the bone again, as you have done, and bend it to another angle, as you did before.
Then strike another shape, or more if needed, then tie it, and bend it to the second knuckle of the finger.
Then draw and drain up to the second rib; then remove it rib by rib until it protrudes entirely, then break it.
and if you cannot draw and drain, push an awl with a very strong double thread through it. and draw it out, then push under one rib, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it protrudes. and be careful that it does not break, because if it breaks, you cannot draw or lift it out, and it harms the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, place wool soaked in vinegar and oil on the wound site; keep treating it until it heals.
If the wound is contracted, twisted, and rolled together all at once, and it's not straight as we have said, If it needs to be cut, it should be cut twisted but not covered; follow what we have said before.
If it needs to be cut, it should be cut twisted but not covered; follow what we have said before. The form of iron used to strike the vein is curved, but does not cut, it should not pierce the vein.
and is large in curve, for if it is fine, it would pierce the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein.
This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where no grass or trees grow and on dry ground.
And sometimes it arises elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of corruption that comes beneath the skin,
as snakes come within the body, worms attack between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, Then the vein changes its course, and the flow of blood begins to exit, just like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is dislocated open, you should wrap around it a piece of wood from 1 to 1 and a half feet long, and sew it.
leave the wood in place at the leg, and every time it slips out of joint, re-wrap around the wood and sew. if it is too long, cut off a part of it and re-wrap the remaining, but do not cover its root until it has all come out. because if you cut off [the wood], it goes back into the flesh and causes an abscess or inflammation and bad illness.
For that thing it is necessary that it should be treated little by little until the head, and no remainder should remain in the body.
And sometimes this vein when it is treated is five fingers long or ten, And one man came to me, from which it was ten fingers long, and when you cut it, it gushes out a pint or more, and pierces through to the bottom,
So that everything inside it empties out; and let the matter within be voided, and for three days bring in medicines that promote healing to the place, then treat it as an abscess would be treated.
And sometimes at this vein many hands are used, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or hand. and a great deal of bleeding occurs, and it jumps out; treat it then as we have said before.
Worms that are born between the skin and flesh
This disease is called on our land "cattle disease," because it often happens to cows.
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, which moves throughout the body expanding and contracting. and it feels pain in one limb after another, until it pierces through the skin where it is going, and jumps out.
And it is infected by corruption of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, lice and roundworms or the belly;
And one doubts its nature, because when it goes through the body, and reaches the head, and comes to the eye; sometimes enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you want to treat it and draw it out, one cannot avoid it but when it goes away:
Therefore, you must tie the joint above and below with a strong cord tightly.
then pull on it upwards and straighten it out fully in the flesh, and do not twist it. If you burn with fire above, let it die.
And the greatest harm it does is to run oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the oil, hold under it the bellows shaped object, then strike above and pull it off;
it is necessary to use the patient with purification of the body with dissolving medicines for bad humors to pass.
and let the patient eat boiled meat without seasonings or sauces.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and it moves from limb to limb; and I saw what I will tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and when I examined her arm, I saw a small swelling in the armpit.
And, as if a worm, the eyes should rise to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as living silver when it cuts from one to another.
the pain is divided from that place and pierces in the shoulder,
and then a little after it runs through the whole body, until it came to the other arm.
Then she turned back again around the body, as I saw.
I wondered greatly how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a way. Nevertheless, I had seen many cases where pain moves from one place to another, but I had never seen this before, as I saw in the woman;
And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins uncovered. and for this reason that condition appears constricted.
but it does not appear in accordance with this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins closed.
And when you wish to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, If the ligament above and below is tightly stretched, then press on top until the swelling returns to its place. and cauterize the joint; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if you treat those who swell up with drugs such as fetid pills and serapin pills, and similar ones.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the places in the body where they strike.
The diversity among them is that some have large points, small, sharp and blunt ones. and those with two points, those with tongues, and those with splinters. and a dislocation of any member occurs in two ways: either in the principal member, which is the head.
or in the member that includes the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it occurs in any location of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear: It is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many cases. and if this ill sign does not appear at all, and the arrow is not fully in, pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when an arrow pierces the bone and exits above it, It is concerning cataract, stone, and gravel in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it may lack force from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and jumps from the wound white matter similar to pus, and also as bruise of flesh;
and if this sign appears, take care of the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not within.
The sign of an arrow when it strikes or pierces is that it is close to the left breast, and it feels like it has been driven into a hard object, not empty. Furthermore, the arrow may become quiet like hair and produce black blood, and bring coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: Therefore, it is clear that death is at hand.
The sign of an arrow that penetrates the flesh deeply is when there is no scum discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, breathes heavily and seeks a warm place.
And if the arrow falls into the cover of the mattress, it should be removed through the small openings; and you must release great pain and great suffering and groans; and all the members of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance, something of indigestible meat may jump out from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly or abdomen, and does not jump out through the intestinal route, there is no hope in the cure nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
The other members, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and loin and hips and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it does not move, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason that you do the following:
It happened to one man that an arrow or splinter lodged in the root of his nose: I tried to extract it from below the fat of the ear, and found no sense (meaning nothing but pus).
And extracted with play a splinter that lodged in the fat of the eye beneath the paper. and the splinter was turned, but could not reach the tip towards out (meaning it had curved back upon itself). And the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, and it could easily pierce ears; the wound was clean, and no bad accident happened to it.
And pierced an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow had ears (like a crossbow bolt):
I was the barber, and made it thin enough that I pierced it, and the Christian was unharmed.
And pierced an arrow through one man, who was either head or belly, and I thought he would die;
And since it has passed more than thirty days, its position does not change; I cut across the arrowhead, trapped it, and pulled it out without any adverse effects.
And if you want to wound one man with an arrow who is on his back, and the wound has been sewn up;
And the arrow remained inside, and it did not cause any change to its natural position, It finds no harm in any of its natural works.
And another man, who had an arrow shot into his body, and the wound was stitched up;
and endured like that without suffering great pain; and many similar things happened.
And through an arrow struck one of the prince's men who had fallen into the ditch, And it was slightly sloping to the right side; and the arrowhead was fully lodged.
I was summoned to treat her after she had fallen for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I felt it all with a thin probe, and did not feel it at all; and it felt tender and pain beneath her right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrowhead
I placed the attractive and digestive plaster on the affected joint, as the joints should not swell. and it appeared to be from the arrowhead.
and it appeared to be from the arrowhead. I applied the plaster for many hours, and directly healed the wound, and the patient stayed well for a long time,
As long as he feels the arrowhead inside his neck for a day; then he tells you [about it]. I apply the wound with corrosive medication by hand for several days until it is cured.
and I try, and feel the tip of the arrowhead sticking to the place; Then I apply an incision to the wound with that corrosive medication until the arrowhead appears visibly.
And passed beyond the limits within 4 months.
Then uncover the wound that I pierced with the pincers, and pull it apart from both sides, and could not extract it.
Then I continued to refine and invent means of instruments until I took it with well-made pincers after 1 hour. In accordance with what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I hold it and return the wound.
And the mirror judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: Then I will restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
I have told you about the qualities of extracting some arrows, If you apply your care to this which I do not entirely specify, for books cannot fully grasp it;
but wise masters understand a little of what is happening and concerning the present and failing condition, they perform nine works and nine operations, below the remedy of things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not enter members where they are driven except in two ways: or through the side where they enter, or from another direction;
and that which jumps out from there where it enters, it is an arrow entering into the flesh, and it may jump out at times now.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh heals around it and align the opening.
And in the same way, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and move it every day;
And then it jumps (or moves), and if it does not jump, pierce it all around with a small needle, as long as the surrounding area is widened, and then draw it out.
And if the arrow is put back into its place within the body but cannot be seen, try to find it thoroughly. and if you feel it, take any suitable instrument and draw it out;
and if the wound is too narrow or the arrow too deep, and if there is no bone or nerve or vein, widen the wound as much as possible; And draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow like it grips,
And draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow like it grips, and push out the bone that is stuck in two parts where you can, then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out.
then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out. be careful that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot dislocate it once, push the leg towards the joint, then draw it, for extraction will be easier in this case. And if the bleeding makes disobedience to you, bring what we have said about the cure in its chapter:
and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and use an instrument as you can draw out the arrow safely,
or quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape that he was when the arrow hit him, For it is the greatest help that there can be, and if you cannot do this, set it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, opens something of it, or the skin is swollen in that place as one can see or feel apparently:
Cut therefore above, as long as the scissors can take it, and then pull it out; if it does not come out now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then pull it out.
If it cannot come out, leave it still and then continue the extraction until it comes out completely;
and if it were from the arrow shaft, push it all the way in;
and if it fell out, and you wish to administer medication, then administer one medicinal instrument. If the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the weapon; then push force.
and if the arrow is stuck in the hair, push the instrument with its point entering in.
And if the arrow is touched, you must cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, Then treat the wound as necessary.
And if an arrow falls or pierces the belly, bladder, side, and it is close by, and you can cover it, then do so.
But be careful not to pierce the vein or nerve, and then remove it, and then stitch the wound if necessary. and nurse it until it heals.
The shape of the pincers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of common veins The number of veins for purging are thirty-one, of which there are sixteen main ones.
It is to be known: 2 bands which are after the ears, called the double "herbich"; and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples visible; and the 2 veins that are in the 2 eyelids of the 2 eyes, called "aspirers"; and the vein which is on the forehead; and the vein which is at the top of the nose; and the two tendons which are at the neck; and the two tendons above the mouth, and these tendons are called "augheherich"; and the two tendons beneath the tongue.
The tendons that are commonly known as five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head". And the middle one is called "fistula", and consists of both the cephalic and basilic. And the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side of the chest. And the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the liver. and this is the one which opens clearly above the armpit.
And the veinlet is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two [branches].
And in the leg and foot there are four veins: one is under the shinbone of the left thigh, And the second saphenous vein that is on the right shin, and the vein called "nese," which is in the left shin.
And in the other leg are four veins beneath these.
The venesections that follow the ears help with ancient catarrhs and migraines. And the qualities of a surgeon, as I tell you, is that you seize the head of the patient,
And the qualities of a surgeon, as I tell you, is that you seize the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins or vein is with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: Draw your fingers to your throat, and where you feel the pulse beneath your throat, press firmly.
then take the lance, thrust it under the vein until you reach the bone, and draw your hand all along the vein upward. and cut through the skin and the vein about two fingerbreadths deep, and make the blood come out until you see it.
then tie and let it heal completely.
And I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is worth emigrating an old man. and softening, and otalgia accustomed, and to the heart of the eyes with hot water;
and the qualities of draining are as I say: And it is instructed to the patient to stretch out his neck, until both veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse beneath your jaw, and then press hard;
then lift the heel of the finger above the vein at the jaw, and push the needle in beneath it; lift up the vein and squeeze it, just as you have done with the other two veins, and make a hole according to your need;
Then tie the patient, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton;
and then let it heal, until it is healed; and we have spoken about their covering and their extraction, where the book begins.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the healing of the skull in ancient facial diseases, and migraines, and fevers.
And its qualities are such that the patient twists his neck to make the vein appear. Then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is:
And put the point on the vein, and press from above with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount that you see; Then cut off the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is dry and not used once with a large flame.
Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; and slice across as the bone is near, so that the flames do not break when they are thin.
The salve of the two veins that are in the armpits helps the eyes, and the swelling, and the redness, and the ulcer in oil, and the diseases of the face;
and the qualities of its salve are that the patient stretches his neck by twisting with some rope, as mentioned before.
then put the salve on it, and let the salve be of the cross, a little long and wide, for there is no heat in it.
And if the flames are subtle, they may break [the patient's skin]; then make a wound of blood, as much as you need, and then cover it with linen, and bind it well.
The vein of the neck is useful against ague, and against smallpox, and diseases of the face. as migraines and redness that come on the face, especially when they are old;
and the quality of the vein is that the patient squeezes his neck, then you press your left hand on his neck, And take the subtle flame long, and thrust it between the two nostrils. for the vein does not open well in that place, and the pus will soon begin to flow.
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is quickly restored.
The salve of two kinds of gundeges aids in the setting of a fracture, and at the beginning of mesh-work, and much in diseases, and in stopping abscesses, and in corroding, and in herpes, and stomach ulcers;
and the quality of the salve is that the patient stretches his neck over one and the other, as we have said; and the master standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient lies on one seat,
Then open the vein along its length widely, then draw out the blood moderately, as needed.
Then fix another part in the other vein, then tie the ligature, and hold all the veins moderately tight, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
On Curing Rabbits The purification of veins in the mouth above helps to cool [the mouth] and promotes decay of the gums, fissures in the lips, toothache, and surrounding areas.
And the qualities of this purification are for you to seat the patient before you and hold their neck as I have said; Then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. And they are recognized by being black, and by the small black veins around them. Take both of them then, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt.
Take both of them then, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt. if you take the larger one from each side, and also do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same way.
From under the tongue The evacuation of veins located beneath the tongue assists after the cephalic vein has been opened, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the bloodletting are that the patient lies supine before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks under each side to find a black vein:
Then, let one of them be taken, and do not go too deep, as beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the cost, which are commonly healed according to two ways, are as follows:
or when pricking with all fire, either mirrhin large or subtle olive oil as you use to cauterize, and it is called "anesil". and are broad and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirrhine is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see:
And it should be used to open the veins with large arterial blood appearing, and those that contain large blood and turbulence; and this is the form of the olive oil flame:
and it is pointed more subtle, and it is for treating subtle veins that contain subtle, yellowish blood.
The sacred vein of the basilica, one of these veins, assists in treating illnesses located below the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the patient to drain pus profusely and urinate from the artery that lies beneath. If it pierces the artery and bleeding occurs, then it must be stopped, as I have said; And should not be poked with a flame, but rather cut like scissors.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, you must dislocate it and change another. If the artery is blocked, or if the vein does not open when cutting into the arm, it opens manifestly. and heat the iron in the fire as we have said.
If you want to discover the location of the artery, then it is necessary to dislocate the arm and touch the place where you can feel the pulse. Then mark the joint with a sign, then bind the arm, and heat the vein with fire.
And watch that you do not cut into the artery when you see the joint swollen, for it is of the artery; then avoid it.
And if you see it rising high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from the artery: Then hurry up, place your thumb on top for a long time, then remove your thumb if the blood stops flowing, which often happens.
Keep the arm still, and let it be so, the patient does not move it; be afraid and do not move it until it is healed.
If the artery does not appear swollen and it inflames, and there is no medicine present, cut open the artery if it is open, as the head of the wound recedes; bleed the limb.
Take a piece of willow bark, cut it in half and place it on top until the next day.
If the limb is not bleeding, that's good; if not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
And cauterization is not always appropriate in various positions due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the ligament in the arm.
The vein-letting in the middle helps to remove blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
And the lord must pierce it through the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deep and strikes the nerve, and it inflames and the wound becomes painful and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve opens frequently, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must open it with the instrument anesthetic; and cut off the nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The sanitary aid for the head helps, as it draws blood from the head, and assists the eyes.
And it is necessary to sanitize when pricking with olive oil or myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Moreover, it is necessary to seek the more delicate place and not to hurt anything when it needs to be done for the first time, and then repeat. And sometimes the joints swell in some men, what should be done for the first time, but it causes no harm. The quality of the urine is according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about urinating is that urination is not brought forth except for the purpose of maintaining health.
And to avoid future illnesses; Let the vein be opened in one of the four veins that are named: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; It should be done to open the vein at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of swelling appear;
It should be done to open the vein on the first or third day, after two or four hours.
The treatment for illnesses has no set time, but when there is need at day or night, in every hour and all times.
It is not necessary to treat children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman in labor except during the fourth month up to the seventh. One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to be treated in any way, it is necessary that the intestines be cleansed with a light clyster. If many worms are retained, so that the veins do not expel the waste products into the principal members;
nor heal the one who is excessively salted with meats, or drunk, so much that he vomits, or watery.
and if he is purged after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, excessive sexual activity, labor, vigilance, and fasting, and his strength or from the weapon or the body;
Then refine the bodily fluids, if they are thick, with foods, drinks and medications, if you have the power to do so.
Then enter or use a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood.
and heal the vein with the sickness around the third part, as we have said.
and keep yourself from labor, pain, lust, and similar things on that day.
And bind and press, and let the bandages be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm twice or thrice.
then gently pull the ligature upward in a moderate manner, for if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot heal without.
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them.
then dip the bandages in a little oil, and place your right thumb on that vein under the area to be treated. The vein should not burst when opening it with a knife. For there are veins that behave like cords in drawing, and some are filled with wind, if one puts fire above it, when withdrawing the flame, it cannot open the vein, and thus is the case with some.
If the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, so the surgeon must be cautious in these matters.
If the vein opens again later or too quickly, and the wound is not inflamed:
If the wound is inflamed and the patient fears it, allow him to rest for one or two days and do not bind the arm: If pus comes, do not enter it into the wound and do not bathe, then wait for the wound to heal before starting again.
And if the wound is small or shallow, and you doubt that much blood will flow from it, you should cauterize the wound with direct flame itself.
Perform a little more vigorously, so that the flesh is inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh inflamed, do not start bleeding again, and put a little oil on it, because it will cool down the blood, and the oil is made in this place.
And administer the oil in each bleeding that you perform to stop the flow of blood;
And the same thing happens with triangles and bows when put back in place; if they are too delicate or split when they are too thick.
And if there comes large abscesses, which happens frequently, especially when the opening of the vein is small, Press quickly and place the moist sponge in hot vinegar and hold for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, it will not harm him. And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh beneath a hot compress, poultice, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance occur at the base of the basilica; place your hand on it then, if you find it soft to the pressure of the hand, this is a bad sign. Then be careful not to apply anything mentioned above, for by chance it is in court without the artery; but let it have one dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another medicine until it heals and becomes healthy.
And draw blood according to its quantity based on its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, let it drain until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and hollow, and requires extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to let blood drop by drops and often, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this way of bleeding is free from the danger of blood clotting and nerve damage, and is more useful than bleeding by length or width.
And for the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give soft bread soaked in grape juice; if he is chilled, bleed him four or five times.
And if it is of cold complexion, let him eat before the sweet bread soaked in syrup sweetened with honey or scented honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and fragrant syrup.
And if it swells after the discharge of blood, then let him drink broth of meat and fragrant subtle syrup.
and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of vein.
And if you want to fracture some bone, and heal it again as needed, when it is weakened by excessive healing, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its power continuously.
And if you want to fracture some bone after the first healing, and it has strong flesh, it heals seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And if you want to heal from another part, it should heal on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body which has been heated, and it causes fever; therefore, it requires drawing a large quantity, and opening the wound until it gushes out. then you apply all the signs of healing and place your hand over some pulses when it heals, so that death does not come in its place. And this happens many times when healers are negligent;
And it is not good when you dislocate the arm and cause bleeding a second time, and the wounds are closed, that you press forcefully. If it is curved, do not stretch out the arm abruptly, for it would be harmful.
but leave it until the bleeding stops a second time; or you prick it with the tip of the flame, so that the frozen blood from the vein flows out. and place one piece of fresh linen dipped in vinegar on top, and press gently.
And if the vein is burst, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess has been soothed.
And if the necessity arises to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are healthier than the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the method for drawing blood is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the vein becomes red.
Then tie it moderately, so that the vein appears well, then hold it steadily from one side, not wide nor long.
and let the wounds be opened widely, and press well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be drawn out, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is in summer, do not put the hand in hot water, because you are putting it more into winter than summer.
And the vein of this vessel is safer than all other vessels, for there are no artery or nerve in it.
The swelling of the hand on the right side is worth all liver diseases, and this is the method:
Hold the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is emptied, if one can see it; And if the wound is transverse, and you cover it entirely, it will not cause any harm.
Do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all exposed without flesh.
Then put the hand in hot water, if the wound is frozen, it will not thaw.
And when you have drained the blood as much as necessary, put oil and linen over the wound to bind it quickly, and do this with each wound.
The purgative of the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
The poultice from the sow's belly is good for all diseases that are beneath the body, such as the illness of the anus, and retention of flowers, and disease of the loins, and knees and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its purgative are that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it breaks. And he lies above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, it goes very deep.
Cut open then a larger vein, or at the ankle, which is more effective.
And if you cut open above the foot, guard against the nerves that are beneath, and cut through as well as possible like in cutting; let the flames be still.
And if the bone cannot come out, place the foot in water and let the vein empty well.
And if it is necessary to clean the first time, start the second time a little above, because the wound is salted. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the other side equally.
The wound of the sciatic nerve is at the knee joint, and its cleaning relieves pain in the ankle, when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of its cleaning is that the patient immerses themselves in water up to the knee joint while twisting it four times.
Otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, drain it in all possible ways that you can, and by crossing. Moreover, you should cover it because the wound is hollow and it is greatly swollen in the hands.
Moreover, you should cover it because the wound is hollow and it is greatly swollen in the hands. And if you do not treat it, no remedy of any kind will open or close the wound or stop the flow of blood.
and let the wound heal as you see fit, then untie the ligature, place cotton on it and press down; the wound is now healed.
Drainage from a blister
Corns or hair, or glass are used for blistering, and blistering is done in two ways: either by making an incision to draw blood, or without making an incision.
This blistering without making an incision is done in two ways: either it is done with fire or without fire;
and two others on both sides of the neck; and the abscesses under the chin. and the abscesses on both shoulders; and the abscesses above the ankles. and abscesses in both arms; and abscesses in both legs. And the boils of the two shins; and boils do not bleed, unless from small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and for this reason, you should not drain them at all, as is done with bloodletting from veins; and it should not be administered in any case, neither with hot nor cold water, in any illness that comes from accumulation, until the entire body is purged.
If it is necessary for the treatment of illnesses to perform bloodletting, or due to custom, we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the morning and evening.
for there are some who, when they need to fart, have a heavy head;
and to those who find repletion and redness in their abdomen, their head, and neck, and blindness of the eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have swollen tongue, and bleed; and if there are some who faint, see blood in their urine and nosebleed, and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, especially if it is in the month, we order to ventose after 3 hours of the day.
The purging of the nose helps the inflammation of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
and this purging is instead of the purging of the head,
it should not be used by those with cold constitution or who have catarrh, as it does great harm to them.
And therefore, it is not advisable for those who have cold heads or sicknesses to use [the cautery].
And those who often heal themselves become negligent, and for this reason, the cupping glass should be placed a little lower due to the fear of negligence.
The cupping at the neck is in the position for the healing of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is beneficial for the treatment of the spine. And to cut through the channel of the thighbone, and completely, and to fill.
It should be slightly pushed as if it is too tightly closed, it may cause obstruction in the intestines or stomach and heart.
The windings in the two ribs of the neck are equal to headaches, and ear pain and migraines, and strangulation, and toothache at the roots.
And it should be in the place of the wound in the basilica; and you must instruct the lord to extend his hand to make the incision, so that he does not cut the artery, and no bleeding occurs.
Ventilations under the chin are useful for mouth diseases and gum decay, as well as other mouth illnesses; they should be placed in the locations of the two lips.
Ventilations under the armpits are useful for diseases that originate from heat and fullness.
The ventosations of the costal joints are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the lord not to enter too deep, for the flesh is bare there, and it knows of nerves and arteries below.
The ventose on the buttocks is worth as many emorroids from the bottom and diseases below, and it must be large, and made of metal, for it needs to draw well; and in case it is too thin, it will break; and it will cause large wounds.
The swellings in the legs open widely, because they attract blood from all over the body; they are similar to ancient rain sores, scrofula (neck swelling) and bladder stones; they weaken the body after a long time, and bring pus into various conditions. They are located in the area of the knee joints and ankles.
The method of treating the swelling is to first empty it, suck it quickly, press it evenly, and continue doing so until you see the area turning red and inflamed, and the redness of blood appears; then stop, and place the swellings, and take care in the disposition of the body, because there are some who have thin skin and clear pores: if this is the case, it should be cut once only, and the wounds should be large and deep; and suck gently.
And if the skin is thick, it should be cut twice: the first time to make the way for thick blood.
And if the wound is very thick, it should be cut three times; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we should only prick once.
And if we want much blood, we should prick often; and if the wound is thick, we should pierce completely, and ensure that the veins are pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and with narrow pores, to anoint the joints of the wounds with penetrative and soluble oil. if it is summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of cucumber seeds.
And if it is in fever, of oil of watercress, or lilies, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the one that is to be healed has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied.
but it should be washed after the fumigation with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture should rise from bed with the aid of aspen wood, or water of myrtle, and similar things.
And he who has large excesses should rise with old wine or juice of sourdock, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar things.
and one should not bleed with a veinlet before the bath or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after venesection.
and it is necessary that he urinate when he needs to bleed and after bleeding. And observe that the patient who is healing is colicky, and if he lacks bile and becomes excessively heated. then it is necessary for him to take cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce leaves, and similar things.
and eat little, consume pork meat, and moist meats.
And the one with a cold constitution should take honey syrup and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor too new, and eat sparingly, consume pork meat, and small birds and songbirds.
And on the day when it swells, he should drink more than eat.
And sometimes one should give a man triacet or muscat to strengthen the main limbs before or after swelling. And the wine must be refined but it is not suitable for those who are hot-tempered to drink it.
The swellings that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, the spleen, gout, abdomen, flank, and groin, because these members cannot tolerate being wounded there.
And let it not be done unless to draw blood from one member to another, as we put on the limbs when the tumor is in a member; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put leeches on the abdomen and the buttock to reduce the member.
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or arrow, it removes by its virtue attracting the obstruction or draws the arrow out of its place.
and thus it does when placed on the liver and the spleen where there is retained wind.
And these blisters are treated empty for suction only; sometimes they are treated with fire, and at other times filled with cold water,
as with diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a manner the bladder is filled with hot water or water that has been boiled with herbs appropriate for it.
The form of the bladder treated with fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers in width and half a palm of breadth, and have one small hole on the middle side, as when pushing an awl.
and be of iron, soft before so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the member;
have in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to insert a handle;
And they may be large or small according to the diseases and age of those who contract them;
For the boils of children are different from those of adults, and the thin ones from the fat ones.
And this boil should be placed over the member like so:
Take a stick of candle wax or linen thread and place it through the boil across the length that is in the boil, "The light should be deep within the bladder so as not to burn the patient."
"And then place it over the member, and your fingers should be over the puncture that we mentioned, so that when you look at it, if steam goes out, remove the bladder."
"Wrap it with linen in the same way as before, and repeat as necessary if required."
"In the bladder used in case of pleurisy (a disease of the lungs), there should be no needle or puncture. It should only be placed over the member when it is full of fluid."
And this is the shape: [The original text does not provide a shape; it seems to be a statement about the subject matter.]
Incisions are not made in places except for members where one cannot put leeches due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. And in bare flesh areas like the palm of the hand or fingertips, and other similar areas;
And the quality of using leeches is that when you find ones that are in sweet clean water without poison, you should take them;
And place them in a warm, gentle poultice until they are familiarized (accustomed) and have no growths in their bellies. Then let them be purged with veins and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red and apply leeches.
When they become full and warm, if a vein can be applied or cupping, do so, for it is of great benefit.
If there is no vein to apply or cupping, raise the limb on a pillow, then immerse it in warm water, and then cover it.
And if the joint becomes too swollen after the body, immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the swelling subsides;
And if the wound becomes multiply, apply ground glass (vitriol) or similar things until it dries up.
or apply half of the beans peeled to the wound and leave it until they adhere to the wound, it will dry up now.
and if you need more, take other wounds.
And if the veins do not want to be taken, rub the place of fresh blood, or insert a needle until the vein bursts. then tie them up and as soon as they feel the blood, they coagulate.
and when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle some powder of aloe and crushed seeds or ashes, then they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear child, that the fool-sick man should fall from this chapter, he never saw any ancient books, nor did he read a single letter of it.
and for this reason, the science is estranged in our land, for I never found any good one.
and I know nothing about it except through the science of ancient books that I have studied for so long that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought in, just as I have done in these 2 chapters before.
Therefore, let us say the summary of this book, the number of words and chapters where the wise put their understanding and dwell on truth, so that those who have been proven knowledgeable will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or distortion comes to anyone, it is necessary for you to clean the wound from both sides, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of the body, infancy, or old age.
If the time is not very hot or too cold; and eats cold meat, meaning cold meats, and poultry and veal, and does not drink wine, nor eats any fattened flesh, and does not fill himself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you doubt an abscess is hot, or spreading of matter in the limb; then the patient returns to their first rule as they have used it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make large stools, or they have thick consistency, such as cooked wheat in water, and peas, and heads, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For this nourishment brings on softened stools and the broken bones heal more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of the old and weak cannot be well retrieved nor joined according to their nature due to the relaxation of members, neither those who are too soft, as the bones of small children.
but has no cure, set above the broken bone.i.e., large strong splints that support and join the member together, as it was before; and do not let it at all from its work, and for this reason it should be fed with coarse foods, as we have said.
And know that the breaks are various in many ways.
For the break of the neck is different from the break of the foot, or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of break. There is a break that grows over time, and another that sharpens, like the quill for writing.
There is a break that grows over time, and another that sharpens, like the quill for writing. And there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small crack.
And each type has its tool, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to its place.
And it is known that bone fractures occur when the bones are twisted, broken open widely and splintered under pressure of the hand.
And if there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can have twisting, a break, or a small fracture. Do not move the hand, but apply medications that follow, and then hold it gently.
And know that the breaks that go to the armpit, and are the two parts disjointed, you must now put them in an even position, thus allowing abscesses to heal.
and if abscesses come, leave it for any day, until the abscess is calm. then put it in the same position as you can easily and skillfully, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are pieces; then press, as needed hereafter.
And if the bone is broken into pieces and it breaks in two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or if your hand breaks one of the smaller members, or two cords, or one cord and your hand;
align the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are dislocated, you gather back all additions in their original place using whatever means you can, and make sure your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient.
align well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
And you should feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: straighten it out nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it forth by their work abscess heat and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
When the limb is well set, punish the patient so that he does not move it, neither while watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. And carefully ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. When it feels no pain, it is not dislocated, and it should be placed in such a position that it feels no pain;
When it feels no pain, it is not dislocated, and it should be placed in such a position that it feels no pain; And keep it straight so twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are various in smallness and largeness and shape.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers: it is necessary to wrap them in linen cloths soft and fine;
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard bandage, for the broad bandages embrace the entire large limb evenly, pressing it from all sides equally, so that there is no swelling;
then bind light padding around it, 3 or 4 turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on the bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less, than the fracture, then move away from the fracture.
And soften the ligament bit by bit, until you take a large part of the healthy limb, then take another ligament and turn it around backwards over the broken limb;
then go to the part below the break and hold it gently, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first lesson above;
then put between the ligaments pads of linen or cloth, until they are all even, then tie everything above with one bandage, and then place well-made stirrups on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something soothing on the abscess and let the one who removes it wait for some days;
then tighten your legs, and they should be half as thick as a large cane, tightly bound, or with ropes used for splitting logs, or with palm branches, and they should be in this shape:
but the bandage that one places on the break should be slightly larger and thicker than the others;
And let it be as long as necessary for the member, whether of small or large size.
then hold it between the anvils in the same way as you did at the first joint, then tie it with a thread moving forward, just as in the first joint above the break.
The thread that follows should be of medium thickness, not too thick or too thin, and made from fine linen.
If the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their cords twisted incorrectly, and this is a great error, because the cord cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stitch.
And if the patient is gored by the shafts of arrows after being wounded in healthy limbs, you should place linseed oil or linen cloth on them to prevent bleeding.
When the wound is fractured and the ligaments are torn apart, here is the remedy I shall tell you.
And know that it is not necessary to hold splints on all broken limbs for the first day. For large limbs, it is not necessary to put splints unless after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of abscess healing;
and here is the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of eggs, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and apply it; and this is the common way for restoring fracture in various positions, and also for women and small children, because it is not too cold or too hot.
Another method of plaster for healing fractures, dislocations and twists: take alum, radish, onion, asafetida and arabic gum, mix .x. parts; add myrrh and aloes, .v. parts; 8 parts of alechil; make it into powder, and melt with yolk of egg; if the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Another method of plaster for twists: take mugwort and mallow, .x. parts; myrrh and aloes, .viiij. parts; asafoetida 6 parts; Armenian bolec .x. parts, grind well, and mix with vinegar or yolk of egg, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for dislocated joints and for bones that have come loose from their place, and to alleviate the pain occurring, and cut the bone and break it: take new linen, moisten it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it on the place. This plaster does not heal, but is good for alleviating hot abscesses and proper bone pains.
Another method of setting broken bones: take dry fig leaves and ground-up pawpaw (earth-apple) leaves, grind them together to make a poultice.
Another method of poultice for mending broken bones and hastening the healing of an abscess: take equal parts of the root of vismalve (marsh-mallow), camomile, violate flowers, oats flour, each one; grind them together, steep in wine, and if the limbs are burnt, steep with moist coriander water or vinegar, and apply it.
Another stronger method of poultice for the restoration of a hardened abscess in the limb: take equal parts of the root of vismalve (marsh-mallow), flaxseed, balm, lentil, and burnet, violate flowers, camomile flowers; grind them together, steep with either salty water, sweet water or vinegar according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance should be placed on a broken limb for restoration except for a plaster made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between soft and firm but not too soft or too hard.
And it seems Galen that dry and slightly warm things should be placed on a broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to make a plaster for wounds and pain: take mugath and horsehair cut into pieces, or feathers of birds, and almonds, and grind them all together, and make a plaster with it.
And then the dislocation occurs a little while later, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not reset it for many days.
If pain or itching comes at the place, or swelling, no rest or inflammation, hasten and reset it, and remove the plaster immediately; take a light cloth and sea sponge moistened with water, dip it in warm water, and apply to the affected area until the itching stops and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place dry linen moistened with warm water or rose oil on it, and tie it up with a bandage to ensure that the abscess does not become cold.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and the pain be removed, then start the suturing delicately, and a little emplastrum, and not to strain it too much as before; and continue with delicacy until it heals.
If you see that an abscess has been opened and drained, reddened, painful, and swollen, and you need emplastrum and linen, start it as before equally.
If nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not undo it for more than 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the break heals, and bring the stitching closer to the skin.
Therefore, hold it more tightly than before and make the flesh thicker, as I have said earlier; if you see it drying out more than necessary, know that no nutrients can enter. Then apply hot moist heat to it every time you dislocate it, and do so every three hours, and slightly stretch the ligament.
Therefore, cut off the nutrients to the limb and hasten to correct what the foolish physician does, which is to leave it twisted: this is bad, and such treatment is dangerous, and I see nothing but weakness and incorrect work.
In various ways of breaking Many methods of breakage are, and various shapes, and the causes are determined.
because there are breakages made by sword blow, and the collarbone breaks the whole bone until it is cut off beneath the bone, as hacks or thrusts do; this type of breakage is called "hack-break".
When the sword strikes the bone from above piercing through, it is called this kind of fracture "absolute"; and these are the two types of fractures, large or small.
And if there is impacted percussion, cleavage, fractures from falling on stones, or other similar things.
And if the fracture penetrates through to the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound is healed into the bone as delicate as a hair, and it has a small fissure, and because of this, it is called this fracture "capillary";
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar things, and causes the bone piece to enter inside, and its end is even as blacksmiths make on top of their cauldrons when they heat them; if it penetrates inside the skin.
This happens more often in people with moist bones, such as a child's head;
And it happens in all these ways of breaking, that small fragments are dislodged as well, which I will speak about in their place.
And we shall know all ways of breakage by the dislocation above them, and the inquiry into their cause, and by the corruption of the flesh that is on top.
The hairy resemblance is known by those who, when the bone has been uncovered and scraped above it, the breakage appears black.
In the treatment of breakage, beware of the patient's accidents; and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever ague, and the eyes to come out and redden, and other similar signs in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a doubtful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
When the navrez comes first to you and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the muzzle.
And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents as we have said come.
And if the break in the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part as follows: and it is that you take the chief of the diseased navreit, and expose above the bone in all possible ways, and above the figure of the wound more gently than you can,
And when blood flow occurs to expose the bone or an abscess boils, one should aid with what is necessary and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths moistened in rose oil. and let the wound rest until the abscess boils subside and make sure blood flow stops; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two ways of work: one method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:
Then insert another cutting tool larger than the first.
And the second method is that you have numerous sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp and made of iron not pointed; and work lightly, so as not to strike the head.
And if the bone is hard and protruding, then you must perforate it around so as to administer sizes with drills, not piercing through the bone of the head, and it should have a margin or one circle above the point that does not let the point pierce through the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all bones; and this is the shape of the four types of drills:
The qualities for perforating around the broken bone are that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the drill a little further and do this all around, then cut the gap in the bone between the fractures, and do this as delicately as possible, lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or any of the tools you have such as pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the sharpness which has remained of the bone entirely, i.e., another instrument resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors.
And if anything remains of the small bones or scales, gently remove them with one instrument; then cure the wound with the things we have said (i.e., a poultice).
And another method of work is that which the Greeks call "saussage," and they hold it in high esteem, and this is their word. It is necessary first that you expose a part of the bone, where the open break moves, so that when you have exposed that part, you place it under the head of this lever-like instrument, as follows in shape:
And do not cut it from one side, and the part is pointed at two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer, so that you gently break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is below.
if it is stuck to the bone, carefully break it, for it can be broken senselessly and with fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smoothen them out afterwards, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp of various sizes, in order to provide the most suitable solution for each case, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Then pass over with a large rasp, and afterwards with smaller ones, and continue doing so until it is smooth.
For each other type of hair-thin fracture and subtle, it is necessary to provide remedy according to its guidance; and this is not something easily understood by one who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the wound is open, you should take 1 linen cloth according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 3 layers, soak it in wine and rose oil, place it on the first cloth; do this more gently than you can, without weighing down the wound, then administer another thread, but do not tighten it more than enough to cover the wound.
and leave it like that for 1 or 2 days until the abscess heals, then remove it, and administer medications such as lily roots, flour of wheat, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; from these things make powder and place it on the wound, and immediately administer trustworthy medications without harm.
And keep the wound clean, do not leave any ointment or bandage there, nor let it be covered with a cloth over the brain, for when a cloth is placed on the wound, it can rot and corrupt, causing great harm to the patient; for when something sharp is put on it, it bites through.
Therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient as we have said, it is doubtful that he will recover his senses.
And if blackness does not come forth except for the medicine that has been applied to it, which has this property, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one part of lamb's wool, and put it on the wound. Then the care of methods of treatments that it requires, as long as he is healthy.
Sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one of them only, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must place your little finger or thumb into the neck, and align the fracture within your index finger, and at the end, until the neck returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part near the neck, and the arm cannot come to its place, then you must align it with the head of a straight stick, about a finger's breadth.
If it is broken in two parts, do the same thing, and hasten to restore it within the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then bind the neck with linen strips if it is broken in one part.
Or you step on one with the other, if it breaks there; and they are so thick that they fill the nostrils of the nose. (Translation)
And some remedy said that one should moisten the swellings with butter and churn it every day. It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg yolk and flour; then leave the swelling until the bone is hard, and the cartilage becomes hard. (Translation)
And sometimes you step on goose feathers instead of swellings, and if there is a soft cloth around it, and hold the breakage, and blow into the patient's mouth; then do as you please. (Translation)
And if an abscess breaks out while you are working on it, put either beeswax or softened cotton in oil of roses, or a pinch of turmeric.
If an abscess does not break out, apply a plaster outside of it made from sizemant flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light bandages on top, but do not tie the wound.
If the wound of the neck is small and broken into many pieces, if it is broken with suitable instruments, then cut the opening, and treat it with healing substances such as char, sulfur, plasters, and ointments appropriate for that situation.
And if there is no wound within the nose, treat it with tents, and place plasters of wool until it heals.
Of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is fractured beneath and there is no wound outside, and the break is only external, but not broken in two, it is curved within, if this can be recognized easily.
It is necessary that, if the break is in the right part, you insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left jawbone, insert your index finger from the right hand and gently press the break from inside and align it with the other side.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated by 2, then you must administer an extension of 2 parts, until it is even.
If the moving of the teeth occurs, whether it's fracture or breakage, hold them with a gold or silver thread or silk, then place a pad on the broken jaw and place one double cloth on top; then place a large well-made bandage or a piece of equal-sized leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it above where you can, and command the patient to rest, and provide him with light food.
And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put it back in place what is changed; and apply a poultice over it with flour or mill powder with eggs or linseed meal after removing the pad; and put a light linen on top of the poultice, and if the poultice adheres, and the patient's disposition does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it heals in four weeks.
And if an abscess swells up, bring what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, be careful not to remove any bone fragments from the fracture; only remove with cautious instruments suitable for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with fire according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all the bone fragments and there is none left over, stitch up the wound if it is wide, and put on one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals completely.
From the armory (or forceps) The armory breaks many times in front of the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated into two parts, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with an injury.
And the treatment is when there is a break without an injury, that you have two assistants, one holds the armory where it feels broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the affected area; then align the break with your hands so that the form is as required, and it has no appearance or bulge.
And if you need to stretch more, place a round ball of cloth or linen around the patient's shoulder, as large as necessary; and extend and tighten the armory, and hold the ball with your hand, so that you align the break as required.
And if you cannot draw out the head of the shoulder by force because it comes in fully, then the patient should lie on his affected side and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the attendant should push the shoulder forward, until the bone of the collarbone is raised.
Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then you must cut through it; pull the pieces apart gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then break it at one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the collarbone to prevent it from coming out:
and resemble a spoon, but not pointed, and be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one be wide, and the other narrow, like the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
And when you are assured that the abscess is hot, if it opens, and if the wound is small, or you doubt whether the abscess is hot, then use linen and bandages to dress the wound, according to its size.
And if abscess becomes cold, immerse it in rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
The splinting of the bone when there are wounds and incisions is that you put the padding of milled powder and egg yolk on top of the bone and place light splints on it, and place a spear beneath if needed. Then take a very long bandage, one palm wide, then place one double cloth on top of it and roll it up; then take a thin stick that is two feet long and wrap it around the bandage, so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and place the stick on the fractured bone, then turn the bandage over the neck, and under the chin, and under the patient's chin; and pull from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the bandage in place, and you clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, you should reinforce it every day, and when the swelling lessens, you should tighten it.
and make the patient lie on his back, then place a small pillow under his armpit to raise the shoulder; in this way, the fracture will be aligned by the movement of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except for bad accidents may happen, up to twenty days.
Then begin the reduction [of dislocation], if you see that it is necessary, and hold it and let it be, until it is restored; and it is usually restored within 28 days, and less in some people.
break of the shoulder
Whenever the shoulder breaks or dislocates, it is not easily moved unless touched; if it appears to be broken according to its shape, reduce it in accordance with its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put powder from a mill with abundant egg white and light feathers on it, and put two layers of cloth on top; then put a wide and thin cushion, about a little larger than the shoulder, and if there is no hollow space in the shoulder under the cushion, fill it with feathers of linen so that the cushion conforms evenly; and then hold it firmly with a strong bandage, so that the cushion does not move from its place, and watch the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes looser, tighten it, and adjust the cushion if it moves from its place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored within 20 to 30 days. And when this number is complete, release him, and be careful, because it is not a bone that can move easily.
And if a bone fragment protrudes in front, but not underneath the skin, lift it up and remove the bone, and follow what was said earlier in the setting of a fracture to treat an abscess with hot cautery.
of the fracture (of the) thigh
The thighbone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks obliquely. And when it is broken, it descends towards the underside, and the patient experiences great pain, lack of limbs, suddenness, and there may be bleeding from the broken bones, and the head opens in the broken bone, and it feels very bad.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and subtly puts it all in place in all ways possible until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put splints and pillows over the thin part of the bone where salt or another light substance is, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; then turn the ligament round and round towards the back, and tighten it gradually, and check every hour if it has healed, and if it softens, tighten it again; and if it needs to be untied, due to corrosion or itchiness at the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and untie it, remove the splint, and attend to those who have come in matters of cures; then reset the splint, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the rib fracture
Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large ones behind the back and near the chest, and they do not bend unless because they are slippery; and it is felt well at the inquiry of the fingers.
And the restoration is that you set it equally, as it should be. Then place the splint, and hold it in place with a stick, if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is inclined inward, causing great pain and swelling, similar to pleurisy, for the bone pierces the lung; and it swells at the tips, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, which is a sign of grave illness, and the ancients had used much effort.
And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the abdomen in order to push out the fracture.
We do not let hot irons come if they have not arrived. And if they have arrived, make them healthy.
And some say to put leeches on the joint for swelling, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the leech does not attract the excess to the joint due to its weak constitution.
And some say to cover the joint with damp linen in hot oil and put tents between the ribs to make it equal on all sides; then it should be cured with pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that he cannot bear from the broken bone and there is doubt in the patient, it is necessary to make an incision above the broken rib and put an instrument under it for support; then you must split the bone gently, extract it lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound together if it is large, and treat it with ointment until it heals. And if an abscess comes, put damp cloths soaked in rose oil on it and apply it; and treat the rib as needed for an abscess and let him lie down on the side where it should be, until it heals.
of the broken collarbone
Sometimes breaks occur in the collarbone bones and they bend; and likewise in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take notice if their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not bleed. Know that in many positions it is mortal, and if they remain silent and do not bleed when stretched or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient can be cured, if care is taken.
If something like this happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will recover or not, take notice if the feet are softened, and there is an accident that occurs in the hands, and the back leaps with wind and trembling involuntarily; and when it is rubbed on the stomach, it leaps involuntarily. And when it is rubbed on the back and wants to sit, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor at all in its cure.
If this accident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
And the cure is that you apply oil to a hot abscess, either rose oil or egg yolk oil, until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying ointments, bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed. If any bone is dislocated, you must cover it with oil; then remove the bone, join the two sides of the wound together with stitches, if it is large, until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow", put your left hand in its place and hold it equal to your right hand, then apply the ointment and plaster if necessary; then tie it, and if it dislocates again, push it back into place, remove the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg bone
It often happens that the bone of the shin is broken, and if it happens, there is only a little lessening at the head; and it becomes long, declines to the front, comes to the patient pain at the place, and points and swells where it breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break; and recognize which one is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head only, then make an equal incision in the same natural shape.
And if the break is long or declines within, then make the patient lie on his belly, so that the restoration of the break is presented to you. And when you have set it straight (the dislocation), put a splint above it, then put a stick or a rod on top and hold the break so that it does not move; and apply the area below the ribs until the breaks are level.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
And if an abscess swells up, do not touch it until the abscess swelling subsides, and put on what was previously mentioned (the bandage); then return to treatment, and hold it as needed, without any bad incident occurring; and that is the method.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder is between the chest and the neck of the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: of which one is that you take a splint thicker than a thumb, in this shape:
And tie the two heads together with two ropes, and bind them upwards, and make the patient lie on one seat; then let him throw his broken arm over the splint, until it comes to rest, and have a hump of splint in the middle, then bind above something heavy or the minister extends it downward; then put the mirrors the break even with their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And another method is that one restrains the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two servants that one holds the one who is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below along all the limb, and extends each one to its part.
If the extraction is stronger, then hold one cord below the fracture, and above the fracture, and each servant extends to his part. And if the fracture is near the shoulder head, then you must put one cord lightly below the socket, and another towards the skin, below the fracture; and in the same way if the fracture is towards the skin, then you must put one cord lightly without effort, as long as the fracture is equal on the level and on the skin; then make the fracture equal, as necessary, and hold it, unless abscesses do not come.
If abscesses have come up, do not hold it for more than 7 days, and place soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil on it until the abscesses are calm; then hold it, and the method of holding it is that you put a wooden splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; and tie the bandage, and hold it on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its normal position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
And if you doubt that the bone moves, use a probe, and place a larger and stronger probe over the fracture, with one inch of space between each probe, and let each probe be as wide as it passes the fracture two inches from each side; then hold the probes in place, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, firmly and slightly less in alignment.
And if you see the alignment of the probes and tightening, as we have said, during the time when you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is heated, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then observe every three days the wound, that pus does not swell or come to the site, or new scabs do not come to the limb because it is too tight. Follow our advice.
And if no such accident occurs, do not loosen it before four days or more; let the patient lie on his back and place his hands on his stomach; and put a linen bandage equally thick under the shoulder; and observe every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or are the ligaments softened; if it is instructed by the virtue of medicine, and give it meat as previously mentioned, so that the meat is first subtle; and when it begins to recover, it should be thick. It is customary for the shoulder and the arm to be reset in forty days; then loosen it and administer baths and ointments for healing. If the structure is misshapen and swollen, wait one day or two months to loosen it.
In case of a broken arm:
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "forearm," of which one is small and forms the lower part of the elbow; and the other is large, and is located under it near the little finger. By chance, only the large forearm may break or both, and sometimes they break together.
When the small phalanges are broken, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large ones are broken, healing is difficult, and it is more painful than when they are broken together. If only the small phalanges are broken, it should be gently extended slightly and set in place.
If it is the large phalanges that are broken, it should be held together more firmly; stretch it up to one finger's width, raise the little finger of the hand higher than the others, and lower the small ones below the others, and have the patient cross themselves on top of it, and place one finger above it higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend your arms on either side under their hand or at a finger's length, and another person at the other end. Then set it in place, according to its best form.
If the break is in several places, put each one back in its place, and if there is any displacement that pricks the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut and remove it, as we have said before.
And if it is wounded by breaking, I have spoken about it in the individual chapter; take care of it.
If in the process of setting a fracture pus forms, apply one cloth made of rose oil and beeswax, neither too hard nor too soft; and glue one cloth subtly on top, until the pus is reduced. Then remove the rose oil and apply the plaster made from milled powder with egg, afterwards place the splints, and make the splint from the fracture site more prominent, and a bit larger than the others; and know that it should have 7 splints or more according to different fracture locations: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and apply pressure above the fracture more than elsewhere, but less when aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are over the fracture site be soft and moist, not hard nor abrasive; and let the thread, which binds it, be linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And examine the member and the limb after some days. If any bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that happens to the member, you must rinse the member with hot water until the itching is reduced; and let the member not rest tight. Then reapply the binding, and if the bindings are worn out and the bones dislocated, and similar things, give advice.
And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, you must soften it with a little medicine, and leave it like that for some days, until the urine flows into it, and then hold it closed.
And if none of the things we have said come to the patient, he shall be unbound until twenty days or more. Inside that time, his hands should be around his neck, and his necks equal, and he should be guarded from movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; and know that this break is restored in thirty or forty days, and possibly in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the break of the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and in us at the fingers, there are few breaks, but it only occurs multiple times.
And when the sole of the hand is broken or sprained, the patient must cross their arms, place them straight in front of themselves equally; then they should place their hand on an extended cloth, and the attendants should extend the broken bones, aligning them as needed, until they are well joined; and apply a plaster and poultices, unless an abscess forms there, then a splint according to the size of the break should be applied; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the break is around the belly of the sole, make a bandage from several cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it around their broken sole; then tighten a long cloth, and let the splint be as wide as the sole of the hand, and tighten it as needed.
And if the break is on the outside [of the bone], then you must place a splint above and another below in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it completely around the hand, and compress the ligament between the fingers.
If the break is in any of the fingers, if it's the thumb, make it even as necessary; and hold it with the sole, and if you see that a small straight splint should be placed to lift the break and prevent movement; and if the break is in other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, make them even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie all of them in one bandage, which is as good as using a splint; and take care in the restoration and the placement of the abscess heat, and treat those who come, as I have said.
broken leg
The bones of the thigh are frequently broken, and it can be seen when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration is that one ligament is tied above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then each minister extends their ligament evenly to their respective parts; and this is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one ligament should be towards the knee, and the other ligaments below the break. Similarly, if it is near the knee, then the ligaments should be at the knee, and the extension distal; then place the bone equally in its two hands, as according to its natural shape, and then apply the splint, and bind it, unless an abscess comes.
And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it be soothed first, then return to your work and treatment; the treatment is done in this manner. You should wrap around the break (fracture) with a bandage made of durable doubled fabric for two or three layers, and let excess remain, then bend the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and insert one long thread between the thigh and the leg, beneath the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; then bend the leg and the bandage upward on the thigh and the leg, and put a splint on the break, and place another splint on the bone of the leg; then use soft cloth fabric for seven inches between the leg and the thigh to even out the tension, then begin to bind firmly four or five times above the splint. And as you progress above the splint and loosen the tension; then take the two threads that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie four splints that are above, then turn beneath the thread end to the back of the foot, tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then let it be, so that no abscess or inflammation or any similar thing comes.
If there is a piece of bone that protrudes, loosen it and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that pierce, you should cut or saw through the area, drain pus, and treat it as we have said until it heals completely.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are placed on it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration, this does not cause discomfort to the patient.
Know that the thigh is restored within one day, or a little more or less, according to the various complexions.
of the road of the knee
Know that in the road of the knee, there is little breakage but it bends often. And if it breaks, this is not just a crack or a simple wound, but rather a complete fracture and there is pain everywhere.
And the restoration is when one equalizes the bone that is broken to its joints, as long as it can be assembled; then place the splint and put on a round pin, if needed, and tighten it as required; then check all the arrangements we have said in other fractures, such as an abscess, burn and others; place at each accident what is needed for it, until it heals.
of the leg fracture
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "shinbone" and the other is called "fibula"; and it happens just as with the arm fracture, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
If the thin bones are broken, they turn forward.
If the large bones are broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; they turn underneath. Then apply extension, make it equal, and bind the splinters equally; but if the fracture is crooked, or there are several pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; align it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of splints that extend the leg from one side to another, and be as long as the leg from the knee down to the sole; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and bind it in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and in this way it is good; and apply one bandage the length of the leg, made of splints, and place the leg for immobilization, and make it exactly at the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day, to check if there is abscess or other accident; treat it until it heals.
of the fracture of the bones from the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes have a fracture and the toes also, and there is no cure except with many positions.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones lifting one over the other, place the patient on his feet on the ground as if he wants to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are elevated, then press it until it returns to its place; then apply an emplastrum and poultice on top, and put a small board under the foot with two even holes, then tighten it around the foot as needed, then once you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you may need.
And when three or four days have passed, loosen the linen, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two (shoulders) are broken, restore them as we have said regarding the hands of the hand; then place a splint on the broken shoulder according to its length, and let it be slightly larger, then place beneath the affected area the table I mentioned, and bind it securely; and if there are more than two or three (broken shoulders), break each one with a splint, enveloped in one linen cloth, and bind the affected area below the table; and ensure that the table is positioned above the belly of the affected shoulder, so it covers it well.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, when we have spoken of them; and treat each case according to its needs.
of the wrist bone fracture
When the bone of nature's woman is broken, make her sit extended, then incline her to the backside part and hold it from behind; then fill the cavity of nature with cotton and put as big a stone as one can in it; then turn the woman, lift the small of her back little by little, and then the cotton pops out until it reaches the entrance of the cavity, and the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the break will be restored. If you see, take a bladder of barley, tie one end to the wound, and push the whole bladder into the cavity; then blow strongly into the tube until the bladder is inflated within: the break will return to its place; then fill it with cotton and leave it for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the man's thumb or woman's is broken, restore it as we have said in the bone of the forearm; and these breaks should not be hidden from him who applies his study and craft, and let this book serve for guidance. For the breaks indicate various positions for restoration: then follow these instructions.
In the shaft when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put the shaft in it; then wrap fabrics around it, and leave for 3 days or more, and it will heal quickly.
Of breakage with wound
It is necessary for one who has a breakage with wound, especially if it is large such as the bones of the leg or shoulder, that it be healed now, so that the wounds that we have mentioned bear witness to it.
And if the wound heals, anoint it with vitriol (if you have no other), then immediately begin to heal the breakage in that same hour or day, unless abscesses appear.
If abscesses appear, wait until the ninth day for healing to begin, allowing the abscesses to subside; do not touch it on the third or fourth day as it may cause harm.
And if the bone breaks out near the opening, it should be gently set back into place with slight extension.
And if the limb does not align itself for you to set it evenly, then you must straighten it with this tool made of iron, which is about 7 to 9 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, the mirror should grasp 3 or 4 fingers, depending on what is needed in each treatment of a broken bone; and it should be round and slightly large but not fold under compression on the member during your work, and sharp at the tip, and thick from the middle to the end, like:
And it is called "palainche", so the curved limb should be placed on top of the visible bone; then push it once until it returns to its original position and is aligned with the other side. If the fracture is subtle, and the tool cannot grab the bone well, then you must cut the top of the bone so that the tool can grasp it firmly.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a saw, to your ability; then remove what is immobilized in the bone with sharpness and small chips.
When the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do what you can to make it be in its natural place, then moisten a clean linen cloth with black stiptic wine, and do not put anything greasy or corrosive on the wound, which may cause pus and corruption; then administer ointment when you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constrained with the fracture; and many times have the foolish surgeon done this, and either caused harm or death, or sometimes rotted the wound; and let the bandage be softer and more pliable than other fractures.
If the wound is large or bad and you fear that a mishap may come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put any ointments on it; instead, wrap it around, in place of ointments, with hard cloths and bind it. And after one day or two days, if you see swelling at the wound, remove what you have applied and apply a healing ointment, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And you should loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
And the limbs should be aligned in such a way that the bone moves downward gently.
And if it passes for many days and cannot heal but again bows, you know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must press the wound with force, and remove all the dislocated bone fragments that cause the pain.
And if there is a fistula or other corruption, it must be cured according to what was said in its chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the thigh or shoulder bones and similar large bones, do not draw it out, for many times death comes; but leave it until it can heal by itself. After 20 or 30 days, you may treat the wound if you can; otherwise, you should leave it alone.
The burning cautery commands the sick to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
We often see sores after the breaking of bones, especially near the joints, and it is a displeasing sight to observe the appearance of the limb; and by chance, the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Therefore, take care: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and saraccoline, acacia, and similar others, taking any one of these things or all together and grind them with strong wine or egg whites or oil; then apply the mixture on a poultice and hold it tightly and do not remove it for many days; then break it open, and start another, until the inflammation is removed; or you can place a piece of well-made plank over it because the properties of the plank are such that they remove all swellings from the limbs. If the inflammation has already hardened into a stone, it must be removed by cutting through it, and make the excess matter apparent, or you can shave it with any rasp until it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains afterwards, the limb becomes weak and delicate due to several reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly and not properly; or because there were too many splints, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or because of excessive irrigation; or because of excessive movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, causing weakness.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body strong, until the blood multiplies in him; then provide bathing, and give joy and rest; then put ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts a great amount of nutrients to it, and irrigate it often with cold water, until the nutrients return to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
twisted limb after health
When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is disfigured, yet it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the foolish who say that a limb should be broken anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and this practice is condemned, and brings great harm, and perhaps death. However, if the swellings and torments are fresh, it must be treated with hot water or softening herbs such as daisy-of-May, roots, medick, and similar things; and you prepare one poultice soothing, such as dittany well made, and take the musk of daisy-of-May, and mix it with gelatin oil or sesame oil, and make a poultice. Or you take fat figs, and grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
And sometimes the node is removed by continuously and repeatedly rubbing with moist hands for a long time. Movement should be brought to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is strengthened and hardened, as stone, and iron is required to be applied, it should be covered up to the bone, making an incision subtle and gently; then place cushion and study in the care.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in any limb, it must now be reset carefully.
If one waits, the joint swells, and if it is reset at that point, there is danger of moving it while it is still swollen. Many times this results in abscesses and other pain.
Furthermore, when this happens, make the patient purge himself, then let him rest until the abscesses are all healed; then immerse the affected limb in hot water and oil, then gently manipulate it, and treat each member according to its location.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
of the lower jaws (jawbones)
It rarely happens that the lower jaws (jawbones) are dislocated in two ways: either they are partially separated from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the bottom, causing saliva to spill out of the mouth, preventing it from being held or closed, and wrapping the tongue around with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it often returns with multiple displacements.
And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly, without delaying;
and in such a way that the attendant holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand should be turned aside, to make it even; and instruct the patient to soften (relax) their jaws and move them in all directions.
And the patient must keep the meat equal, until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is of the two jaws together, anoint them with warm water and oil, and gently bring them back into place; do not press too hard, as we have said earlier.
And when they have been brought back evenly and the mouth of the patient is closed well, soften with a warm poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with several threads.
And the patient sleeps on his back, and his head is between two pillows, so that it does not move either to the right or left, nor should he make any effort to improve, but rather take light food until the pains subside, and his jaws are numb.
and then eat what he wants gently, and do not work at all to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until his jaws are numb and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour and are not restored to their place, fever and usual symptoms may occur, and possibly a stomach problem or vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times he who experiences it dies within 8 days.
of the noose
The noose cannot dislocate from the inside along its length and width, but it can be dislocated at times from the outside, and one feels it.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return; then place the splint and bind it tightly.
And the shoulder joint that is facing out cannot dislocate; if it does, and if it dislocates once, reset it to its place as we have said; then place the splint and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And likewise, the shoulder joint of the back is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
A shoulder dislocation occurs in four ways: firstly, it can occur at the part of the joint below; secondly, at the part of the buttock; thirdly, it can occur at the upper part, but this is rare.
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder or inside through the nerves; often it dislocates below towards the joint of the arm, especially in those who have little flesh, because it can be easily displaced; for those with enough flesh, it is displaced slightly and returns slightly.
And sometimes it happens to some men that they receive a blow or break and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
It is necessary therefore that you test it, as long as you are certain; then commence the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it is turned towards the socket, and you will find a clear difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one. You will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below the socket against the top of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor make any movement.
And likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it should not be hidden, for you will find it evidently on touching.
This manner of dislocation is not only to be reset when new, but also when the child is ill.
The method is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient upwards, then places your hands under the dislocation joint and forces it upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it upwards, then puts it under; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within hand's reach after several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and they should be provided with a soothing and calming balm, such as a decoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and it should be applied.
Then the patient should lie on their back, and a piece of cloth equal in size should be placed under the affected shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then the healer should place his foot on the cloth, and correctly lift the head of the shoulder and pull the hand of the patient.
and another minister should hold the patient's head to prevent it from moving downwards; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it does not, then reset it in this manner:
And make a man who is larger than the patient be present, and position him facing the side of the patient's shoulder, pushing it downwards under the patient's back, lift the patient's shoulder upwards so that the patient hangs in the air. And other ministers draw the hand of the patient towards the stomach. If the patient is too weak, they can hold something heavy with them to prevent the dislocation from returning immediately.
And it can also be reset in another way: and it is as if one drives a long needle into the earth, so that the head should be as round as a pea, and not too thick or too thin; Then it should be placed under the patient but with soft cloth underneath, and the patient should lie long on the bed; then stretch their hand beyond the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, perform this treatment: take one stick of two arms in length and four fingers in width, which has a rounded tip to be pushed entirely inside the joint, according to this shape:
Then put the stick on top of the joint's head wrapped in cloth to prevent it from hurting the patient, then place it inside the patient's joint; extend one arm above the stick, and hold the shoulder above the stick, and the forearm at the end of the upper arm, then place the forearm on a piece of wood about as wide as your hand, and stretch the hands below, and leave the body hanging from the other side; the joint will be reset at this point.
And when the joint is reset, whichever way it may be, you must place an equal piece of woolen cloth beneath the joint; then apply an ointment made with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk over the entire shoulder and around it; then hold the limb below the joint, and twist the linen thread around the ointment, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands in place.
And it is necessary that he eats little food, as long as the limbs are comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is hardened and not softened, it is healthy.
If the joint is displaced due to moisture that has come or for another reason, then you must administer three cauterizations as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
If you do all of this and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold or raise the arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is severed, crushed, or weakened; and know that the joint will never be relocated in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip, and limbs, whether front or back, is made by pressure and stretching of hands, and some other means are administered to it; and care should be given until it heals.
And after the healing comes pain in the member, and slow movement, then the patient uses warm baths many times, until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost
Know that the joint at the elbow is dislocated by points, and it goes in by points; and if it dislocates from all parts, front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected, because one can clearly see and feel it; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the ill arm with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly apart. For the joint is closed, and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder in any way.
And it must be reset as soon as an abscess comes to the place, for if an abscess comes to the place, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset at all, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps there the death comes.
And the restoration is as follows, when it can be returned to its original state: you extend your hand to his two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands towards the mirror according to the cue around, above and below, and push the joint back to his shoulders together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when you fold your hand to the other, and press from the root of the palm on the side that has been dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension. It is done by two assistants extending the arm and pulling it out with both hands, so that it does not move during the extension. Then turn the arm from each side, and when you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it;
And when the physician joins the joint to his hand, he should apply oil to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place until it returns.
And when it is in place, he places dry plaster with egg white on it and holds it firmly, then bends the arm around the patient's neck and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
If the joint is firmly in place, remove the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold well, renew the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if it feels sore after the repositioning of the joint, and it becomes motionless, bathe it well and rub it, and press until it is soothed; or place a sheep's fat pad on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it enter water. And when it swells, rub the joint gently, then replace the fat pad on top, and let it enter water; and do this two or three times until it is healed; if you see, place warm damp wool soaked with butter on it, and hold it in place; it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the wrist occurs, and its reset is easy compared to other joints; however, it should be returned to its place as soon as possible, in the same hour that it becomes dislocated, before the limb swells or an abscess forms there.
And the repositioning is that you put the affected hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and hold it steady so that it is even, so that its palm is above the appearance of the jointure, and push it until it returns.
Moreover, you must make sure it is in its place; then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table for stretching and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table and have them rest their hand above the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
And if not, strain the plasters against abscesses and pus-filled sores with pressure, and leave it like that to start healing.
And if it cannot be endured, and you cannot put it back in place after any days, the dislocated joint will stay that way.
And the patient should not be harmed by fire except when his hand is injured and cannot exert force at all: therefore know that the nerves or arteries are cut, there is no other means of help but to strain by fire cautery in this case, and in case of an emergency, nothing else helps.
And when the hand is injured, apply the plaster as we have said, then strap and leave for five days, then unbind and let be.
If it cannot move well and there is no swelling, moisten with warm water and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand are sometimes dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm.
Then push the finger, and bring the dislocation back to its place as much as possible, then hold the head of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and let it rest for 2 days, then equalize it on the second day; and tie it, as we have said, and the dislocation for a day, and make it move, and re-tie it; and do this often until it is straight.
And similarly, do the same when the shoulder is dislocated in the stomach of the arm, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another place.
When the vertebrae of the back are dislocated.
When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for death soon follows the patient.
And the signs are that the discharges jump of their own volition and cannot be held, and many times the limbs become softened, or the two legs or the two arms, or one.
And often the spine becomes paralyzed at four parts; that which becomes paralyzed in the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is that you inquire whether the gilbositez has come from childhood; if it has not, there is no cure or healing for it altogether.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of healing say in great words, but there is not much benefit in all this:
But I have summarized it according to my intention and made instruments in various ways:
I say that in the swelling that comes before, there is no remedy nor health.
and similarly the one that comes directly in two sides, can be cured only by the one who comes at the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on one side evenly, and have pressure underneath him so he does not bruise himself;
then insert a thistle into the head in the ground and another one at the feet, and tie a rope around the elbows of the patient, and another one at the hips, and ankles, and knees;
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two tendons;
And be tightly bound, the tendons as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine forming it, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a beam that is four arms long, hollowed out below, and the patient lies on the side, and push the end of the beam below, then put the middle of the beam on the spine; and place the mirrors' feet on the other end of the beam, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it on the wheel that turns by hand.
And you must insert two needles into the patient's head of a great arm, and towards the feet insert two others, with a palm's space between each needle, both inside and outside.
and in each needle have one prick or turn of the needle, and let the needles be firmly in the earth so they do not move; and between two needles have one needle turning, like a ligature, and in two turning needles have two small needles of a palm's length, to turn the turn.
Then tie the ligature that is between the shoulders towards the head and the other ligature towards the feet to the opposite needle, and each of the assistants turns the needles along the entire ligature, and the master equalizes the spine as stated.
And when it is level, place a plaster containing desiccant on top, with plenty of egg white, then press it, then apply the steel of a three-foot long rod to the area of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a cord, as we have said, and let the patient use warm compresses until he is well.
If anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the rod we have mentioned earlier; sometimes they administer a piece of wood.
Sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spondile of the back, and it is believed that this is a dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, because one should not have any presumption: perhaps death will come.
Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Know that the joints of the shoulder and the joints of the upper arm come from dislocations only, and not otherwise like other joints; and the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in four parts: internally and externally, front and back; and more internally than the others, slightly dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation internally is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and the sick knee joint is wider than the healthy one, and the sick cannot bend their knee in the fire. And it is the loin that is swollen with abscess heat because the joint of the knee comes there.
And the sign of the one who experiences this happening, is that this event is contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one whose leg is straightened according to completion; however, do not double the knee in pain, and if you wish to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and it holds its urine, and the ankle swells, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of the one whose leg is twisted behind, is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the calf is below the ribs.
The translations for the given lines are as follows:
And for the fresh dislocation, which has four types of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint and push it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, there is no need for any other cure.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must equip one strong assistant and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or one ligament attached to the thigh; and another servant extends his hand over it in this manner that he pushes his hands beneath the knees, then tightens a soft rope around the thigh; and another ties the head with the rope;
and all extend from above and below simultaneously, so that the patient is lifted off the ground once and remains hanging (or suspended).
This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If the joint is not dislocated, treatment should be applied to its appearance. When a dislocation occurs at the shoulder, you must remember to have the patient lie on their unaffected side, then tie a rope around the thigh, and the limb below the angle, then pull the rope up towards the angle and towards the upper arm (humerus).
Then take another assistant to hold the affected thigh with their arms and embrace the thick part of the hip, stretching it out in a wide-open manner: the dislocation will return to its place now; this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then tie the patient's two feet together with a strong rope above their heels and knees, and extend the affected leg two feet further than the others.
Then let him be hung by the neck from a post, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then command one servant to embrace the thigh, and let another servant hang with the patient, who will hold the thigh, for the joint is about to return immediately.
When the dislocation is at its maximum, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the previous example, and attach one strap tightly around the affected leg and also on the thigh.
Then place two rods, one at the neck and another at the feet, then insert one rod between the thighs of the patient in the proper position. And plant it with moist cloths around, so that it does not burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirror place his hand equal to the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place it on a table and press as we have said in the swelling, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended as quickly as possible, and according to what I have said; and place his hand on the side of the injured angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the side, it should not be stretched downwards or raised up off the ground, but rather it should remain as when a woman is dislocated on her side, as we have said in the lying-down position on two beds. and be on his back, and the limb stretched as we have said before, and it should be pressed against the joint towards the table.
and when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then align the thighs, and place the cushion, and hold with a strap so that the bed does not move.
And it rests for 3 or 4 days, then you dislocate it, and place a splint on it; if you see they are even, hold them in position as before, and let it be. After 3 days, dislocate it again, and make it move well until the limb is comforted.
The dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated in three ways: inside and outward, behind; and not forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
then take their knee in your palms, pull it back between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee joint into a V shape. Another servant should extend their foot until the knees return to their place, and the sign is that the leg should easily bend at the knee.
And spread the plaster on it, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly for three or four days, then release it; do not make the patient walk until the limb is comfortable.
And if it's not healed yet, apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is sound.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and the affected area where it is dislocated:
The reduction is easy, and it should be done gently when it is only bruised.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and tie four ministers (attendants) to him, above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice towards the left, lift it up high, and push the foot forcefully upwards;
and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns to its place, that is good; if not, continue the work because it will return.
And if it cannot return in such a way, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and insert a firm peg firmly into the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around to prevent the patient from being pricked.
Then anoint the thigh, and another minister extends the foot to their hands or one link, so that they lie across the neck of the foot. Then each minister extends evenly, and the pegs should be close between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while they are stretched.
Then place the mirrors equal to the dislocation in your hands, and let another minister hold the sound leg below it, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, put the plaster and woolen cloth on top, form it, tie it to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle, so the ligature is not too tight.
Then leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligature loosens, tighten it again; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and send the patient to walk for 4 days. And if it goes before that limit, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
If an abscess opens, you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
of the two
When the arms are dislocated, they must be stretched out gently without effort, and it is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or neck, you should make the patient sit straight on a flat surface or table, and place your foot on the affected joint opening, then press your foot firmly until it returns to its position.
When it is equal and there is no opening, place a two-legged table under the foot of your left leg, then tighten firmly and leave for four days, then undo it; make it rest until it heals.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies.
Do not be hasty in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful and patient, do not be bold.
and at the beginning, use cooling emollient poultices on abscesses, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you see no hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess subsides.
And when the limb is in place, administer soothing abscess-calming ointment, and treat the wound, as necessary, with dehydrated onions.
And if it's due to dislocation and broken bones, reduce them, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
And guard yourself from entering into fear, as I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body. Amen
