I have completed this book for you, dear son, which is the summary of medical knowledge together with its completion, and have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is foreign to all things everywhere, the science is destroyed and decayed, and there remains nothing of it that the hands have not changed, except for the small descriptions in books from the ancients. And from this comes errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off and learning is removed.
It appears that I will vivify it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of iron cauteries, and the other instruments of work accompanied by the statement of their declaration and preparation, as necessary.
And because no good masters of hand are found in our time, the art of medicine has become extended. And one who engages in this should be trained in the science of anatomy as Galen says, to such a degree that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their forms and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, ligaments, and the number of muscles, and the demenement and movement of veins and arteries, and the direction of their outlets.
And therefore, Hippocrates says that the hand with the thumb is much, and with work is little; and the same applies in the art of surgery.
In the beginning of this book, we say to those who are not learned in the matters previously mentioned that they beware lest they choose incorrectly and operate on men; thus I have often seen more of those who engage themselves in this science and abandon their knowledge and sense of experience.
For I saw a foolish man who opened one abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in the neck; thus so much blood flowed out that the woman died between her hands.
And another man who removed an arrow from a man's side, and the arrow was large; he carried with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within two days.
And I had been called to treat it before, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the arrow, and knew well that if it were not cut off, he would die.
And another man took care of one duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was an injury; and the ignorant healers bound the break over the wound with strong sutures, and left no skin at the wound, and let it be in this state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated; and it remained thus until the leg swelled up completely and the toes came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come untie the leg; and when I dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But every corruption of a limb was already confirmed and could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop moving through the limb until all the limb was completely destroyed.
And I saw another mirror that collapsed and then swelled due to the malice of its lord.
Because a cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humour, should not be touched with iron unless it can completely remove what is corrupt in it.
And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, operations where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
It is necessary that you take care of it so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Take arms in your case, and treat your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave those diseases that are full of great suffering; and remove your weapons from what causes doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can depart from this world to the other of glory.
Galen warns in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of bad disease, lest you be called foolish fool."
I have organized this treatise according to .iii. chapters.
The first chapter is about cauterization with fire and against cauterization with medicine for ague, and this chapter is arranged from the head down to the feet; and the forms of instruments, and the ironwork of cautery, and everything necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about ventouse and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is arranged with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the shapes of instruments.
Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality and harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the humors and their harm is a long and subtle science and secret responses; and many wise men spoke about it and agreed with it; but they did not give us enough words, for I reduce the length.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally for all constitutions where there is matter, whether it be two constitutions: namely hot and wet constitution or dry and wet constitution.
In hot and dry constitution together with matter, some have spoken and said that the fire cautery is great help; and others have said the opposite: that the cautery does not benefit in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; and he who said otherwise that cautery provides great help for hot and dry disease in men's bodies. For when you comprehend the body of man and his heat to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it once by experience.
And every way, do not interfere except by those who have tried it and know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their occurrences and the time span; we are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the people gathered together and agreed to the cautery.
And know, my son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing and has more goodness than cautery from burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and it does not harm any other part except the one being heated.
Burning medicines spread from one member to another by spreading, and bring diseases of great suffering to the sick member, and may kill the patient.
The fire due to its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not do anything if there is no excess.
I have found this through experiment and the long service and study that I have put into my art, and it was in line with the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of speech, as I do not wish to deprive you of the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it subdues diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstration; accept this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when cauteries should be done and chose their companions.
And I say that cautery is beneficial in all times, because the harmful events occurring are suppressed by the aid of cautery; and similarly if cauteries are necessary for pain relief, it cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the member.
And do not think so ever, dear child, as the foolish mind does; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say it this way; but it is not as they think, because cauteries are nothing more than medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors causing pain, and works faster than other medicines due to its power and its virtue.
And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease itself and its power; and superfluities gather in him through the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as in the case of cauteries for pain, and similar cases, and that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand at all why cauteries are called the rear of medicine; but they do not believe that cauteries have any value after medicine; however, their intentions are false; and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it works. Then it becomes clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron ones, but they did not say this without reason, due to the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; they also said that the lees of the cautery do not cause inflammation, but this is not true as I have proven, and I have found it to be true for some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron ones, as they said.
And indeed, when you heat something with gold, you do not know when it is hot due to the color of the gold, and it can suddenly cool down, or if heated too much, it makes fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And for this reason we use the fire cautery which we have adapted to our work.
Moreover, I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, so that the way may be easier to find.
hot olive oil cautery
This cautery is good for coldness and moistness on the brain, and in it there are two ways that one does this due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and due to many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient is purged with a soluble medicine cleansing the head for three or four nuis (days) according to what the virtues and age and accustomance of the patient can tolerate; and then heat is applied to the back of the patient's head.
And then make the patient sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on a soft surface; afterward, place the root of your palm on the root of its neck between its two eyes; and where the elbows will come, it will bleed thereafter, then heat the cautery called "olivare", as follows:
Then place the hot cautery on the spot marked with ink, and draw it along while pulling and twisting your finger; then remove your finger immediately, and watch the spot to see if you can see a small bone; if you cannot see it, repeat the cautery process until you do as I have told you; afterward, take one pinch of wax, wrap it in soft cotton, and put it on the spot, and leave it for three days; afterwards, put soft butter on top; and leave it until the burn is healed; after that, treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
And the ancients said that when the wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason, if necessary, assist with leeches.
And said that one should let the cautery rest for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then heal the burnt bone part.
And the other said that the cautery should be left for so long, and pushed down with such force as to break the bone as wide as .i. vertoil (approximately 2 fingers) because the humors flow out; then the wound must be left open for a long time, afterwards it must be healed and soothed.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in all cases, except for some men with fear; and it seems to me that I should let them be; because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other limbs; and also when the head of the sick person is weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems more healing and beneficial to me, and from this method I work in such a way that it brings salvation.
From the ancient pain of the head
When there comes chronic and lasting pain in the head, the patient should use warm herbs and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the head, oils, and plasters; and if they perform cautery on it, it is not effective.
If the patient's headache is strong, be careful that it is not too cold; then cauterize under that cautery a little bit as we have said before.
After performing cautery on each horn of the head as we have said before, and perform one cautery called "vasselz"; it is a little cauterizer in which ventouses are placed; align your hand so you cannot see the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about that later; and the cauteries on the horns should be finer than those with which one cauterizes the midline of the head, and this is the shape:
fire cautery of the head When sudden pain comes in a part of the head and the disease spreads to the oil (brain), and the head is purged with diverse medicines, and other treatments have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and yet it does not help; then cauteries are made according to two ways, that is, with hot medicine or fire.
The cautery with hot medicine is that you take a hot iron and remove the bark from it, and then place one piece of this heated iron on each side of the painful area, so that you can place the hot iron under the skin; and when it is placed in this way, keep the iron under the skin and leave it for twelve hours; then release the iron and treat the wound fiercely and let the wound heal for two or three days; then cover it with linen dipped in butter so that it can be applied again.
After the ointment treatment until it heals; and if you see that someone uses some medicines burning as I have written or ten times treats with burning medicines.
The fire cautery is of this kind. Heat the iron in this shape:
And it is called "close" because the head is made in the shape of a cross or with .1 inch of curvature and a small size; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and move the iron slightly, but not too much so that half of its thickness burns; and withdraw your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which is away from it, and let blood flow abundantly.
After putting cotton in the wound and leaving it for three days; then put dampened cotton on top of it; and heal the shoulder with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this dislocation using the cautery called "cultellare", all around the tip, be careful not to touch the artery in this dislocation which should not be old.
of the dislocation
When treating dislocation as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases and it does not improve, and you see that cauterizing before mentioned medicine and iron do not help, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and place it against the side of the wound with a line of half a finger's length, and press once with your hand without touching the artery and without going to the bone; beware of the jaw that stops speech when one eats, and do not let nerves have regard for the mute and spasms come to the patient, and beware of corruption of blood from the artery when it is cut or fear comes too much and especially to those who are not familiar with it, and are not students and tested; leave the operation in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is explained in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter about the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
for the pain of the ears due to coldness
When the ear has pain due to coldness, and it has been treated with soluble medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "pins", which is made as follows:
After marking all around the sick ear, or around both of them where the pain is located, move away slightly from the root of the ear since you have signed the place; and place 10 points around each ear; after curing it until it is healed.
of the mouth cautery
A cautery is only used to treat tumors that move due to fluid, as we have said in the classification of diseases; and do not apply a cautery to similar conditions arising from sores or nerves.
When you treat this type of torture which mutes the flow of blood from eyes, and purges the head and throat, and this is ineffective, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little further from the temple, and the third at the junction of the lips; place the cautery on the part that opens healthy, and make the cautery towards the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a fist; and leave the cautery until half of the hair is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the shape of the scalpel we have mentioned earlier, but it is slightly more subtle and the blades should be a little thicker; after treating the wound as I have previously stated, allow it to heal when it is healed.
If apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the forehead, and one where the wound is called "vas" as we have previously stated, and the last cautery on the stomach mouth; treat it as we have said before.
From the littera (or litterary)
In this illness, give the patient large years and round pills made from the brain of a rooster; then place the plaster of mustard seed (sinapis) on the head of the patient, which is written or treated with plasters; and this is the way of cautery: if it is done as I have said.
If it is a wound in the head or neck, it is good; and if it is not, make four cauterizations of the vein on the head descending to the neck, with a space between each cauterization of two fingers wide; and cure it as others do; and if you see it needs more, make one in the middle; and if necessary, make two others over the two horns, and cure it until it is healed; and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be as I have said before.
From the coldness of the head The head of the patient should be cleaned for years and as we have said before; after that, anoint the head of the sick person, then make a fire cautery on the head and one at each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the sick person is weak, and the disease is severe, do four cauteries on the spine of the back; leave it until the most painful part is burned, then cool your hand; after that, cure it until it is healed, and remove the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to modify the head with various treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and enduring to take medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make them gargle and often chew food to modify the head; afterwards heat the skull with a pestle, and perform one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the fontanelle, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and enduring, perform cauteries as I have said for him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cauteries be olive-oil according to the method that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, perform one subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupt and large phlegms, then the cautery of such kind should be applied as we have said to those who suffer from paralysis.
If due to melancholy, the excesses decline towards melancholy and the body of the patient is wet, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been mentioned earlier in the division.
After the king, let the patient's head be anointed with one linen cloth well made, also like a circle, place it on his head; and the patient should cross his arms, and he should be well held from all sides; after that, anoint him, using old butter of goats; and heat the cloth carefully, so that it can be tolerable for him to endure it; afterwards, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance, until he is cured.
If you wish to perform cauterization in many places, do it all over the cautery. This method of cauterizing aggravates the brain greatly; then put cotton dampened with butter and linseed oil on top.
of the eyes When the eyes come first with the signs I have said in the division, then you should begin and give the patient something purifying the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times while fasting.
After commanding him to lie down on his back, make a fire cautery at the back of his head, and make two cauteries on the two temples where the swelling of the eye is located or if it's on one temple; and strike with the entire cautery all the veins and arteries that are underneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and take care to prevent bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it by your power as you can.
I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how to extend it; and sometimes a cautery or hot iron is made underneath the two bones at the back.
the body of tears
When the eyes' tears are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or they are near the arteries that appear on the forehead; and it is seen that it is cold, fleumatic superfluities, then you make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the awesending to the eyes: i.e., cautery under the forehead, and 2 cauteries above the temples, and 2 cauteries or haiterel beneath the 2 bones; and if necessary, cauterize skillfully above the eyebrows with a small cautery.
the body of the tears within the eyes
If you treat it according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give a sick person 2 nightshades; after which, heat the head and make cautery or oil cautery on the head; and make 2 cauterizations called "clavilis" above the eyebrows, a little below the hairline; be careful not to cover the artery. And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then use this cautery known as "olivare". This is its shape:
And if you wish to make two cauteries on the two serpents as long as they are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that pricks the oil Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted into sweat, and they prick oil, and a cauterization is performed according to two methods, namely by fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy position; afterwards on paper draw a figure similar to the fennel seed, and it should be the beginning of the sign where the hairs are; then place cotton soaked in egg glair and musk-scented persillaire oil over the oil. Then heat the cauterizer according to the following form:
After cauterizing the figure that you have signed several times, let the blisters be burned in that place; and the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it for 3 days, then put soft cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards, apply ointment until it is healthy.
And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened then repeat the cautery on that same place as you did earlier; and if the hairs are falling out, cauterize it until the paper is raised to its natural position, and they are even, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
The medical hot cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, from each one an ounce, grind them together well; and do it quickly so it does not cool, then spread it onto the form you made like the myrtle leaf, and put paper on top of it; if the patient has pain in one oil only, it should be operated on in one, and if in both as well; and put cotton soaked in egg white under the oil; and the patient's head should be kept healthy and you press your finger every once in a while showing above the medicine, and move it all the times when the patient feels burning sensation from the medicine, because it burns like fire. When you have done this for a long time, administer the medicine to your arm. And when the biting has passed, lift the arm and observe if the papyrus is raised in the same way as it was lifted by burning or incision; and if it is thus, it is good. If not, apply more medicine on the arm or the medicine has not worked yet, while your efforts are equal and your eyes focused; then place moistened cotton over the burned area until the blisters have cooled, afterwards treat the arm with ointment called "dyafenis" and others until it heals.
And if you need to be careful in your work so that the medicine does not drip from the hairs.  And if the papyrus becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, reapply the medicine on the area affected by the papyrus properly, as you have done before; afterwards heal it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the mirror-leaf:
And know that the eye of men is diverse in size and smallness, according to which you should adjust your techniques; do not deviate from the correct path for him who is engaged in this art.
Of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When curing a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on a clean surface and hold it still between your hands so that it does not move or shift; then put cotton soaked in egg white or fresh linseed oil on the area to be cauterized; after heating the cautery, apply it to the affected area shaped like the tip of a feather, ensuring that the cautery is also applied; if you see, it should be pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, it should resemble a tent; however, even if the cauterized area looks different, it still serves for your purpose.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it, drain the pus forcefully; afterwards place the hot iron cauterizer on top, keep your hand on the cauterizer at the part of the neck near the oil, so that your hands do not make a mistake; and place the cauterizer in the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
If you start the cautery up to the bone, it will be good. If not, continue the cauterizing once more and another time as needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards put cotton soaked in butter on top, treat the wound with drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days have passed without improvement, apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing the fistula that none of the ancients spoke about. Understand this as a fistula, and cut the opening; afterwards put in the slit one thin camel's gall from which this formula comes: And they make the quantity of one pound of plaster; hold your hand firmly and do not let the patient move at all, until the plaster solidifies; it is necessary that you place the oil on the patient's cotton wool soaked in egg white or water: the plaster will seal the wound, and the healthy part heals marvelously.
If the wound is healed by the cautery we mentioned, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer purgatives and bring the wound to the body heat according to what is appropriate in its own place.
cavities in lips Many times cracks occur in lips, which are called "poil," and also in children's lips.
When treating these cracks as we have mentioned in the previous lines, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small cautery knife according to this shape:
And immediately place it into these cracks until it reaches the bottom; then cover the area with cerote (cerotum) until it heals.
from the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after becoming purulent and growing and turning into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve: then it is necessary that you have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards plug or close the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at its source, and beyond it; and do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
the slight movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but it does not help, put the head of the patient in a warm bath; after heating the cautery, shape it like a cane and place it on the tooth; then insert the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and repeat the cautery as desired; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and rinse frequently.
And in such manner, the teeth that are moving should be immobilized, and the gums made soft and relaxed, and the moisture corrupt dried up.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold or there is cold or fever, and the medicines have no effect, then it will be necessary to use cautery according to two methods: cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow and the end in a copper or iron spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent (small cloth), and wet it in boiling butter, and put it on the painful tooth immediately and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the tooth again, and put hot iron on it until the heat comes to the surface of the tooth.
1. "The fire cautery is as follows: take a rod of iron or brass, and it should be thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, the shape will come next, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that day itself or the following."
When the scrofulas are of a fluid and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery hair as described below, and have two openings for the smoke to issue from the other side; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, use cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it as such for three days; and apply soft cotton soaked in butter until the pain subsides; afterwards cure the place with ointments and poultices until it is healed.
When the humors prevail in the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged by soluble medicines; afterwards make cautery at the root of the throat, but do not go up to the throat and only use a little bit of heat. Afterwards make another cautery at the joint between the neck and the spine, and it is called "clavile" according to our previous form; and cure the place as previously said until it is healed.
of the throat When all and sickness of the worm are due to cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor heat, and the disease is old, you should perform two fire cauterizations on the forcible joints; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned above.
And if you wish, perform cautery by pricking all the cautery called "poins" of the form mentioned earlier in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be up to 30 or more, around it. After curing the joint as previously said, let the cauterization be at four intervals according to this form:
And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make four at once.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After placing the patient on his back and on his side, press the cavity that is within the thigh with your left hand's fingertips; if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the fire cautery in the shape of two needles as shown here:
and the dislocation will be corrected with these four fire cautery tools; it is made with the cautery that has two needles, because the shape of cauterization consists of several cauteries; and the nerves are shaped according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has two needles:
And sometimes it is cauterized above this, namely the nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After applying the cautery, break it with silk; then make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
If it is dislocated above (the shoulder), which happens rarely, then apply cautery on the thick part of the caution splint or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is repositioned, the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
the cautery of pleurisy
The ancient said that one should perform cauterizations on the pleura using roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest you can find, and it should be dry and as large and long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, heat it up, and cauterize one cautery between the chest and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower in the area below the beard; two cauterizations on the fifth costal cartilage and the sixth, declining slightly; one cautery on the bladder, and one more on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on each side of the bladder, but not the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, instead, be gentle as when smelling.
Some ancient men said that one should use a cautery resembling a razor and heat it up, placing it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; but the pain subsides as we have mentioned in the liver abscess. However, in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula appears that cannot be cured.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of mice as we have said in the divisions of care, and it does not help at all, then apply three ways of cautery, which are all good.
One of the ways is that you make four or six cauterizations in a row, according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the cautery of the liver as we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, let the patient be conscious on his back.
Another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; take the cavity where the patient's swelling comes towards the left side, and lift the cavities from there according to the cavity, following the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After setting the two inflamed nerves on fire until they are pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, thus having four; if you see, cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.  After the cure when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is worth noting that the other cures mentioned before should be done first.
Diuretics
Cauterizing does not help with edema (dropies), except in the way called "asclytes". If you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in the divisions, and your cure is of no benefit, then you must do four cauteries around the liver, one on the stomach, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one in the area of pain; and ensure that the cauteries are well placed near the thick part of the kidney.
After letting the fire cautery heal for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; healing would hasten and the two intentions will be combined with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the claw as we have shown before; and for the back it is olive-shaped, according to what was mentioned above.
of the swelling of feet When the feet are swollen in one who is edematous, and filled with watery citrus fluid, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and dip your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, lest the watery citrus fluid spreads too far, and let the cautery be in this shape:
After making two cauteries in each leg at the tip of the index finger; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and another outside the leg; and leave the cauteries above for a while to heal, so that the water drains out; afterwards cure the other wounds as we have said.
of the swelling
When the swelling of the belly comes from cold and moisture, while the digestive and retentive qualities that are in the stomach and intestine are inhibited, and it cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having strong symptoms, then do this: make one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before (cautere of the stomach), or cauterize around the belly, in a circular manner; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, one subtle cautery at the clavicle, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see excessive moisture and the patient suffering, do a cautery on the elbow, one on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach, near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when aid is available.
Treatment of hemorrhoids:
When hemorrhoids are deep-rooted, whether one or more, and they are old and filled with large cold and corrupted humors, and as we have said in the previous sections, they cannot be cured; it is beneficial to perform cauterization: 4 on the spine of the back, which is completely exposed beneath the almecdate pouch and triangulated, and 1 caution below the navel. 2 doses;
And if you think the stomach is chilled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then a large caution should be applied to the stomach as described previously, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen entirely with a cautery claw; leave the caution open for a long time. After curing the wound, let it heal when it is clean.
of the fleshiness called "thelul"
When you cut an artery, take the fire-cautery that appears like a razor and then burn it all over the artery you are cutting; leave your hand there so the tip of the cautery comes to the vein opening, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much blood, cauterize each time as we have said; afterwards, treat with healing herbs until they heal completely; and if you cauterize a large area with a large fire-cautery, it will provide more help.
of an unhealed wound
When a patient cannot endure such large incision or opening, as we shall explain in its place, comes the sickness that can only be healed by cautery.
When a fistula comes, and it is filled with pus and corrupted moisture, one must test the entire extent of it subtly, and be aware that you know the entire extent of the opening to the fullest. After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, put it into the fistula according to the size of the opening that the pus has entered, and continue to heat the cautery until the body part and corruption are burned, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of pus needing treatment; beware of burning the nerves that are there, and the large veins. If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not treat them outside the charned area, think that it is not persistent; after treating the area until it is healthy, if the area is seared and the material has been removed for a long time, know that the area is completely healthy; but if the material has not been removed, know that the area is cut, and the bone is corrupted at that point; and in this way, as one of those we will say about it.
kidney disease When pain in the flank comes with large swelling and does not take on female form, then it is necessary that you make a cautery over the kidneys from both sides using the cautery claw as we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be 4 cauteries in a line, and they will provide more help.
of the bladder When the bladder becomes soft and weak from cold or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the area outside the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, each cautery should be as long as a thumb; and make one cautery behind the back, if necessary; and make the cauteries incisions like the shape previously described.
of the anus When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term ends late; and when they come, then it causes great pain: then you must make four cauteries around the womb, as we have said, or cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauterization be with a hot iron, as we have said.
The pustule
When viscous moistures flow towards the abscess of the pustule and cause it to move from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the location of the source can be found by sight. If you need to cauterize the patient over the abscess of the pustule at one cautery resembling a circle, with the sign pointing before the place around the abscess as it turns, so that the abscess is within the circle; and let the cauterization be similar to that used for the stomach.
And if this fire cautery is not present for you, make 4 large olive-oil cauterizations instead, and let them be as deep as all the others; and heal it until it is healed.
of the pain from the hernia When pain occurs in the hernia bag, it is due to coldness and moisture; the sick are healed with what we have said above in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the sick person from the gross humors using fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
After the cautery, its method is in two ways: either with burning substances, or fire cautery. Fire cautery is done in various ways, one of which is as follows: you shall cauterize on top of the boil on the haunch, four triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make a deep and wide incision between each cautery that is the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes cautery is done in the middle on top of the boil on the haunch, for which there are four according to this shape:
And if you wish, if you cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned in the dislocation of the haunch, but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire haunch, and all the edges should be burned.
And this is how one does it in sciatica when the pain is in the haunch and cannot reach the thigh nor the leg. If the pain comes to the thigh and the leg, two cauteries should be done where the patient says that the pain lies, and one cautery above the ankle 4 fingers, with a small space on the left side; let the cauteries be scalpel-shaped, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toe or near it, cauterize where he feels the pain 2-4 fingers or 4 in the cautery which is called "poins".
And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a fire cautery using either a knife or circular device, and be careful in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on too long so as not to burn the nerves and large arteries, and not to cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
I have seen many who have performed a cautery on the foot of the leg and left it too long, causing the entire leg to swell, as well as the toes, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a belly solution in which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, perform a cautery on one and the other in this manner. // The wise men say about the cautery of the shin, here is the method: make one iron rod with a head as thick as a nail of the thumb or slightly smaller, and be crosswise or between-crosswise at a distance equal to the width of a walnut; and the crosspieces should be four parts wide and shaped like nuts, and have a single handle of iron well made. This is its shape:
And let it be scalded until it is all red and boils, and then put it on top of the sick man's haunch, and turn it over to the healthy side; and cauterize once with a fire cautery, and leave it for four days; then make a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards, cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance and not many who use it; but this is a good cautery for those who can bear it, and where it should be applied.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either from falling or from striking or from excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter, none of these similar causes are worth cauterization, unless it is caused by the influx of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be bled of fetid pills or similar, and make it on the back where the pain is located, three inches marked with incisions, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the power and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cauterization should be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do four cauterizations or four on the cautery called "clavile moien" in this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrowed anus when they defecate, and fear; you can find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that appears above the other spines.
When you see this [object] and wish to cure it, if necessary, use the fire cautery in this manner.
Increase the size of the fire cautery on each part of the spine. And if you see, apply the cautery around the spine, pointing .2 or .3 inches, with the tips close to each other. After that, cure the area until it is healed as we have said, and be careful not to use a cautery in a glandular area containing nerves.
of the pain in the joints
When pain in the joints is from swelling affecting every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and it is caused by coldness and medicine cannot cure it, it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the patient prepare a cautery around the joint of the foot, and the cautery should be olive-shaped according to this form:
If it is necessary to prick the face of the foot, prepare a cautery all over the foot, which is called "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, prepare a cautery on each knee. Four cauteries or four from each part should be olive-shaped; and if you need more, do more, but hold your hand only as long as the tips of the coal are burned.
And if the pains extend to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make incisions around the wrist; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, make incisions on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and consider medicines. For if you give good care and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's aid.
Of the breaking of the siphac (or siphunculus)
When the hernia comes in anguish, and the bulge descends into the groin and this happens suddenly, if you want to treat it, you must not let him eat anything that day; you should use things that relax the abdomen so the stool passes from his stomach. Afterwards have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to cling to his loins as tightly as possible until the bulge has receded, then press it to your sides, and apply pressure on top of the hernia above the joint of the little finger, and at every sign that is similar to half a circle on the chest. Then heat the cautery in the shape that is shown here:
until it is white and gives out sparks (or flames). Then press the bulges back to their place; and have the assistants hold his hand so they do not return. Tightly bind both his thighs to the patient, put a cushion and a belt on his thighs, and another one around his waist that holds his hands. Then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, holding it straight and until you reach the bone. If you do not touch the bone at first, try again until you reach it; be careful that the bulge does not come out while you are applying the cautery. Do not burn it, and make sure the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And the cauteries for children should be fine-tuned according to their size, and for adults according to theirs; after 3 days, cure the place of the cauterization with butter until the burn is healed; after that, cure it with other unguents until it is healthy; and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days, so that the wound may heal well; and it is necessary to allow his excrements to be delayed, so that the feces do not protrude when he gets up to go to the rooms.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, provide him with a well-made strap and keep it for another 40 days; let him rest well, so that he does not work too much or eat and drink too much, nor talk too loudly; and when he follows these instructions, he will be completely healthy. And I will say more about the treatment of amputation in its chapter afterwards. of the cutting into the belly
When roundworms come into other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow more, then let one fire cautery be made according to its quantity, and it should be burned the third part of the belly; afterwards, cure as we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at four angles according to this form:
Mark the place of the worm and make a line above it in width over the roundworm, and another below it, and press your hand all along the cautery handle. But the first cauterizations are lighter and easier to move.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes in any member, either due to falling or being injured, and that pain lasts for a long time and the medicine does not work, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness, and its virtue and location of twisting and pain. If it heals from the first cauterization, that is good; if not, repeat another cauterization on top of it, as this is the custom, because the member nearest to the wound should change, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient heals.
When a wound occurs due to cutting or an injury, and pus comes out of it, and the limb surrounding the wound becomes inflamed, then it should be dressed with the medicine called "meselerie," and the dressing should cover the wound entirely, and the dressing should be applied daily until the wound heals.
The poultices are sometimes aided by cautery with great help, and the same applies to illness that comes from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you observe it starting, be careful and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither pus nor decay remains, then apply five cauteries on the head: one at the top of the head, another near the front towards the end of the hair; two on the temples, and one at the back of the skull; leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and let the scabs come out until the vapors of the large humors can escape; then cauterize the mice according to what is described.
And if the swelling is spread out everywhere; it clearly indicates that you must burn with these cauteries which we have said: one on the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and one small one, and two on each shoulder; two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of nerves that are above the ankles, do not burn them; sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the fist, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Know that the more cauteries you do, the more help it gives, and it is beneficial to him; and know that the sick do not feel pain from cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cauterizations be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the art of iron smithing. After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
inflammation or swelling
When a swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils and plasters but remains unhealthy, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness; and let the cautery be slightly deep into the flesh. Then cure it with ointments until it becomes healthy. And sometimes a cautery is made on the hand, foot, back, at the nerve's opening that makes the limb numb, and in this way the swelling is removed; but no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the nerves moving the body.
When a boil or abscess breaks open and is left to heal on its own without treatment, and it remains swollen, then apply leeches to the affected area according to its size; and let the leeches suck until the swelling goes down. And sometimes leeches are applied to the hand, foot, back, at the opening of the nerve that makes the limb numb, and in this way the boil or abscess is drained; but no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" appears and the medicine devices do not work, then cauterize it with a deep cautery according to the size of the affected area until the blister is removed and its color changes; then apply a poultice made from barley flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with goose blood and woodpecker blood, of each one part; mix everything together, tie it in a cloth, and place it at the affected site until it becomes healthy.
The treatment of scrofula by cautery
When scrofula begins and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that looks like a circle surrounding the entire scrofula, although some wise men say that cautionery should also be done in the middle of the scrofula; but I do not think it is good because it may ulcerate and corrupt it, and I have seen this happen once; a more appropriate thing is to cauterize around it, with the cautery called "circule", as we have said in the discussion about cautioneries.
the swelling that cannot grow larger
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which is slow to heal or because of the superfluous matter it makes or because of the patient's age when they are decrepit (meaning very old) and have little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it pierced completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery in this manner:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels the course of the pus to be cleared. Afterwards, cure it perfectly when it is healed.
The cure for fire is with iron.
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", which is simply a consumption of a limb, for it weakens the limbs just like fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place where cautionery with fire can be used, then cauterize the cauteries little and large, according to what is required at the location or where the illness is; after the cauterization of all parts until you have reached all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything corrupted should be removed. And then leave it for 3 days, and apply a soft ointment made from cauterized lees soaked in oil to the affected areas until the burns caused by fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the cure of the medicine-induced ulcer has healed. And if after 3 days you see that healthy tissue has not grown, it is good; and if this is not the case, then repeat the cauterization on the part that remains corrupted. And this consumption can sometimes be cured with a hot medicine instead of fire-induced cautionery; however, fire-induced cautionery is of greater aid. I have already said the cure for the hot medicine in the division: take as needed.
drops that come to the feet.
Often happens that in the feet, a disease called "clos" arises according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that bites the foot. And the cauteries for this disease are according to .ij. ways. This means cautery by fire, and cautery by hot water. Cautery by fire is that you heat .i. cautery comb as thin as a feather of a small bird, made of good iron so that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and that it has fine edges; after that, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it like this for .iij. days until it begins to emit pus; then make a plaster of bad herbs crushed with oil, and leave the plaster on it all night, and the nails will shrink and be uprooted from their roots. Then cure the place with soothing ointment until it is healed.
If it is transformed by moisture on the outside of the body, and often happens in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery by hot water; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or wood, or a feather from a small bird, and put it on the nail and press it, i.e., to remove warts; and put the cane on it so that it presses all around, then put a little hot oil on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in rotating so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water penetrates deeply to the root; and allow the patient a little the bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will uproot all its roots. Do this again until you have heated all those in the body, then cure them with ointments that soothe.
the cures for shaking
When some tremble from cold or quartan fever, or other illnesses, it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one cauterization at the heel, and one on the stomach using the olive cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
of putrid boils
Sometimes the body shows external signs of bathing or putrid boils that come from corrupted matter. In such cases, it is necessary at first to make a cautery on each chief of the boil: a subtle cautery made with a myrtle stick, so the point is held in fire, or a long root of aristolochia, or the cautery lenticularis. Sometimes they are cauterized from the start according to this method, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter that comes from them is destroyed, and they become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Often there are great flowings of blood from the cut artery at the wound or in the incision of the abscess or the cauterization of the member and similar things; it is a very bad thing to let it out.
And although this happens in some cases, hasten to put your finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very tight until the blood is stopped from flowing out; then take the olive oil cauteries, both small and large, until they are all red; then dip .i., whether large or small depending on the size and location of the wound where the artery is cut, in the oil and place the cautery on that vein while holding your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
And if the wound suddenly jumps when you hold your finger on the vein and the cautery is extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease doing one after the other until the wound is healed; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and that no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when a vein bursts from an artery, it cannot be well stopped at all, except by one of the four methods we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which can stop blood; and bind and hold it accordingly.
Whoever provides tight binding with strips of cloth or places hot things on it, or similar things, will not achieve anything beneficial if the bleeding does not stop.
And if this does not help and there is no remedy or medicine available, he must place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it wide until the bleeding stops above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but let it be dampened with cold water often so that it becomes very cold, until the bleeding stops and thickens and stops; and make inquiries in advance about the necessary cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and we explain the kinds of cauteries, their causes, instruments, forms, and types; I placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way because those things are easier to understand that way.
And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason, greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to undertake folly. For many people come in for treatment. Some of them are so afflicted by their disease that they die easily due to the foolishness they find in their sickness, and from the greatness of its malice; and it is from these that fear should arise. And of these there are those who give you advice, and say: "Wait, I am cured." And the illness is deceitful. It is not right that you consent to those who come to you in this way, but put more concern for your honor than for your desire, and do not act rashly but wisely from those things of which you are certain, and from which you can take and lose; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation is converted; and this will help you acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Dear dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of his hand, so be it.
I have divided this chapter into sections, in speaking of each section, just as I have written about the cauteries from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand what you need from that which is before you.
a head full of water
Know that this illness often comes upon children at birth, and when the head of the child is forcefully constrained; and sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
I have never seen this illness in adults, and all those I have seen hastened to death; therefore, it seems worthwhile for me to describe the treatment in some cures.
And I saw an infant whose head was filled with water, and it swelled daily to the point that it could not support it; and so much moisture accumulated that it seemed he would die, and this moisture is collected below the bone at the siphac, between the skull and the bone. Therefore, when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you must make a large incision over the head; let the size be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out. Here is the shape of the spatula:
If the swelling is larger and the abscess is greater, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the swelling is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the incisions at each end of the abscess opening wide when pressed from within and it does not respond: then you must make four cuts in the middle of the abscess according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the swelling outside. After that, tighten the cuts with bandages and powders, and put vinegar and oil in them, and leave it until the fifth day; then loosen it, and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head swell gradually, and give the patient dried meat from the swelling as much as necessary until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision is that you look for the size of the abscess and gather the pus; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Then take care that you do not cover the artery and make sure there flows blood, so that the patient dies a proper death by bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
diarrhea
When it happens to anyone with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or worse, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery, with which two arteries will be cut.
Then, when you see them, you must make the patient lean back; afterwards rub the place of two sharp fabrics on his neck until the arteries appear, then tighten the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein is biting, and the leves of one and the other are after the ears, and they are tied again; then mark the levels with a sign, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts. The cut should reach as far as the bone, and this should be wide through the neck.
And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, making a cut similar to two fingers wide across.
And when a vein is cut, it jumps continually outwards without ceasing.
And if the artery does not open at will, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then press and pierce up to the bone; and that amount of blood to be forced out is 7 cubic centimeters, and possibly a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone point by point, if the hot iron does not enter, then hold and bind the wound and cure it with ointment until it heals.
of migration
When an old migraine comes and the acute catarrh arrives, due to moisture in the eyes, heat in the temples, old foolishness and similar things; it is treated with methods of medicine but none of it helps; if arteries from the temples are cut and cauterized as we have said.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should lie down with his/her hair on the temples and pay attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not easily found except in some cold people; and if it is found, the patient should tighten his/her neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and moisten the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula as shown in the following form:
then lightly peel the skin to expose the artery, and pull it up towards the tweezers, and carefully separate the threads that are below each part; if the artery is thin, turn it at the end of the tweezers, then cut from that side according to the number of stones. For if it is not cut, it will not be moved completely in all places.
And draw out the blood from the 5th vein, up to the 3rd one; and if the artery is large, then you must tie it with a strong double thread of silk, so that pus does not come before the wound closes and there is flowing of blood; then remove the surplus between the 2 ligatures in the same hour itself, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the wound with the cautery cutlass up to the bone, but this is the hard work, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a hot constitution.
For cauteries are help for treating moisture: therefore it is of great help to those with moisture. For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the area with old cotton and place a well-made tourniquet on it; and when you loosen them, they should be cured with dry medicines that produce char, and bandages, until it is healed; and if without cutting the artery as you perform, hasten to cover it with cautery, or use vitriol and squeeze it with your hand so that the area becomes discolored; and if this is not available, place your finger on the area for a long time until it freezes, and rub the area with cold water until it stops, and then squeeze it as necessary; and the hard and more difficult part in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery of 2 parts, but they should be well thickened to keep their heat longer. For when the straw is too thin, it retains less heat. And there should be between the two blades, one of a thick gap, and then when you have signed [the wound] for two leagues, and you place the heated iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be spaced apart because it is not glued with this cautery throughout; and this is the shape of the cautery:
tears
When the eyes' tears are flowing from the veins that are above the testicle of fire, and medicine does not help in treating them; you see the patient writhing in pain, and his forehead sweating as if with fever; and if they are soft and moist, so that the hairs on the scrotum have fallen out, and the scrotum is burned, scalded by the heat of tears, it requires this treatment.
And it will be called by the ancients "contused cure," and you shall make incisions at the back of the patient who has this disease in the hairs on his forehead, then make 4 equal fissures along the length of the forehead; one of these fissures as two fingers all the way down from the forehead to the nose, and the other two as two fingers across the scrotum above the testicles, being careful not to cut the arteries that are on the sides of the scrotum; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each wound should be the size of four fingers joined together.
From the incision which is above the temple to the second incision; and scrape the entire core that is between the two cuts all the way up to the bone, then continue from the mid-incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatulumile (spatula).
Insert the tool called "cultellaire" into the first incision. It is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other side, and its shape is: Then place the sharp side towards the flesh and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mid-incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the cartilage towards the hairs until the incision is complete up to where it opens the core, and then continue in the mid-incision until the other end; and then press the blood equally and identify the level for the blood drawn; then place a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put moist cloths soaked in vinegar and oil on top, and make sure that there are no abscesses present; three days later, untie the suture, and apply a large amount of strong ointment made with basilicon oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
The root of the hairs
When a sharp catarrh comes commonly, and you see the thin and small hairs falling out, and the vision becomes cloudy, and burned paper-like spots; and the hair follicles itch, and when the head hurts with intense pain, and the patient coughs; then know through these symptoms that those materials and that catarrh do not come from anything but many veins, and the remedy for the cure that is there, if it exists, is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to bend his head back, then make a large incision along the forehead, and another deep one. [Take] about half an inch of cloth and begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then insert cotton between the two lips of the incision and hemp thread; then place moist linen cloths on top, and be careful not to cause an abscess to heat up; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote char growth.
In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of turmeric, and make a poultice with them; administer it in these wounds to promote healing throughout.
for the unstopping of ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains or animals, or stones or similar objects like iron; seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils; or something flowing like water and sand and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, stone or any other thing that does not fit in the ear, nor enters the ear, place the ear on the sun. If you see a stone, distill a little drop of violet oil or camphor oil, then apply extraction; and make it vomit with mustard, and stop up the nostrils when vomiting comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stretch the ear above. Often farting occurs through this cure; and if it does not fart, extract it with subtle tweezers as follows:
If it does not fart through the tweezers, extract it with thin wire of small length; and if it does not through this method, make a cane of wax and push its tip into the ear forcefully or through the ear canal, and stop up that which is around the cane with molten wax so that the wind cannot enter with the cane; then pull it out in the form of farting, for often it farts as we have said; and if it does not fart in this way, take glue of any kind and put it on anything that you find, and place any instrument sharp at the end over it; then put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out. And if it does not fart through any of the things we have said, hasten to open the ear before the abscess comes and spasms; and the method of opening is that you first make the patient sneeze the cephalic head, and draw blood according to the measure of its power, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small opening in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and let the opening be as a moon, so that you come to the stone, then extract it with your strength, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. And if it is an abscess that swells, administer drainage; and if it cannot be drained, administer a thin, fine spatula according to this form:
But do not make an incision if you think the abscess is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made several incisions; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is clean.
In the ear when water falls, the patient should use hot fumigation with first condensers and fill the ear with cotton. Let it rest on that ear itself or the water will flow out. If it does not, take many pebbles according to the length of your finger and boil them slightly; then place one or two of them in the patient's ear and press another pebble against the one inside the ear; continue to do this with pebble after pebble until the water comes out completely, and it will flow out entirely; if you see, take a stick, and push one of the ears into the ear, and heat the other end of the stick with fire until the stick is burned; then repeat this process with other sticks until all the water comes out, as we have said in the pebble treatment.
In the extraction of small animals, such as fleas and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and can be felt, bring about extraction with tweezers; and this is the lightest thing that can be removed from the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and the cure does not improve, if you see any worms, remove them with fine tweezers; but if there are none, take this substance's cord:
Make it narrow inside and wide outside. Insert the most subtle part of the cord into the ear according to the severity of the patient's discomfort, then firmly draw out all the cord; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they do not comply with coming out, stuff cotton around the cord as I have said in the previous section; and if they still do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find them where I treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear using this apparatus as you see:
And silver or tin is to be placed under a small hole, and above a receiver for distillation; and for pressing within the distillation there should be an instrument of tin well made for this purpose. If you wish, take a scraper and wind it around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish in the canal, which should be in the ear. Then push the scraper into the cotton, and press gently until the oil is distilled or has risen to the ear. The patient will feel the heat within. The distillation should be heated with fire in the same way as it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective if it were cold.
ear stoppage (or ear drops)
No child is born without ear problems; and this same thing happens in men due to ear wounds or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage sometimes comes suddenly into the ear, if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a small amount of discharge from the ear, which can be seen well.
Therefore, when it comes in full (meaning the disease), if one cannot see it, is grave in many conditions and when one can see it, you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opilation (pustule) apparent, then open it entirely with this spatula of which the form is as follows:
And be sharp and pointed in front and behind, so that it does not prick the ear; if the opilation is of pus or cartilage from the ear, hold it with subtle tweezers and gently press it until all the pus is expelled.
And if the pustule is inside the ear, take a subtle razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the cartilage of the ear. If you feel the pustulation that causes pain to the patient's hearing, make a small incision gently, but be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a plug according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Make this every day until the wound heals, take a linen cloth and soak it in rose oil and powdered vitriol; if you see swelling on the ear, then you must pull out the linen cloth and apply another linen cloth soaked in oil of roses and wax, until the swelling disappears; then heal it until it is healed.
If bleeding comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are either to treat with distillation.
of paper pulp
This is the remedy that comes in papers for the eyes when they are moist and dry; you should stretch them with tweezers and forceps, then strike their roots with a spatula; afterwards place vitriol powder on it.
And if it does not work without peeling, then cauterize with the subtle cautery of the lentil, and cauterize afterwards after the incision has healed; and many times they heal, yet nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hailstone
"Often come out of the eyes on paper things that seem hail-like in shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called 'hail', and it is a thick gathering of moisture in the upper and lower layers of the paper; the treatment is as follows: take care to ensure that the hail does not melt from one side or the other, and this is an easy thing to know; make a hole wide enough, then gently remove the skin from each side, then take the tweezers and grasp it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient; if the tear is large, assemble it with stitches, and care for it until it heals; if it is small, do not apply force, because the ointment will restore it soon and prevent harm."
"If the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and grasp the hail with tweezers and press from both sides; if the paper is pushed away by the incision, do not worry; when the hail is covered, apply salty oil, and care for the affected area until the patient is healed."
"of the fat of the eyes"
Exinach is a grease that is impregnated on fabrics made of paper, and it happens more often in children than in adults, and it causes them much discomfort, and they get catarrh at mornings, and cannot bear the light of the sun because tears quickly flow from their eyes; therefore, they lie down on their faces immediately, sleep, and have wet papers under their eyelids that cover the exinach which opens in oil. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
The method of treatment is that the patient should place his head on your clean surface; then take one small linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach contained in each part, then put it over him; press with your hands from both sides so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture using a pointed spatula, but not too large, no larger than the wound made when opening a vein; and cut through the skin to where you see the exinach; and in several positions, the exinach comes out from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then take hold of the entire piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand to both sides until it is spread; and make sure not to tear in the incision, that you do not go all the way with the spatula up to the oil, that you do not pierce it.
And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, lift a little the incision gently until it opens; then pull out as we have said, then moisten gauze in water and oil, and place it on the wound, and hold bandages.
And to those who break the oil and put it on to corrode the moisture that remains. Then heal it until it is healthy. And if an abscess heats up at the place, heal it with hot poultices until it is healthy.
of the hairs from the papers
When paper lice are born with hair other than nature's, and they grow, they harm the eyes, and cause illnesses such as customary tears and softening of the paper lice and albugo, which leads to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways of treatment: either by cautery along with fire, or by cold medicine according to what is stated in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by squeezing, as I will say.
You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper lice from the oil to your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, push an awl through one filament of it; and cut off the margin of the paper or the hairs growing from these hairs, and pull one filament along the entire length of the paper, and shave it with a razor; then make an incision in the part underneath the paper, under the hairs, covering the whole spatumile, from the large tear to the small; then draw out one filament, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen beneath the paper, then mark upon the paper a figure similar to the mirte leaf, and it is essential that the figure be according to the quantity by which you want to lift the paper as described to all.
And if you need to remove a large quantity of paper as the paper is softened; then make an incision along all the spatumile on the two lines that you have marked, starting from the large tear down to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then insert the onion into either angle of the keyhole, then peel it entirely; then stitch the two lips together with a needle and thread of fine linen at one filament, and squeeze out the blood, and attach any excess filaments to some gluey things, if you want to do this; but if not, leave the stitches and the filaments for 2 or 3 days; then treat the wound without stitching using drying and binding agents, as the paper rises again at the edge of the wound and its attachment, but the stitches are rotten (as the ancients say), and this is labor without fear.
And if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure like the fennel of myrtle, as we have said, three times drawing according to the form below:
Then join those who are above the small spaces equally according to the form below:
And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, take a needle with one thread, and push it through the figure; then take another thread from the large hole, and the second thread from the small, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over which you have signed, as we have said, then stitch the two edges of the wound together with suturing, and heal it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with a balm and similar soothing agents.
And sometimes the hair of the head is converted: you must use what we have said about incision; however, stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of dogs is as follows: you convert the skin and turn it inside out as I have said, and then make two stitches by art, and two thin threads as long as the skin and the width of the incision; and tie together the two ends with threads; then assemble one on top of the other subtly over what is above the skin of oil, and bind the two stitches from the two parts tightly; leave it like this for some days, and the skin that is tightened will rot and necrotize and fall off, leaving a hole through which it can heal.
If it takes a long time or you must force it, then cure it until it is healed; when the wound is closed, and the skin rises, and the hairs cannot be felt; and this is the form of the two stitches that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
1. The work (li ovraiges) is such that you take a fine needle, and put on it one thread of silk and fine; then assemble the heads (les chiés) and join them subtly, and let the lengths of threads be a palm long; then prepare another fine silk thread briefly, and join its ends; then place the patient's head in your hand; let the work be done in sunlight so that it is visible, for this work is subtle and minute; then push the needle to the base of the hair adjacent to the natural hair, and make it pierce through the paper quickly until you pull it over the natural hair; then remove the hair up to the base, and put the removed hair back into the hole in the paper, if there is any; then remove your hand until the hairs come out entirely from the paper with the natural hair.
And if the case (la chasse) is treated and the hairs do not come out, you will draw the case to below, along with the thread that you have prepared, until the case comes out through the opening made and you see it through oil vision; then you will draw the case and the thread, close the oil, and leave it for 2 or 3 days, until the hair adheres in its place and the flesh grows over; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural hair, and let them grow together, until they are elongated and then shave them.
of the purulence of oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or porridge comes in the oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It happens suddenly through a wound, or through cutting, or cautery, or similar things.
And the way of treatment for this is that you cut that joint, separate its lips, and put in linen threads, and keep it until it heals; it should not be used in the treatment of it with things that dry and restrict. For if you do so, the disease returns worse than the first time; but works of softening things, such as fenugreek; and the broth of water or milk and flax seeds are cooked, and immediately afterward, castor oil melted into any oil is added to it, and a linen wrap is made from this, and this is used for treatment.
And the key to your cure is that you do not allow it to heal in its original form; and this treatment that we have described is not without caution against this disease returning in its original form.
Of the fat that comes in oil
This disease that is beneath [described as] "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds, fissures, cauterization, and similar things; and the procedure in it [the disease] is that you take a needle, with which there should be a double thread, and thrust it into the fat, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out in two folds of the fat; then the fat should be raised above the entire needle, and [you] apply a large spatula.
And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the crack, and turn the paper, and make two cracks where the costal cartilage lies within the paper; and let the heads of the two cracks be at the four angles of the incision that you have made, and let them form an angle such that when they are assembled, the shape should be like the shape of a letter which has the name "y greek"; then remove that cartilage, according to the amount it protrudes from the paper; then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen; then apply the medicine for softening as we have said before, and heat, until it heals.
If the illness comes from a crack or incision or cauterization, then you must make a smooth cut beneath the hairs of the paper, as described before; then you should split apart between the two edges of a tent, as I have said; and the work must be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare engines with all their power as they know how to bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is required for the work and various instruments.
quickly from the paper
When this bond occurs in the hand of men in such a way that the paper is stuck together with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to insert the point of a razor beneath the paper, lift it up; and hold it between pliers until you cut the adhesion which is near the spatumile, not too sharp or too deep so as not to cause pain to the patient from the sharp spatumile; and make your incision, by which you scrape the assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and heal the entire assembly, and salt the oil at times, lift fresh sweet oil, and colyrium; then place a linen tent between the paper and oil, and put above the oil wool moistened abundantly with egg yolk; and after the third day use the colyrium and the healing substances until it heals.
of the nail of the oil
Know that the nail has two types: one is nervous and resembles a hard horn-like growth, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moist matter that when touched with iron and cooked with pliers, it cannot be removed; and both start from the large root, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all the light and movement of the oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient places their head on your hand, then you pull out the hairs; take paper in your hand, then bend the nail over with small tweezers, and hold it up; then take a needle, put a horse hair or ox or cattle hair and a strong thread on it; bend the tip of the needle slightly and pierce the nail, poke through the entire needle, tie the nail with a thread and hold it up, then scrape off all the skin surrounding the nail root including silk and wool to the head; then chop the remaining in the root of the nail at the spatula-like tip and the small forces, leaving the natural flesh or nail, so that the incision does not bring forth tears as is usual; sometimes the nail is only set on the onyx, and at the thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft spatulum around it as described in this shape.
And ensure that the spatulum does not touch the flesh layer and break it, and that the pulp is not pierced; and after the incision pour some broken oil and ointment made from litargire on it, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with whatever is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter it, this condition of the nail is often treated with medicines; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take a spatula-like tip slightly sharp according to this shape:
And gently scrape the nail above, and if you see that it does not lessen at all and the reason is pursued, distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litharge and red collyrium powder and boiled, and stop up the oil until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
If nothing goes against you in the oil as in an abscess, then let it heal on its own, and first treat the abscess with warm remedies until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the oil greatly, suspend it at the onion, and crush a part of it but not too much, so that tears do not come; then distill into the red collyrium oil made of litharge.
of the flesh that grows over the eyelid
In some men, flesh sometimes grows red and covers the eyelid and presses against the eyeball and turns it outward, resembling a baluster rose; and the procedure is such that the patient places their head in your hand, then you open the eyes, and cut all the growing flesh with cautery-like instruments appropriate for this purpose, and hold it with force; then cut the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting to the root until the end, taking care not to wound the oil gland at the operation; and let the incision be a spatula-shaped one as we have said in the incision of the nail, and the small tools used for removing the nail, as shown by the form described in this chapter.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of ointment crushed or distilled red collyrium resembling corrosive medicines, and place cotton soaked with egg white on top to ensure that the wound heals without infection; if anything remains, and the wound becomes infected, and you doubt whether it will heal properly, leave the oil and treat the infection with soothing remedies for healing wounds; then return to your work when the wound is healed, and do the same for all such cases of eyelid growth in the oil in this manner.
But in every case, it is necessary that you be cautious of the treatment for each weak part of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not strike your hand in any of these works until you see that this member can bear that work.
of the veins of the eyes
The red veins that are covered over the eye take away its work and weaken the eye all day long. Therefore, it is necessary at first to examine whether the eye, in which the vein is, is healthy and has no other disease but the vein; then cauterize it in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then press those veins all along according to your wisdom, and let them be subtle double as shown here:
And let them be two times in one body according to this form:
Then let these veins be handled delicately, and suck out the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that no heat remains but the veins themselves; and when you have done this, if it distills green and red collyrium to cure those who are congealed.
And if you are unable to suck out all of it in that hour, apply a plaster on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and assured of healing, then continue according to this manner as before until it is healed; and this is the form of the treatment:
of the fistula from oil
The term for "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said earlier, and it is not healed, there is a trap in it that you cut open above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the tools mentioned earlier to reform it; and it is called "sharp head", and it should be made in the form of a pointed chief, and sharpened like a chisel as shown in the present form:
And place the rotten bone part on top, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the corruption is restored; do this once, then restore the bone with medicinal pressure.
If the bone is healed and char grows around it, and the body of the wound remains closed for 40 days without becoming abscessed or infected, knowing that it is healthy; if this is not the case, there is no other remedy but to return the fistula to its original place according to this form: you must expose the bone a second time with iron and medicine heat, and when it is exposed, take one rod according to this form, and let the iron be pointed at three angles, and let the shaft be attenuated to the head as you see here:
Then place the rod on the bone near the edge of the wound, and move your hand away from the oil by a little bit, then turn the rod completely so it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand on their nose; and then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the char grows and hardens the bones, the matter goes to the nose; it will be easier for the patient.
From the flow of oil
If all the eyes (meaning openings in a body part, such as wounds or abscesses) are fully opened and there is no need to dislodge anything or lessen it, then you must tie up the patient; next, heal him, apply hot poultices or plasters with iron to help, then apply oil (made of ingredients like acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla); then hold the oil, and apply the poultice on bandages and cloths. The manner of the cloths should be that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and place one on top of another according to the size required by the eyes; then bind them with a tough bandage and repeat the hot poultices and plasters and the oil and the cloths and the bandages until the eyes are healed. If the bandage weakens, you must tighten it more; if the bandage wears off after a day or night, you must remove it and see if the eyes heal over again. If they do, that is good; if not, repeat the poultice, the cloths, the bandages and the oil until they are healed.
From the breaking of woven fabric
When disruptions occur in the ruptured eyeball, it opens up and fumes like grains of resin, and is frightening to see; then if you cover it, the treatment is such that you push an awl into the root of the affected part all the way to the top, then push another awl where there is a double thread from the limbus; pierce it, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then hold the eye tightly with the double thread and wrap a portion of the eyeball around it, tightening it well, then pull out the awl and put oil-soaked woolen yarn on it abundantly; and leave it until the threads adhere with the eyeball, then treat the oil with comforting substances until the wound heals; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the eyeball itself in a circular bandage of fabric until it heals.
If the eyes appear swollen, pierce them with a thin spatula that comes from oil, remove the moisture and clean the eyes, then enter immediately; then pull it out when it is healed.
of the oil bowl
This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from the oilbowl, appearing like an abscess draining but not being an abscess; and the appearance of its work is that you make the patient sit on a chair fitted and straight, then take hold of his head between your two hands, and move it until you see the oilbowl come up towards your eyes; then let it be lanced, and unstop the light, and let the patient observe things as he usually does; and if it does not drain, know that it is an abscess, and if the draining of the oilbowl is not prepared as we have said. If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtile spatumile and put it on the corneal cloth .i. a span along the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal cloth and the crown, until the oilbowl comes out; and when it is issued, let it distill into the hot oily honey mixture or water boiled with honey, or fenugreek water boiled with honey, then cure it with another treatment until it heals.
oil abscesses
We have the appearance of abscesses in the division and what is needed to perforate it; do according to its health. You must make the patient sit with his arms crossed, away from light due to the sun, and press the oil gently and tightly; then put the paper of the oil on your left hand if the hair is on the left side, or on your right hand if the hair is on the right side; then take in your right hand (if the hair is on the left side) the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand (if the hair is on the right side); then place the point of the instrument under the cornea at a distance of one finger width from the inner corner of the eye, towards the lesser eyelid; then push the almagda instrument vigorously and hold your hand firmly until it penetrates through the cornea, and feel that the almagda has reached the empty space; and the measure of the passage of the almagda should be at the full length of the measurement from the prunele to the end of the nose; this is the cornea of the oil; you will see the bone in the paper due to the brightness of the corneal cloth, and then put the instrument up to where the abscess is, and press it forcefully down a passage after that. If the abscess drains now, the patient can see before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a brief rest, and if the second vein rises again, place the force with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently twist your hand around; then put a little of the gemstone oil inside. Then apply oil soaked or damp cloth, in rose oil and abundant egg, and bind with the oil. We, and those from our time, place on top commin crushed with abundant egg.
If the gemstone oil cannot enter due to its hardness, since there are some men who have very hard hairs, then you must take the tool called "alberit," which is shaped as follows:
And so, only pierce the conjunctive and do not go too deep, but make it subtle first, then insert the gemstone; and when the work is complete, prepare the patient for sleep by having him lie on his back in a dark room; and be aware of all movements, take light foods, and do not move his head to either side, and tie him according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in the same dark room, test his sight, show him some things, and then re-tie him for a week; do not do this during the treatment or immediately after the incision, but rather loosen it because the blood rises quickly.
If an abscess breaks open, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and direct it towards that which soothes an abscess; and when it is appeased, you should lance the eye (incision) and put a small linen cloth over it for one day, and stay in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert to his case; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country people make almagda perciet, so that the juice comes out, but I never saw any such thing on our land, nor have I heard of it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And here are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are properly from arsenic:
And the head of these [should be] of the same subtlety, and the backbone in four angles bent.
of the neck on the nose
Never are or nasal charms born diverse, of which some seem like scorpions at the mouth of feet; and if there are such [charms] or a charm inflamed with black color, and if it is a soft charm of good color. In this case, for these soft chars that are not inflamed, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the onion juice onto those chars, and drag them out; then take what you can hold with the sharp, subtle spatula, until you know that the charm is entirely removed.
And if there remains any substance that cannot be covered, open it with all sorts of subtle and light instruments so that nothing remains; and if without your notice, or the abscess swells, aid it as necessary; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize it until the pus dries up and all the charred matter is removed, then pour in oil, vinegar or cool water.
If the poison enters into the palace (skull), know that it is sick; and if the poison does not perforate as necessary, know that char has grown in the bone above, so instruments do not come to cut it: then you must insert a large thread of flax, well greased with your hands, and have intervals of one thumb's width between each stitch; and put the patient's head into the thread in its nostrils as far as it can go, and draw it out while smelling for the poison to come out through the nose; and children at school often do this, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it; then hold one head with one hand, and the other head with the other hand, and know one after the other by us who are at the thread. Do this until you know that the stitches have corrupted the char; then pull out the thread, squeeze out the blood, and immerse the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of char; and then put oil or a plaster of some kind over it for as long as it is sick, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, as they say when distilling oils and medicines in the nose:
And it should be made of silver or lead, resembling a lamp with an open top, like a funnel, and guide it accordingly; and if you see, make the funnel closed, and let the instrument be filled for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating oil or any liquid.
On the flesh upon the neck
Often on the head of the neck arises a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large until it is visible to look at; and because of this, you must cut it open at the beginning, and completely remove it, then put in place the fire cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay too long when it becomes large, take care if it is hard, dark colored, insensitive: do not touch it with iron as it is an aggravated abscess, for when it is cut open once, much harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch and not dark colored, you can cover it all, fear the patient and treat the area with drying and constricting substances.
when the neck is cut and sewn up
Know that when solutions of continuation come in one of these cartilage joints, it is of little use except in some men. Therefore, if this happens to anyone, you should check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then you place the two lips together in a suture, then cure it until it heals; and if the lips are already dislocated from one side and the other, you must sew up all the parts of their edge until they heal, then put the two lips together in a suture and hold them, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood, and incense crushed; and place powder on top of these powders a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster adhering, and leave it until it dries up, then cure it with ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
To the human hands, it often happens inside the lips there is an abscess hard like grains of wheat, smaller and larger; then you should turn the lips and cut above each tooth, take with forceps and strike in every part; afterwards use leeches after incision of vitriol powder, until the blood stops flowing; then apply the ointment of asafoetida and cure the wound with dry substances until it heals.
Of the skin around the gums
Many times, there arises on the gums a type of skin that the ancients called "albulus"; you should hold it with forceps and strike its root, letting the blood flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying powders to the area; if the skin returns after the incision and this happens often, cut it again and cauterize; it will not return after being cauterized; these are the shapes of the instruments for covering.
The sores (or ulcers)
Sometimes sores are collected at the top of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs which are ugly; and sometimes they are black and yellow and swollen as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must have the patient sit between your hands, with their head in your lap, and remove the sores or scabs that appear, as long as there is nothing remaining; and do the same for the blackness and greenness, and the yellow and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, as long as you have completely removed everything; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to be smoothed, according to the work that shows, because the razor used to remove the teeth from between them has other shapes than the one used to remove them; and these shapes and others should be with you prepared.
When treating the tooth for pain, you should delay drawing it out as much as possible, because it must not be done at all; since this is a very high substance and there should be no excuse for razing (or removing) it. Then when the patient is constrained to draw a tooth, you must be certain about which one to pull. Many times pain deceives the patient, and they believe it is a good tooth, but the pain does not cease even after the good tooth has been removed, for we have seen this happen with noblemen; and when you are fully certain about which tooth to pull, you must incise around the tooth all around. Use a strong spatula to protect the gums from all sides; then push it with your fingers or subtle pliers at the base of the tooth, little by little until it is well loosened, then tighten the pliers firmly; and keep the patient's chin in your hand so that it does not move.
After breaking the tooth, if it does not come out by itself, take any of these instruments and gently push it in from all sides, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, you must fill it with cloth where the holes are; and carefully tighten the pliers, so that it does not break while being pulled out; and you should work very carefully around the gum to extract the tooth.
And be careful not to break it (the tooth) and leave a part behind, which would cause the patient greater pain from the root than in the first instance. Be aware that you do not act like ignorant nobles, who by their haste and recklessness sometimes break the cart, and fail to perform what we have mentioned; but sometimes they bring about great disease due to the roots that remain or because of the cart they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine or oil and lard; and if blood flows from it, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of instruments, which mute the teeth at first, should have long points and large handles, so that they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are their shapes:
And have large handles so they do not bend when used, and be of good iron, and toothed for holding them firmly.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, then you must put cotton soaked in butter on it for 1 or 2 days until the butter is absorbed, then insert the tongs called "algefri", which resemble a beak of a pincer; and inside them should be made like a chisel, and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these instruments, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the tool called "althali," meaning pliers, here is its form:
It should be thick and large so as not to break it, and if the root pops out with these tools, that is good; but if it does not, then help with all the instruments, here are their forms following:
And if you help with this instrument that has two prongs, here is its form:
And other tools that are placed before the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, whose shape is as follows:
And this tool must not break, and know that many tools of teeth are; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the wise masters find their own instrument according to what their work and illness require, because there are various diseases where the ancients did not teach any instruments due to diversity among them; and if it breaks a chariot or another bone, which is possible, then he seeks the tools that are required, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, as follows: And let them be large and sturdy to hold the bone tightly, so that it does not slip away, but can be held and removed; and then restore the bone with appropriate medicine; and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, then remove everything with this tool:
When the teeth appear not according to natural shape and the form is ugly, even in young women, you should know if the tooth has not erupted after the milk tooth, and it is not properly aligned, and cannot be filed or trimmed; then extract it. And if it is accompanied with the tooth, take this instrument that is described as being similar to a small beak, made of sharp iron at its tip:
And press hard and hard for many days due to the tooth's hardness, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a small file as shown below:
and is like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth gently but firmly for many days until it loosens slightly; then smooth it at the end with any smoother, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and bites the tongue, you must file off the sharpness so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth fall out
When the teeth fall out due to either being knocked out or falling, and the patient is unable to chew anything without them falling out again, and you treat them with medicines that restrict [the teeth], it is not effective; instead, they should be held in place with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and decay, but gold does not change; and let the thread be medium sized neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and place it double between two healthy teeth, then place the roots between the misaligned teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering it up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and carefully, so that it does not move; and let your grip be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then take the roots with the thread using pliers, assemble them, and place them back between the healthy tooth, making sure it does not bite the tongue; then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if they slip out or the threads break, hold another thread in place; if it remains and serves for a time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy and two misaligned teeth, as you see:
And when the teeth fall out and are put back in place repeatedly as we have said; let no one who is not wise and patient interfere; and sometimes the shape of a tooth made from bone from a cow or other animal is placed where the missing tooth was, and it is held in place as described earlier, and it remains and serves for a long time.
To cover the ligament of the tongue
There is sometimes this ligament that comes under the tongue naturally or by accident due to a wound; and the treatments are such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head steady, lift the tongue; then cover the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it is hard or not, and this is due to sudden wound, press the uncine and cover the ligament widely; and make sure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery that is beneath; and when you have done so, lift the cool rose water or cold water, then put a linen tent under the tongue; and bandage him each night, so that the wound does not heal. And if there comes discharge of blood, apply vitriol powder; and if it persists, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other medicine until he is healed.
and if you see it of short color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is declining towards blenchor (gangrene), and there is moisture, press the uncine, and cut it with a thin spatula from both sides; and if the wound persists at your treatment, apply vitriol powder until it is drained; then raise cool water or oil, and treat with other medicine until he is healed.
abscesses of the throat
Sometimes boils called "godath" appear inside the throat, which are properly called the two mandibles. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess with small sensation and reddish color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the reason of bleeding; but let it remain until it is soft, and then you will cut it open or it would burst by itself; and if it is white-colored and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first check if the abscess is cold and calm. Then make the patient sit in the sun, with his chest in your hand, and open his mouth and take hold of the mandibles between your hands, and press the tongue down on top of the instrument, which has this shape; it can be made of silver or fine bronze like a knife:
And press the tongue down on top of the instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the awl and insert it into the mandible, pulling it up more than you can; and pull anything from the cloths with it, then cover it with the instrument, which has this shape, resembling a fork; even though the neck is curved and one end is close to the other, and they are very sharp, they are made of iron or bone.
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron tongs like this shape:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron tongs in such a way: one part is named, and when you have grabbed one of the nuts (or bulbs), grasp the other in the same manner, then heat the wound with hot, sharp, and smooth objects, and if bleeding occurs, continue heating it until the bleeding stops; or scabs from pomegranate peels are cooked, or bay leaves, and similar things to stop the bleeding; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes more abscesses than two nuts grow in the throat, grasp them then equally as well.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside the throat, to be precise, a small abscess; and I had closed her throat entirely, so the woman could not exhale due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died in one or two days. The abscess was so high up that it had already formed two pockets through both openings of the throat. So I immediately made an incision, and inserted a hook through one pocket, then pulled out a large piece of pus; then I sealed the other opening of the throat, opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the hook into those abscesses, removed a portion, and only a small amount of blood came out; thus, the passage in her throat was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting the abscess for a long time; the abscess continued to grow back, filling the space I had vacated until it became very large; then I trapped it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus the abscess ceased growing; and I left those parts and let God heal them afterwards.
of the eye
When the eye swells and is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are eased, and it is subtle, then you must cut; and the one that is round swollen and not long; and it is bloodshot or of dark color or black, then you must make an incision in it. For there is great danger for the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see, according to the manner I have said, of its swelling and length, to make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then insert the hook into the eye, pull it out, and cut at .i. of .ij. places that I have said in the incision of the 2 arrows. And you must not cut more than the superfluous tissue that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do more, it hurts the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the 2 arrows, and treat it until it heals. And if the patient fears to be cut, then use an instrument for cauterization to lessen fear. And the manner of cauterization is hot. And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then presses the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned or chapter on cauterization, and hold against a hot live coal, but not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, as shown in the following figure:
And if the patient has hair in the eye, or oil is applied to it, as with the scoop of a spoon, and the instrument is placed on top of all the medicine over the eye; and the patient lies on his side so that saliva and mucus flows from his mouth into the medicine without reaching the throat and nose; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it swelling and the bite of the medicine is eased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the socket to the cotton, so that the cotton sticks to the eye; and do this repeatedly until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. And if you have to start over with the cauterization of the medicine, begin again, and after the cauterization drain the pus around the eye, using a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and treated with gargling until it heals.
This cure is more effective by fumigation rather than cautery; if it is treated by this method, take camphor and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, gather all or some of these in one pot, put them inside, boil them; the pot should be tightly closed with strong clay, and in the pot place one instrument made of hair according to this method: And it should be made of silver or lead, and one end should be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapors rise to the eyes through the nose, until the eye is purified; after that repeat often, until the eye dries up, and make sure not to do this at the beginning of abscess heating, for many things may happen then; do not do it except when the abscess heat is subsiding. And if this instrument is not present, take a reed and place an eggshell inside the patient's mouth so that the patient does not have too hot vapors; for the eggshell does not let the vapors weigh down on the mouth, and it is good remedy together with health.
Many times a bone or fish spine is stuck in the throat, or some other thing; you must therefore pull out what you can see and press the tongue against the instrument so that you see it move; if it does not open and remains stuck in the throat, the patient must vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it will expel the thing then. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will stick, and you can pull it out. And if it does not come out as we have said, take one instrument made of reed according to this form:
And bend the instruments slightly at the head so that they can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, for it may swell up or push the bone in; it is better for the patient to push the instrument, because they will move or adjust what needs to be adjusted; if they push downwards, pull it back evenly along the entire instrument until it is out.
from the throat's cavity
Sometimes medicine is the cavity of the throat, as I said in the division, through the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the sick person's throat towards the sun, then press their tongue to the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the cavity, pull it out with a small hook or subtle tweezers suitable for this purpose. If this is not effective, take a curved cane, and push it into the sick person's throat, then thrust or bend the end of the cane with a hot iron and repeat this often. Dip the sick person in cold water all day. Then take a full glass of cold water, open their mouth, pour it into their mouth without swallowing, and move it around with your hand frequently; and as soon as you feel the cavity, let them vomit.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then you should sedate the patient with aphrodisiac, at the instrument I mentioned in the treatment of the eye; do this multiple times, for it will persist. The manner of the treatment is that you take one pot or one having charcoal inside, and cover it with a perforated cloth; place the head of the instrument inside it; then pour your fumigation, and have the patient place the head of the tube in their mouth, and close the mouth, so that no smoke escapes, but comes only as far as the nose; and the nasal cavity will now persist, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation multiple times; allow the patient to be thirsty, eat salty and bitter foods, and drink nothing of water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out under this management.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the nasal cavity, when it can be seen, resembles curved pincers for insertion into the throat; and has the appearance of a syringe tip, and is coated with lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and here is its shape:
The chapters on abscesses
Many things resembling abscess are mentioned in this chapter, as memory recalls from one and another in this book, and they are different in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways that one is similar to its likeness, and of that which contains moisture. And the second way is for the joints that are on the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the shoulder blade are different from those that occur in joints, and each should have its own judgment in the work.
And if the abscess is not to be pierced, let it be allowed to ripen according to its completion; and if there are those that need to be pierced when they have become hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses which occur near joints. For when an abscess occurs near a joint, and is left until it has been surrounded, the ligament and nerve of the joint may rot, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is from the principal member, and the piercing is delayed until it has ripened, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, and the piercing is done before it has ripened, it should not be pierced without digestion being completed, except for that which is from the foundation, which cannot penetrate fully, and be elongated inside, and a fistula forms; and it will not heal within a long time.
And you should know the time of piercing the abscess that has ripened according to its completion, and it is when the pain is relieved, and the disappearance of the fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and the swelling and opening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you should make sure the piercing is as far from the abscess as possible, and where it has opened; and let the piercing be along the length of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or near joints, nerves, and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no hair.
In those who are ill, it is to be performed according to the affected member. And when an abscess is in a hard place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion complete, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, the body will bleed out and it will fill with much pus; and possibly harden the lips and deepen it inside. And for any abscess which are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limb requires. It is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if it has such abscesses where the care is required, and covering; when it has become as cloth, and softened, it is necessary to do as with babies: and if there are those that are cut into four angles, and if there are those from which you cover as myrtle leaf, as abscesses of the ankles; and if there are those where you make a round cut, and other cuts and similar punctures.
When there is no head (i.e., a superficial abscess), it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in one hour, but only part of it; stop the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing wrongly; do this repeatedly until the pus is drained completely. This should be done with great caution when the patient is weak, such as women, children, old people or debilitated ones. Sometimes the pus may jump out with the discharge, possibly killing the patient, and you must be careful not to blame yourself. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large opening, bring linen or old cotton threads; and if it is a large abscess and there are many punctures, it is necessary that you place a thread in each one so that they come against each other; and if you have cut a part of the skin in the abscess and shaved it around, it is necessary to fill it with old cotton or linen gauze without moisture, and keep it for three days; then open it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and alum, wet one cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly. If the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book; and if it is winter, or the shoulder or abscess is very nervous, you must put hot tents and moistened cloths over them; and if it is summer, and the shoulder is fleshy, you must put moistened cloths on top of it, or cold water and oil, or cold water and oil cooled, for three days as we have said; then drain the abscess and treat the wound until it heals.
This is what you should know universally about the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and now here is the chapter.
on the sores
1. For small abscesses that come in the head, there are methods that are in linens, such as the one for a bladder stone, and there are many similarities. There are some that have moisture like pus; and there are others that are hard and stony at the base, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act against it. And the procedures of the abdomen are such that you should try all instruments called "entromissoire", from which this form follows, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, they should be done above the long one. And when the moisture is drained, scrape without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it will return immediately if left; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and apply to the wound and leave until the next day; and let those who are slow-healing do this. And repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, as long as you know that it does not remain overnight; then cure the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains one hard knot, crush it along the length; throw your fingers into it, and scrape from all sides, and put all your care to draw pus out where it lies; and if the artery acts against you, do as I have told you before. And do the same for an abscess that is stony, and for removing and treating it as I have told you.
And the incision on a hard abscess and one with moisture is lighter, for they have little blood. And if some of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and of those I crushed an abscess or head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a quartz stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if any had been cut into it, it would have made a wound like that of a quartz. In other abscesses coming from heads, especially those that come from children's heads and the roots of ears, they should be opened wide for as long as possible to draw out pus; and treat them as appropriate.
of scrofulas
Often this abscess occurs at the neck, under the jaw, and in groins, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body; and they are large, and are joined together. And each scrofula is specifically inside its coat, as the lump of the neck and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see a favorable disposition in the patient, and it is similar in color to the body, and silent on all sides and does not pulsate at the neck nor the artery nor the conduit, and does not penetrate; then you should cut it above, and peel off each part, and place the two lips of the curette at the anus, if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and pull it slowly, and be sure to not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatula or lancet too sharply, so that your hand does not slip, and do not see too far ahead, so you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not stop bleeding, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that coagulate blood, and hold the wound; let it be until the abscess is soothed and the wound softens and begins to drain. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work, as you should; then look for your cue if there are any small scrofulas remaining, and cut them off and clean them. If there is a large root of the scrofula in the wound, do not cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang down without causing harm; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you scrape the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you gather the two edges of the wound, and sew them now, because there is no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root, and draw pus, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas with excess, pierce where there is a more open area; and pierce it in the same way as the one mentioned above, depending on it, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply enchanting char ointment until it heals.
In this case, "de squinance" appears to be a misspelling or variant of the term "d'escroquance," which means "from squeezing." Here is the corrected line:
The ancients spoke about the size of the throat, but I never saw it done in our land and it is written according to their words.
To those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the throat slit called "epiglote" should be cut open; and no aid should be given by these, because all the veins and the spur of the disease are at those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in two tonsils. When the disease is in the channel of the spur, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the death that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglote, it is necessary that we cut it below four circles or three small slits across, between the circles or by the quantity of the cut of the scythe, not in the cartilage.
And if the throat is contracted at the incision of the epiglottis, there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long in length.
If the master is afraid, then it must extend the skin of the throat all along, then cut open the chest until it reaches the ribcage; and sever the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then close the opening, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the incision of the ribcage which jumps out due to the broken place, and by the lack of voice.
And leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed where doubt of strangulation exists, bring together the two lips of the wound and sew it closed with care, then apply medications that cause pus to form until it heals.
Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the wings are cut off. Then you tie the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
And for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, and it has passed in 3 days or 4. Then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young lady took one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the windpipe;
And I was called to cure it, but I found it as dead.
I found the wound and saw the blood coming out of it, and I knew that it had not opened or led to any vein other than the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I quickly closed the wound and cured it until it was healed.
The girl's voice returned to normal, and she resumed her usual condition.
Because I say to you that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
of the large throat   (The word 'gorge' can also mean 'throat' or 'neck', but here it refers to 'large throat' as a translation of 'la tailleure de l’epiglotte'. In modern French, 'tailleure' would not be used this way.)
This abscess is called "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess of a reddish-yellow color, and it is very common in women;   (Here, 'cist' refers to the abscess mentioned at the beginning of the line.)
and it occurs in two ways: natural or accidental; or it is not caused by an instrument.   (Here, 'et' means 'and', and the first 'ou' means 'or'. The phrase 'natureil n’a point d’engien' can be translated as 'natural has no tool', meaning that in this case, there is no external cause to the abscess.)
And the accidents occur in two ways, one of which resembles fatty tissue and the other resembles an abscess that comes from us due to arteries. And there should be fear and it is not good to make large incisions except in the small one, and prove it and search for the entire insertion. if you prove it like a fat lump and it does not open at all, strike it, as we do with lumps, and draw out its entire coat, if there is any. And carefully examine it completely, and treat it as appropriate, until it is perfectly healthy.
from us
Many methods of ours there are, which I will describe all the similarities;
And now I must say all the difference between dislocation and protrusion.
Issue is heat and sustained fever while the inflammation has passed, and the swelling is complete; then the fever subsides and the heat.
With not there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains one swelling, which is its own sac and is the same color as the body, and begins like a bladder and grows larger.
And they are according to two types, either fatty or moist, and many of them are of the same color as I said in the classification.
When you come to the treatment of the nose, you must first test and examine all the instruments called "introscope", according to their shape that appears in the chapter that follows.
The method of inquiry into abscesses for us is that you take the moistest place you find within the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little until you feel that the instrument has penetrated the core. Then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
Then straighten the dislocated joint, and beware that it does not jump out again.
If the tumor runs cold, have it bled as I said for other abscesses;
and if the dislocated joint does not bring forth moisture (it is fat), make a cross-shaped incision in it, take hold of it with the pincers, and remove the skin gently from both sides, and draw the coat or membrane that covers it out along with the fat.
And if you cannot draw it whole, then draw it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if something remains, then it returns many times;
And if a little remains and does not cause you grief, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, press the wound, place warm soothing things on it, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
If the wound is large, cut it in two lips, and treat it with whatever that cures flesh.
And if the vein beats against you or something else, and you are forced to act quickly, use vitriol powder, and let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound heals, and let the swelling of the blood subside; then cover again what has remained unhealed.
Here are the forms of the trepan tools, and they are in three types: large, medium, and small; and among them there are four square ones called "albarets", and one called "breb", and there are also three types for encircling abscesses with fistula: large, medium, and small.
and they are like needles used to sew charms, made of citron wood, iron, or silver; the ones colored yellow are worth more, and those with black planks are sharper for encircling abscesses with fistula.
And there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wound's width.
The forms of tumors are much alike, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also tumors with two curvatures in three ways.  Here comes the next sentence to translate:
And there are also tumors with three curvatures, and these can be in four ways; and there are tumors with two curvatures as well as those with a single curvature, and they are all necessary in their place. Here is the next sentence to translate:
The head of these [parts] which are being cut is sharp, and those who do not cut thoroughly from one side, from where the nerves are scraped, since the vein or nerve is not struck.
And of these incisions are the joints tied together with stitches, so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of abscesses.
and are of four types: large, small, medium, as you see.
And one should not use it anywhere except in charnu (charred or burned) limbs such as legs, arms, breasts, and in similar places.
Sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling plasters of fistula, in this form, for drawing blood:
and it is placed sometimes at the place that bleeds from the veins and arteries, and sometimes it is reapplied in this large form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they start to decay, until they resemble the breasts of a woman;
And they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, it must be done according to this form as described in the following lines (b) up to line (g): Then, scrape the fat, apply the wound with a healing ointment, then bring together the two edges of the wound to stitch, and heal it until it is healed:
if the breast tilts downwards and is swollen due to its size as it happens with women, if so, make two slits above, by two similar incisions: From this, one should hold the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to line g; Then scrape the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and bring what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it heals;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment; And let it fester until it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then heal it until it is healed.
of the abscesses in the buttocks
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas containing moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g: And when the whole boil that is in the abscess is emptied, apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and dress it with ointment as needed until it heals.
If the abscess resembles scrofula, make incisions as we have said in the treatment of scrofula; and if the wound becomes boil-like again, bring fire as we have said before.
The rupture of the artery.
When the artery is ruptured and the skin over it is sewn, there are often abscesses, and this also happens at an inflamed vein and abscess.
And if it is recognized thus, when it is for the artery, the abscesses are long in full growth. and when you feel it with your hands, it feels constricted; and when it is for the vein, it feels hot to the touch.
and it is foolishness to cover the abscess, especially when it is under the joints and angles and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, the treatment with iron must be avoided, and the same applies to those who are near death. In the one whose artery is swollen, an incision should be made through the skin along its length.
Therefore, the treatment with iron must be avoided, and the same applies to those who are near death. In the one whose artery is swollen, an incision should be made through the skin along its length. Then cut open the groin area and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, exposing it.
Then place an awl under it and pierce it to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread for two fingers' breadth, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then the joint that is between the two ligaments of an incision should be held in place as long as it is not issued, and abscesses should be opened;
then administer the cure that binds a splint, as long as the ligament cries out; then anoint this with ointment until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to the opening of the vein, then you should anoint your hand with it as far as the skin from the abscess; Then push the needle beneath the joint that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have it with one double thread, so that you draw it from the other side. Tie the abscess, as I told you, or a linen of one part to two cheeks with thread.
And if you doubt that the thread will come out, push another needle through all the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four inches;
Then pierce the abscess until the excess drains out, then pierce the pus and leave what is connected.
Then put on one damp cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, then treat it with liniments and ointments until it is healed.
from the black abscesses
As abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses appear in black areas when they are wounded, or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
And this often occurs in the shoulder and the arm and all joints where there are connections, which is to say, it is a severe abscess, and its color appears like that of the body, and it is in multiple conditions with pain.
And when it is squeezed, the patient feels pain, but not all over the body, but rather under the skin.
It should be tightly bound from all sides, and it should not move forward or backward, nor up or down. And the one in the joints should not be covered with iron, for by chance it might contract.
And he who is either the head or forehead, should apply the spatula to the skin. If the abscesses are small, take them with forceps and squeeze at its base;
If it is large, you should suspend it on an onion, and peel it, then break the bone and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal until it is healthy.
Large swellings hanging Sometimes occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; and there are small and very large ones.
And I saw one man who had two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else and had no difference, and were white, had fine roots, and were slit open, and continued to produce moisture.
I found and weighed one at 16 ounces, and the other at 7, and the works in incision are such that if you look closely, the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root.
If the copper is broad and the fire cautery is present with you. For in cutting, there are often too large evacuations of blood, and if it flows without your restraint, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and terrified of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread of flax, tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for 2 days.
and then hold it [the shoulder or limb], and do not stop applying pressure on the thread of plaster until it brings the joint into place, and you feel it working; and if the roots are thick, be careful when applying pressure, especially towards the stomach, but you can easily apply pressure to half of it.
Then cauterize so that it does not return; then care for the wound, and make sure you do not apply pressure to the thread that is of a dark color and poor sensation and of a milky appearance.
For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to the treatment of scabies later on.
When the thigh is pierced
If the wound or slash in the thigh appears as a result of a piercing with a cautery, or a hole in the belly and some of the thighs, as it often happens in other routes, or bleeding from veins or arteries according to what is described above, or inflammation;
If it is through the incision of the siphac and from the hole in the thigh, its appearance is similar to the color of pus, light without pain, and with various openings. And if it is due to the intestine rupturing, then it is more varied; and when pressure is applied to it with hands, it rebounds, and then returns, and possibly swells, and greatly increases at the entrance of the wound and by heavy labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is easy and opens easily when pressed with the hand, do not apply pressure; and if it is bleeding, it will open with these signs: abscesses large and hard, and are filled according to a quantity.
and if it is due to gas, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see whether its appearance is from blood of the artery, or vein, or gas. If it is necessary that you let the treatment be. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, you must command the patient to strain his anus, and be extended straight, then press all around the belly. Then command him to rest between your hands, Then go around the joint that you have marked with all the spatiule. Then cut half of the abscess on top with a large knife.
Then open half of the abscess that is extended above the ligature, and insert your index finger, and try to find the intestine. If you find it seized by a cord, dislocate it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
and if you find the boil, take it by the onion, and squeeze the superfluidity out of it;
and if the arteries make you contradict or the vein, go quickly around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two thick threads through them, and insert the needles around that which you have made in a cross shape that you will pierce;
then press the abscess four fingers above the needles, and if you see it open, remove the needles, and leave the area until it dries up by itself. Or you strike when it is soft and yields, then treat what is required, and cover the abscess as we have said.
Or you strike when it is soft and yields, then treat what is required, and cover the abscess as we have said. Draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the wound as required, and bind up the wound.
The translation is "on a boil" or "a boil".
We have said in the division the resemblances of chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how to avoid the cure of iron; and we say that chancre originates in the marriage, and great caution is required in its cure, and the ancients stated that when chancres are in a place where it can be shaved like chancre that is on the genitals, and in the thigh, and in similar places, it should all be removed when it first appears; and when it is large and old, it is not advisable to approach it, for I never knew anyone to heal it; no one ever healed it before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him sweat if there is manifest repletion, then shave the patient.i. one good place to perform the operation; then pour boiling oil or vinegar over the place where the operation will be performed; then press your thumbs or an instrument onto the chancre, and remove all of it without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely, and be careful not to prevent the bleeding by cutting into an artery or a vein, if that happens, cauterize until the bleeding stops; then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
of hydropisy We have already said in the division, the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure which is done with medicines, and that which is cured by fire: it is only eclites; one should not touch iron in these two similarities, namely tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this similarity of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not work, look to see if the patient is weak or has other diseases besides dropsy, such as abdominal bloating and similar things; one should not touch iron in this case because there is doubt. If you see the patient strong and healthy, and he only has dropsy and nothing else, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work like this: Lay the patient straight on your hands, and let the assistant press the abdomen towards the bottom of the bladder, then take the spatula sharp pointed as shown in this form: And it should be cut into two parts with a point, but not so deep that it can reach the intestine when pushed in, and it cannot pierce through.
then look to see if the dropsy is adhering towards the intestines: If it is, you must make an incision beneath the bladder 4 fingers straight downwards above the fist; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side of the bladder 4 fingers; and if it is due to the spleen, it should be on the right side, and do not let the patient lie over the incision so that the waste does not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and push it, and place your hand all over the spatula between the skin and the tissue as when peeling off to the thickness of a nail or thereabouts; then pierce the tissue until the spatula comes to the correct position, which is the location of the water, then pull it, and place this instrument here as shown in the figure: And it resembles a silver thin chain, made of iron or light brass, with a hole at the bottom part. On one side, there are three holes; on two sides, two holes, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make when they trim a quill:
The salve is above, so when the instrument reaches the water, press down on it now. Then empty the area, because if you see more than necessary at that moment, there is a chance that the patient might die from resolution of their spirit due to the weapon, or they might fall unconscious or approach death:
but empty according to the amount of its virtue, and according to the patient's condition and pulse; then remove the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained for safety to stop the bleeding that is on the tissue, as I have mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then use the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering, and draw out a small amount of water:
Perform this procedure every day and avoid overindulging in food or drink except a little water. If you have doubts about the patient, and leave them with too much water, cure them with burial or hot sand, by sweating or bathing, and exposing them to the sun, and anoint them with wine; and cure them with drying medicines until they are healthy, and cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
Stopping (or treating) the member (or penis). There are no children born without foreskin or whose foreskins are small or not in their proper place. It is necessary to perform circumcision immediately using a very thin spatula according to this form: then place the foreskin, which should be very thin and soft, with the tip touching the glans; tie it with a thread for 2 or 4 days until the child wants to urinate, at which point the threads are removed and urination occurs, and then the foreskin is repositioned. In case of difficulty, there is no need for concern because the urine that comes out does not leave the foreskin closed. The patient with a small putrid sore is to be treated with the plaster of pitch, as previously stated, and it will spread. Those who do not have the sore in its place are blessed, for no one is born with the sore at the head of the penis, thus they cannot urinate before raising their penis; and they cannot ejaculate due to the fact that the matter cannot reach the marris (urethra), and it is a harmful disease.
The method of work is that the patient lies on their back with the head of the penis and the buttocks aligned as the tail of a feather, so that the sore opens in the middle, as necessary; and you should beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, you should stop the bleeding by applying pressure to the bleeding area and cure the wound until it is healed.
genital ulcers Many times this albathe comes in the penis, and it is an appearance of a bad genital condition; and there are both harmful and harmless ones; you must take them one time with very subtle hands, crush and clean all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on top, and cure it with diafinicon ointment until it heals. And if the albathe is harmful, with a putrid color and odor, then you must apply cautery to it. When you have crushed it, and if the albathe is inside the penis and has both parts within the flesh and parts outside, then you must remove the internal albathe first; and when it is separated, cure the external part. For when you treat them together, there is no certainty that the genitals will not be perforated, and blackness and corruption come into the penis and surrounding area; you must clean all that is black and corrupted, then lay ointment made of pomegranate rind and honey on top, and cure it with other treatments until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery as follows: The cautery helps with two conditions at once: bleeding and corruption. If the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert or guide a tube made of wood from the plum tree into the penis, and make the patient urinate; when the hair reaches the tip of the penis (which is for those who have not been circumcised), if it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you must shave with one instrument, removing all the skin until the ligaments are released, and liberate the penis from all sides.
And if it is serious to discuss this, you should cauterize it with a small spatula about half an inch from the tip of the vein and the skin; then press gently between 2 fingers, and put a thin linen cloth dampened with cold water on it, so that it does not immediately come away.
When performing circumcision, first cleanse the member completely with warm water; then take a sharp knife and cut off the foreskin, leaving a little skin at the bottom.
Circumcision is not without its complications, like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own free will and for infants, it is necessary that we do the best job possible and make it as easy as possible for healing.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
I wanted the greater part of the masters and sages who performed circumcision to have at least one dagger, and with force, and in all one novacula; but the cowardly ones fled because there are two layers, and by chance if he strikes the upper one and delays the lower one.
Then it is covered and the pain is doubled, and at the mundification which is done with a dagger, the tip of the member is not secure; and in the mundification of the nail, by chance the iron escapes and spoils the work, and many times are born like that which do not need mundification and I have seen it.
Regarding the amputation that is made to all the links of the chain, I have found the advantage in the experiment, because the forces cut equally well above as below.
For when you press your hand, the links are equally shortened all the time, but ensure that the wires are tightly closed around the skin, and use the method of the first work so that you make the child think that you are not forcing him to tie the wire only around the rod, but then let him go in every way possible. Then make the child place his hands straight in front of him and keep the forces hidden behind your hands or under your feet so that the children do not see them, nor any instruments; then bring your hand to the rod and blow or call out, and pull it up until the head of the rod is immersed; then clean the area well of the filth assembled there, then tie a double stitch at the join, then tie one link to another at each interval; hold the second stitch by the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two links, then tie the wire quickly and pull the head of the rod;
Then make the child place his hands straight in front of him and keep the forces hidden behind your hands or under your feet so that the children do not see them, nor any instruments; then bring your hand to the rod and blow or call out, and pull it up until the head of the rod is immersed; then clean the area well of the filth assembled there, then tie a double stitch at the join, then tie one link to another at each interval; hold the second stitch by the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two links, then tie the wire quickly and pull the head of the rod; Then let the pus flow drop by drop, for it is the humors; and put powder on top and on the powder a piece of cloth glued with a mixture of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, boiled with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and heal it with other treatment until it becomes healthy.
The forms of the forces for the healing are as follows: the two cheeks should be tender and thin, and the cheeks should also be as wide as the hand equally.
The error in the healing is when the kernels are at incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, so that the lesion becomes an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then cut.
And if they exceed three days and what is beneath the scrotum is swollen, leave it until the abscesses have subsided and gently scrape it; if it bursts as you can move it, be careful of the part of the scrotum, this will not harm it.
Then heal the affected area with powder on a shallow wound as we have said about treating powders, and if it bursts excessively and goes above, this will not harm anything; heal it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or blood congealed, or pus, or frozen meat, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
If the urine is not relieved and you see that it is retained due to a stone in the bladder or urethra, then the patient should be bent over their knees; their feet should be placed on the back, and their abdomen from the upper part of the back should be extended, and the patient should be restrained as much as possible; then the collector's gloves should be used to forcefully express the stone above the bladder, so that the urine is relieved.
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is its form: it should be made of thin silver, light and slender like a bird's feather; it should have a tube of about half a palm in length, and it should be thin at the top.
And the manner of the discharge of urine is that you take one double thread, tie one end to the head, one piece of wool or cotton, and push the head into the syringe; and stop the excess of the linen and push it up to the head of the syringe, then oil or butter and egg yolk anoint the syringe, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil of olive and warm water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis over the anus; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and have the patient feel it come to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless the conduit through which it goes is twisted; then the thread follows the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the thread, then pull out the thread forcefully, and correct the urine.
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient relieved.
The diseases of the bladder
When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is assembled there, and you see it distill acids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydra", and its shape is:
It is closed, and it has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the upper end has a cap so that the medicine can flow out in such a way that it stops the urine without adding anything, if possible to draw out the moisture, and push when needed;
And when you see to throw your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the cuke in the moisture, and draw it along which is within; if you draw out the moisture with the cuke, and then forcefully push the cuke along; the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which the bladder is cleansed: it is as follows:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is raised one hand's breadth or the size of the links. Then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you wish to cleanse the bladder with. Then tie this between two hands using a good double thread, and heat one end of the moisture over the fire. Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then hold your hand under the bladder with all the moisture coming towards it, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like a pouch and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press firmly with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
from the stone
We have said in the division the ways of stone and its extraction with medicines; and I have said the difference between the embedded stone in the intestine, and all the signs, and when you should work on a stone of size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often with children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; it opens the urinary orifice, it inflames the patient's penis, it pricks it many times, then binds it; and the jumping of these stones often causes foundation problems; and the healing of children is light until they are 4 years old, and it is severe in adults, and it is most moderate for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to remove all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders seeking for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and tilt him downwards and move him, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and rises a little towards the top; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards; then press it and touch it from within.
If you feel the stone in the cavity, hurry up and cut into the stone above it. And if it does not fall out by touching it all over, moisten your left thumb if the patient is an infant, or moisturize your little finger, if the patient is a young adult completed; and push it to its base, try to remove the stone, when you feel it in your hand, press it against the bladder opening; then press on it and push it towards the place where you want to cut.
Instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch out his right hand above, and remove the skin that is under the bladder in the part where you make the incision; then push the spatula covering it, so it takes its shape:
And make the incision between what is between the ureters and the base, not at the middle but along the left side of the navel; and it should be straight above the stone, and your hands should be at its base or in its middle, and it should be cut through so that it is wide on the outside and narrow on the inside, according to the size of the stone, but not too large;
By chance, the pressure that is its foundation, must jump without any effort; and know that there is this stone or it has angles and edges; it is necessary to extract it; and if it is soft, like a plum pit, and rounded, where the extraction is easy.
Then in the place that has angles and edges, make a larger incision; and if it does not jump out, then you must forcefully extract it using pliers shaped like a limer at the end, to press the stone so that it does not escape; or you can push underneath it with a thin curved instrument at the end; and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, enlarge .1 inch hole and remove without cortex, then stretch it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, push the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then pound it, pull it out, and take out the smaller ones afterwards. If they are very large, they must be cut into pieces and make a larger incision. For the patient has two outcomes: he dies, or urine comes out immediately because the bladder cannot be sealed; but still try to extract or break apart with pliers until you remove it in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, tighten it, and put a moist, oiled cloth on top; or in oil and cold water, or rosewater and cold water, to soothe the abscess heat; then make the patient lie down on their neck, and do not loosen the ligament until the third day.
When you loosen it, rinse well the area with oil and water, then apply healing ointments such as diaphanicon and basilicon until it heals.
If an abscess or corruption comes up in the wound and if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is retained which is known to be harmful without its release: then press your thumb on the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and cause injury.
Then clean the wound that is deep and shallow and inflamed, and help in all ways you know, until it heals; and it is necessary that every herb you use to treat him, you bind his thighs with them and apply the medicine on its place.
And if the stone is small and it is guided by a rod and pierced and urine cannot pass out of it; treat it in this way, you cut it many times until the passage is opened, it is excused from cutting due to this treatment. I have already proven this.
Take a metal probe of this shape and sharp at four angles pierced into one thread:
1. Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft of the stone under the bladder, so that it does not return to the bladder.
and if you cannot do this for any reason preventing it, tie a thread under the stone and another above, then push the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the lower thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
from a woman's stone (ovary)
It happens rarely that a stone is in the womb of women, and if it ever happens, it is a great grief for the cure, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is because one cannot find a woman skilled enough who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's body is deeper than the stone in a man, which means it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear.
And if you need to do this (remove the stone), then it is necessary that you take a skilled midwife and at all costs find her, and if you cannot find one, not even a chaste virgin; and present a wise woman in the art of women's lives or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to do what you command for the incision of the stone.
And carefully examine whether the woman is a virgin; then you must push her vagina or foundation and search for the stone; if you find it, force it below her vagina, and advise her to push with her hand where the patient is, and press her left hand on the bladder.
If you find it (the stone), she should move it little by little from the bladder opening towards the root of the thigh until it reaches the root of the cuntis; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh near the mule with the con, where it is moved and feels the stone in that area; do not move her hand above or below the stone, and let it be cut into small pieces.
Then push the root towards the thigh, if you feel the stone so that the wound opens enough for the stone to come out; know that there are many types of stones: small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and those with veins. Know their appearances to determine the outcome.
And if the bone protrudes, place vitriol powder on it and hold for an hour until the bone is set; then return to your work, until the pain subsides, and have the tools I told you about in the extraction of the stone for men to assist you in your task.
If the bone protrudes and it is an artery that is cut, place powder on the wound and apply tight bandages and do not continue, let the arrowhead remain and do not draw it out for fear of killing the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is alleviated and the wounds are healed, return to your work until the pain subsides.
Of a flesh hernia
A hernia aquosa is nothing but an accumulation of moisture or white matter, which is beneath the bladder, containing the egg; and it is called a "white matter," and sometimes it is specifically in the egg's lining, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the bladder between the white matter we have mentioned; and this does not occur without pain.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and it spreads out that matter.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the bladder, and this moisture has many colors: either it turns yellowish, or it is without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is completely white as we have said, it is an abscess, that is, long like an egg, and the eyes do not open, for there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very cloth, it is an abscess with part of the egg and because of this, one thinks that it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the eyes and the white part that is completely white, one can feel it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe thoroughly with a blunt instrument, so that the shape is as described before. According to what follows the intruder, judge of what is within.
According to what follows the intruder, judge of what is within. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be anesthetized to our power and the filling of his body; then lay him on his back, on something a little high, and put many layers of cloth underneath him.
then lie him on his left side, and command the assistant to lie on his right, and extend the staff between one of the two joints of the hips.
Then take the spatula and strike the hide of the hocks through its length up to the heel, and make your incision straight in dividing the hide of the hocks as far as the white tendon, and peel off the skin carefully according to your ability.
Then pierce the white tendon with sharp needles about one finger's breadth wide and draw out all the liquid, then place your thumbs, and stretch the white tendon upward; do not touch the bone of the hock, but only the white tendon; strike all around it carefully or in pieces, for if you don't strike it well, the liquid will return.
and if the calf jumps away from your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work with the white tendon; then bring together the two sides of the bone of the hock with a stitch, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted with another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood; afterwards strike the coccyx to the whole suspension, and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; strike the other part similarly as you did the first, then squeeze out the blood, and put moistened linen in oil on the wound.
and put more moistened linen in wine and oil, and place them on the coccyxes, and cover it with double cloths, and tie it above all the cord that is according to this shape:
Then take two bandages, and make them of linen cloth in this manner and sew them together in the belt of the breeches, and one of the heads takes hold beneath the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the fist; and the other two heads above the two angles, and let all the rest be gathered together in the loop of the belt.
And sometimes this ramice of cautery is used in place of iron surgery, and you take one cautery scalpel and cut the skin of the boils, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is exposed.
if you take the cautery in this form and pierce the boil with it, and peel off this thin layer of skin using the hot and sharp cautery.
And the cup in all ways you can, as long as you are heating it; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and beware of the disorder of blood, and be cautious about the surgeries of cutting.
and if anything happens contrary to it, or abscess swelling or bleeding or something else, if you cure what is happening contrary, according to what is said before.
and if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work due to its horror, then bring a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have said that the water has been brought out,
Make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part beneath all the spittle wide, and make the perforation long along the body; and let the holes be large, so that all the pus flows out.
Then put cotton on the wound and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow out, then heal it until the wound is healed.
and if the white linen cloth does not allow the pus to come out of the wound's mouth, then you must put a pen or instrument for draining pus from dropsy in it, as its shape is shown before; and widen one side of the wound slightly, feel that the pus returns, and collect it after 6 months or so, and when it is collected as described before, the patient will pass his days.
From the abscess of the eyes
Know that in the case of this operation, there are many possible positions due to which it seems to me that one should remain still.
And I will tell you the work and similarities of abscess.
Therefore, many abscesses come from the body, including the eyes; and it is often the case.
It is to be known by excessive sharp and hot, which is spread on the kidneys, or through beating;
and is the color of the abscess according to the body's color; it finds no pain, but is a severe abscess;
and by chance it is a swollen and hard abscess, and of that color, and sometimes comes from an artery, or from the inflammation of a vein.
When it is from an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers;    Quant c’est de enflure de voine, si est conus par la doulour qui vient des parties sus et dedens, et par li est mueve et se moult agrandit. And you should not touch it.
One who is afflicted with inflammation of the vein is known by the expression of the touch of the fingers.
and can make the incision on this appearance, and on other sores;   --> And one can easily make an incision on this symptom, and on other sores. And it is that you cut the cyst's core, then the yolk is in the upper part, and the white substance is pulled out, and release the suspensorium of the yolk from all parts of the egg.   --> And it is to cut the core of the cyst, then the yolk rises up, and pull out the white substance, and free the suspensorium of the yolk from all around the egg.
If the egg is already softened with these hatched characters, then you must draw out the egg and break it.
And if it is near to breaking open or in the vessels that are within, you must deliver all that softness and break it roundly.
And if the birth of the membrane is to one side, you must break it all and draw out the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Of an abscess of the eyes
This is a swelling resembling a boil on the eyelids, with softening of the eyes  (eyelids) and the patient groans in pain as he goes.
And the cure for this disease is both careful and dangerous as previously stated.
Furthermore, we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then push the suspensory apparatus from the hips down to your arms, Apply to all wounds close to the penis, and mark them with the masters, and stretch them out correctly;
then cut into the sharp pointed ulcer, wide along the wound, while they are exposed.
and then scrape from both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
and then insert an awl with one double thread, tie it at the first joint where the blood vessel is, and tie it again at the other end. Then press the shoulder straight, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted humors.
Then dress the wound as one does with other ulcers, so that no pus flows from any of the corners.
for if all the pus comes out, it will not harm, and if all the pus comes up, then the corners must be drained. If the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the breaking of the vein The results of this procedure are due to the section that comes or the breaking of the vein, or the extension onto the abdomen in the area of the inguinal region, because the intestines descend from that opening to one of the cavities.
and this wound is either shallow or deep, and it comes in these two ways of causing injury: either by impact, or by jumping, or by twisting, or by lifting a heavy weight, and similar things.
and the signs when it is of the extension of the shallow wound are that they happen gradually, over a long time, and do not come suddenly. and the abscesses are even up to the full depth because the shallow wound follows the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of a section through the stomach, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously beneath the skin close to it, and this is due to the outflow of the intestine and the body cavity through the stomach.
Sometimes the intestines are expelled through the anus and remain blocked, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, due to fear, it is necessary to escape.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestines back into their place with their hand inside through the wound, if they can reach. Then hold him by the neck between your hands, and lift his legs;
then stretch out the abdomen above, and strike the entire hide of the flanks with length. Then bring in the fingers of the waist one by one according to what you need to open the wound, and make sure they are wide enough for the eyes to come out.
Then scrape the swelling that is beneath the skin of the eye, as long as the white swelling is hard and exposed from all sides;
Then insert your finger into that which follows the eye (the eye socket), into that which is between the white swelling and the second swelling beneath the skin of the eye;
and remove that which is behind the eye, and between the second swelling; and then move your hand to the inside of the eyelid, and raise the white swelling towards your left hand, and lift the eye towards the swelling towards the waist. And instruct the minister to stretch the arm upwards, and release the one who is behind the elbow.
And if there is any intestine rolled up or hard white pus, and if you find anything of this sort, push it into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with one thick thread made from ten threads, and push it into the back part of the pus, which is after the skin of the coccyx; after the buttocks, then cut the limbs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads. Then, align one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie them together with a strong ligament from beneath the skin at the joint, about two fingers' width apart; Then, wrap the joints of the fingers and tie them together with a strong ligament about two fingers' width apart, so that no worms that feed on them can enter, nor an abscess spread; and make the ligament straight according to the first ligament that was about two fingers' length, and after these two ligaments leave the skin that is beneath the skin of the joints wide enough for a finger;
And after that [the procedure], according to the roundness that the egg carries; then strike in the part which is beneath the skin of the shoulders, as much as it does not break, and bend, as we have said before.
Then apply wet wool in oil and place it on the wounds, and bring the ligature as we have said. And sometimes the white sores that I have mentioned are cauterized after incision due to fear of blood loss.
For this often occurs and leave the ligament until it chooses to drop off; and if it delays in falling off, you should apply hot water, and put on what has been said, until it drops off.
Then heal the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
of carnous hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a hinge which joins together the bone, in this manner you bind the joints, after the cut lightly above them.
Then insert it into the wound and treat the abscess of those who open it, until the joints fall apart; and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes there comes gangrene within wounds, as we have said, and open the joints; do not remove any intestines from the anus, and if some are removed, it is bad, and repair them hourly.
And if it remains too long at this point, the wound or abscess believes that the intestines are descending.
This happens by the extension of the abscess, which is in the bowels, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then the muscles and ligaments become softened and opened up.
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
And it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then strike the place of the rupture swollen with a blow of a distance of 3 fingers;
Then draw out the pus that is under the skin which lies beneath, then take the rod and place it on the apparent place of the pus;
And press with the entire abdomen, then cut the two apparent places of the pus on the head of the rod, and do the same for both sides;
Then extract the head of the rod and do not cover or extend the pus or any other thing, as I have informed you in the treatment of the removal of the entrails;
Then heal by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if it bleeds and heals the wound, as long as it is healed.
The leech is confined and has no appearance in the wound, and the cautery is heated up in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the heels
Many times the skin of the heels becomes soft in some men, because the fat inside is softened and can be seen; when it is observed that it needs to be cured, one should make the patient lie on their back, and cut the softened skin above the natural skin; then assemble two lips together for a stitch, and if you see, sew the excess skin of the softened area with 2 or 4 firm stitches; then cut between the stitches, and heal as other wounds do, until it is healed, and cut the threads.
The torture
The use of torture is mentioned in our law, and I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; however, it is necessary for two reasons: one is that the mirrors answer when asked about it, as well as its remedy; and the other, because we often need to torture animals to help us, such as sheep, goats, cattle, and other animals. Therefore, I say that torture is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the method of attraction, we place the animal in hot water until the skin is softened and relaxed; then we grab it with our hand, making sure it is held firmly so that it does not move anymore. As for the method of cutting, first we mark the animal, then we press the skin of its anus with our left hand, tie it up, and strike above each testicle once or twice depending on how thoroughly we have scorched them; leave a small amount of pus and the subtle pus that is over the vessels; this method of torture differs from that by attraction because sometimes something remains in the anus due to attraction, causing the animal to desire pleasure; then cure the wound until it heals.
Hermaphrodites
1. Hermaphrodite is according to .ij. forms in humans: one of which is between the two openings, as the figure of nature for a woman, who has hair, and sometimes urinates from it.  And the other form is in women, and has on top of the penis like a rod and two openings.  And the treatment of both man and woman is that you cut around the adjacent areas entirely, and treat them as other wounds; in the second form, in men whose urine jumps from the skin of the openings, there is no cure.
The disease or illness:
de la tentigene:
From erratic [situations]
In erratic [situations], the nature of a woman is not understood, or the opening is small; it can be natural by birth, or an accident caused by illness that comes upon it; or it can be due to incorrect positioning, or from a subtle or thick siphon, and it occurs either in marriage or during childbirth, or during labor, or after; and one must avoid conceiving, and the delivery, and unfortunately causing the flowers to bloom; and the recognition of these is by the observation of the belly. If the opening appears close, whether at your fingers or the eye [vulva], you hasten, and press in this manner: put your fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spread out her legs; then form the two openings, until the subtle siphon is round, and the opening is closed; then take linen and moisten it with oil, and place it over the area, and let the woman rest for each day so that it cannot heal. And if the siphon is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula resembling a mirte leaf. If the opening is from a tear, suspend it at the onyx [urethra] and cut; and have ready medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together in abundance of egg; then bring a wide plank, so that the wound cannot heal; and let it be long, and bring a tent of dry linen; then heal other wounds until it is healed. And when in childbirth there is a tear, it must be covered according to this manner, unless it is an abscess that has been festered. For the festered abscess that is in childbirth, one must not touch to heal.
From hemorrhoids [a condition characterized by inflammation of the veins around the anus or lower rectum]
1. "Emorroydes are openings of veins which without care usually heal on their own." - Emorroidas son las aberturas de venas, las cuales sin atención usualmente sanan por sí mismas.
"from the rectum" - del recto
Many methods of abscess come in the marriage (the body), such as carbuncles, pus-filled abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to discuss in this treatise the abscess that comes in the marriage, which is not one of those abscesses that cling together; and if you want to know the work with fire, observe whether the abscess is agitated at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red which you can see.  Then do not rush to pierce, but let it heal until the pain subsides; and then have the patient sit on one seat, and he should have two small seats or he leans, and support his back and assemble his feet at the parts away from the leg; and his legs should be spread out, and place his arms under his thighs, and tie them well with a strong ligament; then bring the pus to the left side of the abscess, and introduce the instrument used to open the abscess cavity, which will follow the shape; and when you introduce this instrument, ensure that it does not penetrate too deep into the abscess, and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is large, cover the depth of the abscess with cloths so that the instrument does not harm it; and place the mouthpiece of the instrument on top, and mark the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one can feel it with the hand, it should be covered with a linen cloth dipped in oil or rose oil; and put the cloth over the abscess and over the handle linen cloth that is clean and moistened with water or medicinal herbs that are cooked; then cover it for two days with ointment until it heals; and sometimes lift the abscess and the wound by applying a cloth dipped in water and honey, and then apply water or long-cooked herbal remedies such as lily root and aristolochia; then return to the ointment.  And if the wound closes again in the abscess, you must be careful not to burn with fire, but heal it as we have said in the division.
The birth
It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the shape of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see a woman push downwards, and desire to urinate; then the child should hasten to be born. So, know that this delivery is according to natural shape, and it is the head of the child that comes out first, followed by the second part with it. When you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on the woman's abdomen so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends towards the head, the second part follows, and the husband is cleansed of his waste by good cleansing. And he who comes in another way does not come naturally. For sometimes he comes from his feet, or the body or limbs come, or the hands, or he comes to the abdomen or chest, or he may be turned around accidentally on his neck, and in other evil shapes; it is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and skilled in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist.
If the child comes out first through natural delivery and the woman delivers with great effort, and her strength is weak, let her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the midwife's little spatula between her fingers in the shape shown here: and cut the second part, and strike it with its nails until the membranes that are inside come out; and hold the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, you should cleans her privates with mustard oil of fenugreek; then make her take a position and vomit, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour; this will now bring forth the child. And if two hands come out first, you should gently pull them back bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, have the woman sit on one saddle, and lift her feet up; then tilt the saddle onto the ground, and anoint the woman so that she does not urinate when tilting; and if the hands still cannot enter and the child is dead, strike its hands with the knife shown above and extract the child, and pull it out gently.
The issue of the child on his feet When the infant comes upon his feet, you must push him upward. and then turn the feet this way and that, until they are even;
Then take one of the feet and stretch it out this way and that.
Can it jump up to any kidneys, if commanded to catch it, and make it vomit by means of a concoction; If it leaps (the condition), if God wills it.
And if it does not leap as we have said, you must turn it gently and slowly, according to the natural figure. For then it is easier.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, take musk-powder from high places, oil of rosin, melted gum, and grind everything in one mortar; and place the nature of the woman within it and drive this ointment out. then make her sit in a cold bath up to her chest;
And when it is softened inside, make one myrrh collier and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour; Then make it sit on a chair, then make it vomit and hold its mouth and nose shut, and gently press the abdomen, for the child now jumps (or moves restlessly). of the exit of the child upon its knees When a child comes in this form, put the balm on their hands little by little;
of the infant's delivery which comes out with a hand's breadth wide. it is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand. if it cannot be brought back, then raise the woman and walk.
If it cannot walk, make it lie down on a bed, and bend its legs.
then apply the mustard plaster as I have described;
and if it does not give birth, make it sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and help the baby according to its natural shape, and make it vomit, and command it to grasp as tightly as possible until the afterbirth issues forth;
Of the birth of the child on its neck, and it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother The bailiff should touch his hand, then turn it little by little and pull gently;
and when it is even, place natural mucilage of high altitude and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct it to move a little at a time;
and when you have done this, make it sit on a seat, and instruct it to hold itself; and make it vomit. In the same way, you should proceed with everything
In the same way, you should proceed with everything Press it in this manner for everything, grasp the dislocation with your nail until all moisture is gone.
And if the membranes rise above its face and neck, strike it with your fist from below so that it is not held back and the membranes die.
Then push the child inside until you have placed it as needed, and command the woman to take hold of herself once:
from the birth of twins Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange and seldom happens. Two are strange things, and they do not live unless named;
I know that they multiply, and are conquered by the one who designs them, which is linked to the boil;
And sometimes they emerge naturally like teeth, as we have said.
If it emerges violently, then the treatment should be as we have said, and let the physician be subtle, and do quickly and gently what it does; And do as is fitting to heal (or save). of many children (lit. from many children)
of many children (lit. from many children) Never are formed in marriage (lit. There is never a formation in marriage) more than two or three, or four or five, or six or seven, or up to fifteen, and all of them are shaped like children by the measure of the wise,
and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, because such things can happen accidentally. Follow what is required.
Of a dead child
When treating the woman who has given birth to a dead child or miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come naturally, and you are forced to perform manual work. if it is required that you know whether the woman is of good virtue and does not have an accident or fear of death;
It is necessary for the woman to lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And the attendant should shave her in two parts, or tie her to the bed so she is not treated for childbirth.
Then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with musk and aloeswood and linseed, then anoint her hands with those oils and musk mixtures. Then push it into the socket lightly, then look for one that can fit in it.
and beware if the entrails appear to protrude above its head; if they push the fingers into its eyes or neck or mouth or throat or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs.
And if the dislocation is on the limbs, pierce or prick it and apply moderate pressure to the ribs;
You must grip the handle with your right hand and place the spur between both hands of your left hand, and push it gently to the full extent of your hand, and pierce the handle in one of the places we have mentioned until it reaches an empty space;
Then pierce towards one another or the other way around, whichever is necessary, so that the extraction holes are equal;
and then make them equal by moving from both sides to draw them out, and hold the teeth in position so they can be drawn out as shown here:
If any part remains, place some oil on the tweezers with your fingers and push it into that part, then draw out the other part;
And if there remains no dislocation, place this cone or higher onto the joint and do so until it moves completely out.
When one hand comes before the other, but cannot be returned due to holding, It must be that you wind up (the bandage) on one cloth until it moves completely.
Then take hold of the limb at its joint, either the heel or the elbow, and you should do the same with your other hand, and with two fingers.
If the child's thigh is fat and it is narrow at its outlet, or if there is a swelling of the head assembled, If you must insert the spinal arrow between your fingers and make the head and extract the swelling; or you will go to the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows it;
and similarly do the same for the bones naturally large; and then draw out the bones with pliers;
And if the shoulder jumps out and is held with force, it should be cut, as far as the protruding moisture goes;
If it cannot issue forth, strike it into pieces where you can.
If it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, you should pierce it until the moisture flows out.
If the swelling is above the feet, the treatment is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the bladder is easy.
And if it is struck in the abdomen or thigh, you should pull it out with a one-fold cloth wrapped around the hand; and cause the moisture that is there to withdraw;
and if another member has been dislocated, and the head remains; If the bailiff presses his hand deep into the wound of the mare, and pulls until he reaches the mouth of the wound; then he presses once or twice, and pulls further;
and if the mouth of the mare's wound is narrowed by a hot emetic that has come in, it is not necessary to work; It is required to administer moist and fat things; And apply poultices, as well as soothing in warm waters and moistening.
And if the hernia is on the side, and you can make it even, then apply what we have said in the live child;
And if it lacks power, pull it apart into pieces, leaving nothing of the joint behind.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said in abscess poultices that come in the marriage box.
And if bleeding occurs, it should be placed in a tight binding, and other treatments should be applied.
I have seen a woman whose fetus had died, then a second one was placed on top of the dead one and it revived. After a long time, an abscess came to the armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began great purulence.
I was called for the treatment, and thought long about it, but could not stop the bleeding from the wound.
I applied strong-drawing plaster, and an object came out, and after several days another one did. I wondered much, because the stomach has no bones.
I suspect that it is the bones of a dead child.
I am treating the wound and find several bones inside, as long as the woman remains in a better condition. And the woman remained in that state for a long time, and eventually died a little while later.
And I did not remember this chapter except for when the master finds an unusual thing that he knows how to help with.
Return the arm to its place
Here comes the form of the pressor, with which you weigh books; and at two turns to the two shoulders of the two hinges. The horns shall be more slender than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;    Si bien qu’en la première forme de ce pressor il puet estre le corne plus gros que le restrictoire.  Et si li cornes sont trop granz, on en eue un d'eslancie et l'autre d'aposteme, quant il est trop petit on en eue un d'eslancie et un autre d'eslancie.
And the mouth of the barrel should be 1 inch wide, and the sides of the arms 1 foot long, and half a palm in depth;    Et si le fust soit trop grant ou trop petit, on en eue un autre selon que il doit estre. And between the two limbs there should be two joints of the same bone, which are fastened in one and in the other, half a palm's length or slightly longer;
And this pair of joints are pushed into the mouth of the wound to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, similar in appearance but more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or beechwood, according to the shape of pliers; And let there be two shoulders and two joints, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers in width;
And when opening the woman with all the instruments, make her sit on one bed, her feet hanging down and legs open; Then place the two joints side by side in the woman, and hold the head of the instrument beneath her thighs; Then work your hand with all the tools, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the anvil, until the bail makes what it desires.
All these tools are covered and multiplied in their likenesses; and when the master has prepared them, then he works more quickly, and higher for humans according to their quantity.
Never disdain the tool that you have not prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her placenta, and then make her vomit by pressing on her abdomen, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose. And if she jumps due to this, it is good.
If it does not happen, take a small pot, and make a syringe or basin, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, wormwood, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water above the fire; then put a tube or a hollow pipe on one end and the other end into the mouth of the patient.
and hold the plaster until the vapors enter the patient; then make him vomit, as we have said. If the second one jumps quickly.   In this context, it seems like "secondine" refers to a condition or symptom, and "hastanment" means suddenly. However, without additional context, it's hard to determine the exact meaning of these terms in this specific passage. It would be useful to have more sentences surrounding this one for a better understanding. And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal as commanded, instruct the maidservant to wet her left hand in sesame oil or musk oil of althea, and then put it on the affected area.
And if you find a second one, take it and carefully pull it out straight so that the worm does not bite during extraction. But you must move it gently left and right, and then draw it out; it will come out and detach itself.
And if the mouth of the bladder is stretched open, we have said the treatment for evacuation and fumigation of herbs.
And if it lacks all that we have said, then ensure you do not pull.
However, the one at the bladder's mouth should be tied to the woman's thigh, then clysterize with ointment made from four ingredients.
If it is possible and if he brings it back and comes, but nevertheless, when she has it, if a bad smell comes to the stomach and the head, and blisters the patient.
Therefore, it is necessary for suitable fumigations for this purpose: no ancient person has proven the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for the retention of flowers and the expulsion of the afterbirth is as follows:
And it is made of glass resembling a cane, and the neck is put in the vagina, and the handle large above the fire.
And let the fumigation be over the coals, and the taint until it is destroyed, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it has been stopped up with a subtle plaster. Therefore it is necessary to pierce that plaster in the proper place, and do not pierce it with sharp spathula, and make sure that you do not injure the surrounding tissues.
Then lay a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with ointment until it heals.
If you doubt it will stay in place, then pierce a splint of wood and leave it for several days, and remove it when the patient is able to go to his rooms.
And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess occurs; it must be covered: if it is to heal, as we have said earlier with the splint of wood.
of the fistula at its base Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodular, and those that come out from above the foundation grow larger, or in the space between two parts,
and when this nodular fistula is old, it is operated upon, and moisture awakens inflammation or subtle swelling.
And sometimes these fistulas are persistent; they are known by those who observe them when the patient has discharge or flatulence, and possibly by a jump upwards.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder and halfway down the penis; they reach up to the knee joint, and even up to the neck of the cube (coccyx).
And thus one recognizes the fistula persevering at its foundation, but not persevering: and you should place your index finger or foundation into it, and insert a thin awl of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisted nature.
If it has a twisted nature, then insert a fine splint or horsehair into it, until you feel the splint or the hair at your finger:
and if you don't feel it, and it does not cause pus, inflammation or worms, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce at all; hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the conduit of urine, if it gushes out urine and cannot be sealed by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the knee joint, then the tendon comes out at its level; If there is no curvature and the pain is coming from elsewhere, then it remains in a bent position, and neither medicine nor binding with ointment helps.
And in these Persian fistulas there is no remedy but labor, and vain efforts of foolish physicians who intervene.
In that which is not Persian or old, in hope of health by iron, as I have experienced,
And the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly; Then push a tent of reed, or a plank if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the dislocation comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you push your index finger there,
Then you will feel that the dislocation has pierced through; and if it is exposed where you feel between your fingers or flesh, then you know that it is penetrated. If one does not work it at all, it cannot be healed.
One must know that some can be well healed, but it happens rarely;
and the help that is given to it, if it is done by heating the cautery thinly according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and put everything hot in the fistula, until it comes out from the base; and do this twice or thrice, as long as you know that these charred pieces must be burned, which resemble a feather of a bird;
Then treat the wound with damp bandages in butter until the pus disappears, then treat it with healing salve containing warm and binding ingredients.
If it heals like that, it is good. But if it cannot heal otherwise,   ...
If the wound remains open and does not close up properly, and you find an abscess between your finger and the wound, cover it with a thick layer of lard or syrup, and watch the abscess that is under the covering to see if it bursts. If the head of the fistula at its beginning, presses immediately against the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
The tent will be opened and cut; then take the charr fatries that seem like a bird's feather, and none remain.
And if the wound is gaping, and cuts between you and the incision, cauterize it with fire or medicine ointment.
Fire cauteries bring together two good things: the burning of these attached charms, and the stopping of blood flow and the drying out of moisture.
then the treatment of wet tents in butter or crushed cheeses, until the lees settle down, and the charms are burned in the butter.
then treat the wound with onion juice made of hard charcoal, and the medicine is dry.
When it is treated, it becomes healed and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes up to the full depth of the foundation, and is removed from the body, push your finger or foundation in there and check it.
If you feel the membrane or fabric or flesh that is about to pierce, but there is no way out except through hope and faith from the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you plunge it to the bottom, or if it is pus-filled, you pierce it and heal it as we did earlier.
And go not too deep, lest you cover the holding device that supports the base, and let the evacuation come by its own will. Then heal, as we have said;
Then heal, as we have said; If it happens to be sound, then remove the covering and clean it once it is removed from its base, either by stretching or by using some instrument pointed for that purpose. Then disinfect the wound with the charred material to the extent possible;
Then study to heal the wound, and keep the fistula in the part outside of its base; it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you press the tent [or probe] into the fistula, and it is where it touches the base of the skin above. If you take a probing stick at its tip in this manner: And insert one thick thread into two, and push the sheath all the way to the fistula until it reaches the tip.
If it is perforated at the margin of the foundation within, then draw out the thread from the perforation, thus you push your hand or foundation.
And draw out the thread from the tip of the fistula, and bring together the two heads, and bind one to the other, and leave for one or two days.
And hold it without movement, until the threads catch these charms that are between them, and pierce.
Then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not pierce itself, then make it pierce in every possible way, as long as it is not too deep.
For it should not be covered with a plaster that goes too deep, and then healed as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of a spur-like thorn with which they make a fistula is very sharp at one end and cuts through. And on the other hand not, because one should not strike where one should not strike, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two types. The first type is located inside the foundation, like a piece of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in the outside it has blood. And if there are one or more (of them), and they are dislocated from their foundation and at the base of the foundation; but those that are dislocated have little moisture.
And furthermore there is also some citron-yellow liquid or blood, and they have the color of the body.
And the cure for those who have them within the foundation is that you command the patient to strain themselves to urinate in a chamber, until the foundation settles down and this can be seen by the sons. If you hurry, hold it with pliers or grip it with your nail, then strike its roots.
and if they cannot be held by pliers due to moisture, take a cloth or cotton, or a piece of gauze instead. hold it with your hands, then strike and sprinkle some hot powders instead of cautery on top. or you cauterize it as the chapter on cautery says, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the foundation cannot come out, clisterize the patient with biting and sharp clistere to clean the area where the foundation is, so that it may come out openly.
If the patients prepare themselves, and if their threads are deep in the foundation, then the treatment will be easy. And it is that you grasp them with your nail or tweezers, strike them, and then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary to apply the suturing in this manner: take one twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle.  This will be continued until the wound has been completely closed. And if it is wide (the wound); draw the thread out, then tie it, and draw out the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one for draining excess blood;
Then place on the foundation a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then leave it until it stops bleeding, and when it has stopped, treat the wound with salve and other remedies until it is healed.
The drying of wounds or foundations Often there is drying of wounds in the intestines due to natural constraint and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you press with the tip of a spatula or your nail the scab above it, so as not to let it get wet. then heal it until it becomes soft, as needed;
And if it cannot heal, start shaving more forcefully than before, until it bleeds, and scrape it. Then let it heal as long as it is healed.
toothache. A formice is a small creature that burrows near the body and moves forward a lot.
And sometimes the fever strikes the throat, and it feels like death by shivering, and it affects the whole body, more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is to take a cane made of goose feather or strong hen feather and place it around the shivering, until the purple circles it all over;   Et tu fais le cierge ou il soit adoussi a la couleur de sanc, et mette l’autre cainne sur li, qui soit adousse à la couleur de vermeil, et maintiens ce li cierges tant que les coulours estrent jaunis et le fremit est desaussiez. Then turn your hand all around the cane until you cover it completely over the shivering, and put it inside, and dry out the shivering from its roots.
And if you see (it), do as follows with a cat of oil or iron in this manner, and make it thin underneath and draw it out from above:
Do not perforate, as it is to maintain the tooth, and press more; and if you see (it), cauterize the pain, as it is in front or chapter of cautery.
of the shape of the clyster   This sentence does not have a direct translation equivalent to English, but "clistere" refers to an enema or rectal irrigation, and "de la forme" means "of the shape". The context suggests that the author is referring to the instrument used for this procedure. Sometimes a silver or copper clyster, or melted tallow or oil, is made; and sometimes these small or large instruments are made, depending on the ones brought to hand.
Therefore, those to be treated in children's care and who are weak and painful, are small.
The shape of the cupping glass can be both small and large, or the abdomen is bound in this manner:
and it should have an opening where the abdomen is bound, as you can see, and the chest should be pierced on two sides, one with two holes and the other with one;
And let the stomach or a man put the medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small holes.
and there should be space between each hole, then insert a strong thread through each hole, around ten or more around, and bind the stomach like a goatskin. and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then cleanse it (clisterize); this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with caster oil or goose fat, or something similar, then gently apply it;
then the ministers should press it with their two hands together until it is all visible, then remove the caster oil, and wash the patient's legs.
if the medicine seems to come out, squeeze it as much as possible; and if it sleeps for an entire night, it is more helpful.
And if you cauterize in the disease of belly decay, and the medicine is quick to heal, continue it until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are foundation or abscess, then use the clyster as gentle as for a child;
this is the form of the gentle clyster on which the skin should be stretched:
wounds
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments for hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and how they are made.
Wounds are made by the thrusting of a spear, cutting with swords and knives, or arrows, lances, or shafts, or similar things.
What are done according to the laws of the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, or head, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, because memories will come in its chapter.
When a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to an arrow or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, And you doubt the draining of an abscess hot: if it makes blood come out from the head itself, even a little bit of blood from the wound, and the drainage is contrary to the damaged part;
And the patient should purge himself of wine and thick foods.
If he does not want to drain, let his food be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And place on the wound, if hot abscess comes, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in vinegar.
And if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air or powder, I will say a little later what the powder is;
And if the fire has moved it (the wound), put some ointments on it until it heals.
And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and its lips cannot be brought together by tension, bring them together by suturing, as I will explain for abdominal wounds by suturing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, festers, and does not hold firmly, press it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. Instruct the patient to eat large meats such as boiled heads (testes) and wheat, also like pulses, and similar things.
And if you find or suspect rotten flesh, without reaching the bone, press the entire thing, and pour hot liquid on it, then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without a cord, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, you should tie it off; and if you find the artery dislocated, bind it with a thread. And if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
And if the wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; put this powder on it so that the arse moves it.
And the way to make the powder is: take incense one part, dragon's blood 2 parts, live coal 4 parts, and grind finely.   <!-- This is a rough guess at the translation based on context --> And apply the wound, press it firmly, until it drains well and joins completely with all its blood.
And then bind it tightly, and leave it to heal by itself if it does not swell; because one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes they do this with only chalk when there is no incense nor dragon's blood, but the ulcer has not moved the wound.
If the ulcer has moved the wound, it should be in this case, without any doubt, that you should not use this powder.   --> If the ulcer has caused the wound to move, there should be no doubt about not using this powder.
But put on some herbal plasters made of wheat flour diluted with water and honey until it thickens. Then heal with other treatments until he is healthy.
And if the broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine forceps;
And I shall tell you after the fractures of the head.
Of the wound of the neck.
If a wound comes or is in the neck and it is simple without any difference from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are severed.
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy but to let them be and not apply any binding, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. And place nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuation of these is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, like boiled water with sweet oil added to it, and boiled again in sweet water. and other stones of this kind, and always kept moist.
If the wound is large, then cut it and bind it with strips, until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, pierce or puncture it (the wound) lower.
If the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, stop it (the bleeding), tie it, and cauterize if necessary.
And if the spine in the throat (or windpipe) is cut or pierced, the food passage must be kept clear. If the heart is near the neck of the throat, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. And then let it come naturally and leave it for some days, then cure it with hot poultices until it is healed.
If the wound presses on the bone, squeeze it. If there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and leave the rest until the wound heals. And let the joints be dislocated and aligned.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder that I have said on it. If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from spear or knife
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if it has any pus discharge as the patient complains: then know that the wound is fatal;
and if it is not deep, and it is all fresh blood, do not put any powder on it immediately or tie it up for the blood that disperses too much; and return to the patient's heart, and open the wound; but apply an attracting ointment, and let it stay for two times a day;
and if you do not have an ointment, put in the wound old cotton to draw out moisture.
and make the patient rest on the wound for three days or four, or more. if there is no spasm or bad tremors of the heart and no drawing from the entrails. And when you see good positions, know that the wound is healed. Apply the remedy and other treatments, as long as he is healthy;
If it cannot heal, and if an abscess forms, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as needed.
If the wound is from sword or knife incision and it is simple (not compounded), whether on the front or back, treat what is in front of it;
If it is large, stitch it up; if it is small, powder it, and if it is embedded in the bone and has broken into pieces, either sew up the wound or draw out the fragments if they are exposed. and if they are not exposed, let the wound drain, align the extraction.
And for other wounds on various limbs, judgement is made according to what we have said.
Breaking of the belly
The breaking of the belly is great, medium, and small.
From a large wound, the intestines sometimes protrude or the nerves of the intestines, due to which the insertion takes place.
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one,
Because more points are put into [the intestines], if they are not put in one by one. because the intestines inflate quickly when they feel the heat, and more points enter them.
and for this reason it is better to stitch the midline wound, because it is better to sew the inflamed intestines in their place rather than others.
And know that the abdominal incision is according to four methods:
The two common joints occur in the abdomen joint.
and the joints of other wounds on the body and two other joints specific to those wounds are common to other wounds.
Moreover, they are more appropriate with the abdomen joint, and I shall say one and explain it.
I say that when the wound is small, and any internal organ protrudes from it, And great care is required when resetting [something], this can be done in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or a piece of cloth in cold water only, cook in squiant and cyper and pepper, and stretch the intestine until the swelling is removed;
And sometimes this wine restrains, and is boiled to dilute.
When you see the swelling separate, if the intestines are cooked with too much or bad water, for by this, the entry is closed almost completely;
And if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
and the first treatment is cooked meat, we should not cut it unnecessarily;
And this is the instrument to cut with:
Slice into it deeply along the curve and not across, and look at its shape here:
And when the wound is widened, and the intestines burst out, Put it back to its natural shape in its proper place, If you can, for it is necessary.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part beneath the belly, make the patient lie on his back. and raise his legs higher than his head; if it is in the part beneath the belly,
and similarly, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts If the broken part is higher than the other;
and thus it should be applied to what I say in large and small wounds.
For small wounds, use what is appropriate;
then have between your hands a kind and compassionate minister who touches the entire wound with his hand, And hold the lips together; and this is the common method of stitching (or suturing);
and this is the common method of stitching (or suturing); and you take a needle or several, according to the width of the wound, Then leave the edge of the wound a distance of two fingers (approximately one inch), and insert a needle with a single strong thread; And pierce the two shoulder blades with the two shoulder bones (ribs).
Then tie a double thread around the needle of two parts (two threads). Then assemble the two shoulders of the wound facing each other,
and leave one finger's width in space, and insert another needle. then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue to do so according to the number of needles needed, As long as the entire wound is held closed;
And the needles be medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick. because the thin needles pierce all the skin, and the large ones cannot enter properly: because they should be medium-sized.
And it is not advisable to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin.
so as not to open and pierce the wound before the suture.
Then hold the heads of the needles, so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping. And he puts tents or bandages on the head of arrows to keep it steady. and leaves them until the wound is healed.
And this way of stitching arrows is more suitable for small wounds. For he thrusts a needle or two.
The second suture is common, and you must gather together two shoulder blades and two rib bones with a needle having one strong middle thread. And when you have pierced these bones all four together,
And when you have pierced these bones all four together, then remove the needle from the part where you started, in the manner one cuts meat.
and place a space between each joint with the thickness of a hen's eggshell;
This joint is for the man,
And I sew a wound which a man had or belly,
which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and it exposed the intestines about two palms in length,
And the wound was within the belly. I put back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours.
And the wound healed up to 15 days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
The monk had judged that he would die, but this was a miracle;
And do not treat it with ointment, for I was in one place where none were found, nor any medicine. And apply old cotton twice a day on the wound and wash it with water of honey until it is healed.
I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
Take the needle, and thrust it from the outer part towards the inner one until it reaches.
when it has pierced through the core straight on straight, then take out the needle where its head was or where you had inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the inner part towards the outer one until it reaches.
and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as pelts are made by a tanner, And you leave the suture open on one side, and close it on the other, until the stitches are all completed.
The second method of suturing, as Galen calls it,
it is similar to what anyone does when joining two natural parts together, And apply one of the cheeks of the jaw to the other cheek in this manner:
Insert a needle or cheek of the mirror near that side, and only pierce it through there. leave the two cheeks of the jaw. then turn the needle and pierce it from the outer part to the inner one. 2 shoulders of the breastplate [or armor]
then make a hole in one and the other of the exterior part up to that within, in 2 other shoulders of the cuirass [or armor] on the opposite side.
and this is the manner of sewing and the most common one.
Galen said this word, and no one contradicts it,
One must sew the stomach with two needles, each containing thread.
and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
And know that when the incision is inside the abdomen, The sewing is more difficult than other parts of the abdomen.
The judgments of the wound are as follows, similar to the judgments of other wounds:
and it is when you find the fresh wound full of blood, just as the arrow moved it, if you reinsert the intestines and sew them up; then put powder made from charcoal on top,
if you reinsert the intestines and sew them up; then put powder made from charcoal on top, And if the arm has been moved, place some ointment on it while the wound heals; Thread the sutures and sew them together with the needle; Then treat the wound as usual, until it is healed;
And if you have no medicine, place it immediately as soon as it begins to emit pus, old cotton. and move it two times a day until it is healthy.
For you do not need any other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt whether the wound will spread to the main members, It is necessary that you soften flax lightly in warm oil, or in rose oil. and place it around the sores, and under the saddlebags (bandages).
if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, and this often happens, if the cluster of black wine is hot, and especially when putrefaction reaches the intestines;
And pierce within, know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The 'jeun' intestine cannot heal when perforated. and it is because of the wounds in them, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to nerves.
And if the suture jumps out from the wound, replace it in the same manner as the intestine while it is fresh.
And if it becomes old and turns black, you should lie the affected area so that blood does not flow from it. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament. and hang the two heads on the side of the wound away from the extraction, so that when the sinews fall, the wound will be opened.
of the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men,
because I have seen that a man was pierced or wounded by a spear;
And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became ulcerated and turned into a fistula, and in it there was exudation and flatulence;
I treated him according to what I knew, and did not stop refining until he was healthy, and the wounds closed up.
And when I see it sewn up, I feared that the patient has ill in his belly; and he had no illness, but stayed in better condition, and ate and drank;
and the experimentalists said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be sewn up in this manner: take large clamps, then gather the lips of the wound, And when the convulsions have opened the mouth, place it on the two lips,
then put another convulsion in this manner as before, until the wound is completely seized;
And dress (or bandage) the wound. If the head swells in the intestines and brings no harm to the patient,
and it can be tied with a thin string cut from the intestine of an animal.
In such a manner: take this thread of intestine that is very thin, and then tie it to the head of this thin thread (or twist of linen).\] then thread the cord through the needle, sew the intestine and tie it in the wound.
And this method of stitching tremors is not stronger than by way of faith and hope.
If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no remedy or health, unless by subtlety.
of fistula or that it is Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called "fistula." and indeed, when it opens up and becomes hollow.
And a fistula is according to the truth, a hard and white swelling where no pain is felt, and it is swollen like the feathers of a bird;
And sometimes in a clear jump, and other times in a thick bow. Sometimes narrow, and other times quite wide.
And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not healed and there is no flesh, This is only through one of the four causes:
or through the thinness of blood or body; or through its corruption: or because there is hard flesh within, and above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; When there is too much swelling; when the limb is pushed out (dislocated), and the matter is of bad quality; when the medicine is not good for the treatment. because corruption is a type of plague; For the property of the region, digestion is slow, health delayed, and it naturally swells. there are veins or bones
and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and remedies for medicines in the division.
Now I shall tell you the cure for fistula made by handwork.
Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves. or in the bladder, intestines, bladder, or ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
All such fistulas are of grave healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not reach up to the level I mentioned, and you have faith in the cure, And you may recognize it, if you take a tent of honey or iron, if the vein is straight, then pierce it.
and if the vein is twisted, seek with a thin probe for it, because the probe bends around the twists;
if the vein is severely damaged and you cannot find it with probes, if the hernia occurs through one of the perforations,
for moisture cuts from one perforation to another and cleanses it;
then carefully excise it to the extent of your skill, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is fully covered.
and ask the patient carefully where he feels the pain when you press on it, and at what location.
And when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in one of the places that I have told you, if the shoulder follows what I have told you,
or in one of the places that I have told you, if the shoulder follows what I have told you, and remove the rotten flesh and corrupt cartilage that are inside. and then heal it until it is healed,
And if the fistula is correctly penetrated straight through, it must be sealed off as deeply as possible. Then place dampened bandages soaked in a hot medicinal solution inside the fistula and push them to the tip of the fistula.
Then place dampened bandages soaked in a hot medicinal solution inside the fistula and push them to the tip of the fistula. until the medicine removes the excess that remains at the bottom;
Then apply ointment made with pure lard, until it is healed;
And if it is not healthy through this, cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is rotten due to the abscess, break it. If a vein or nerve does not affect major limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all the corruption is removed, Then treat harmful things until it is healed;
And if not healed, then bend as before, know that you are not going to the fountain:
remove and dig deep until you reach the bottom, And remove all the corruption, then restore its place;
If it is thus purified, it is well. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there is no other remedy but to let it heal on its own.
And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it with the pliers, if extraction with an instrument is suitable for this,
and if there are many bones, pull them all out, do not leave any one.
and if the moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, If hot and moist water and fat (or lard) are applied, and the bones are freed.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something healing-balm to the wound. and let it remain until the flesh is swollen around the bones,
and then they will have more easily removed the bones;
And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then scrape off the corruption only to the extent that the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound;
if there is a large part of the corruption and it reaches the bone marrow; If it is necessary to be cut open and covered until corruption occurs, and then it should be healed until it is closed;
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause that came from within the body.
Until substances came to the leg, and a large abscess broke out, without any reason to open [it].
but they opened it anyway due to their foolishness, causing the abscess to burst open. and they bled a great deal, and it became a fistula, and many died due to diarrhea and moisture of the body.
and they both sought cures for two years, but there was no skilled surgeon among them.
as long as I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medications with which he was being treated and that which ran through the wounds with great force; and the youth's body became red, and had a yellowish hue.
I pitched a tent in one of the wounds, and then sought all the wounds,
And I found that they come toward each other from all parts of the leg.
Then I hurried and cut into one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption went to the bone within;
I seemed to see the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except what I left behind;
And begins to treat the wound with salves for long times, but cannot heal.
Then again it is reinforced and the bone is exposed as before,
And found a continuous corruption in the bone, and burned it, then left it to heal and tried to mend the place.
But I could not heal more than covering a palm of the bone and draining all its marrow. Then restore it with medicines; it heals and hardens quickly.
and should not begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure. and because of the fear of death I had for him. Because it bled frequently but healed completely.
Because it bled frequently but healed completely. And in its place, a hard growth arises from the bone, and it was well-composed and had no harm or counteraction of any kind, neither at its edge nor its arrival.
and stretch the head, so that you pull out the rotten flesh beneath it. and expose the skin on the side where you want to be, so that the skin does not puncture the flesh; And put a splint or a plank under the bone to cover the corrupt flesh. And it should be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and also another time.
If the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, If you uncover all the flesh, then put a splint underneath,
And, let the corruption extend from one part to another, and let it be equal in length to the length of the corruption, i.e., finger span, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, strike the corrupted joint and break the bone on the other side.
And if the corruption extends between two joints, there is no remedy but to strike it.
If the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is a very difficult thing to treat. But nonetheless, you must inquire about that corruption, how it opens itself; and clean it in all ways that you can, but ensure the vein or nerve do not oppose you;
and know that the incision and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance; and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and hardness; And for this reason, it is necessary to prepare an instrument for every kind of work.
And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you think about the instrument that you need, according to what is necessary.
hot fire The heads may fall out due to internal causes, or due to external ones;
and when you have given the remedy for this corruption through the use of medicines, and it does not benefit at all, it is necessary to cover that member up to the level where the corruption comes, The patient escapes from death by this means or by the greater malice of the defect of a limb.
The patient escapes from death by this means or by the greater malice of the defect of a limb. and the signs are that the limb turns black as if it had been burned by fire. and after the blackness comes the corrosion of one member after another. and take the whole body by hand; hasten to cover.
and if it is by the striking of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes and similar.
if the corruption is at the top of the thumb, strike it, and do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, strike it at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, strike at the edge; and if it passes the edge, it is death. And no remedy is useful for it except its quantity of virtue.
And thus do as when the corruption comes or peels: if it comes at the first joint, then scrape after the other joint;
and if it comes in peeling, then scrape the whole peel. If it rises in the leg, then scrape at the knee joint.
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy for the patient but death.
and the manner of covering or healing the member is to bind it above and below. stretch one minister one of the lower bonds, and another minister the other bond upward. and you cut through the flesh that is between the two bonds with a spatula-shaped tool, until the bone is exposed.
Then take linen cloth or wool, and place one on each side, so that the wool does not touch the healthy flesh. And the patient comes to you with another wound or abscess dressed.
And if blood flow occurs when you are working, then cauterize the place immediately. or you put some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed,
Then bind the member with a firm ligature, and cure it until it heals;
and I will tell you what happened to one man in my opinion:
a man had a black spot which seemed burned by fire,
And the burn started first in his lower leg, until it consumed all of the lower leg;
And when a person sees the corrosion, he pierces it with copper, and it becomes healthy.
For a long time after the corrosion recedes or from one hand it comes to me.
and I placed him on things that caused it to recur after the purification of the body, but the corrosion could not cease.
And you ask me to cut off his hand, but I have no hope of recurrence of the matter. And doubt also if I am to cut his hand, he will not die, for the virtue of man was weak; and he lost all hope and returned to his earth, and pierced with a copper sword, he was healed;
and I have not heard this story except that it is done differently if it is needed.
Aposteme sometimes comes in a charnut place and stays for so long that it causes a great swelling of the body. And then it runs and pierces through, causing the body to jump, and keeps the limbs open like a knight. And the skin that is above it is as thin as one layer of undyed cloth. and will not run to the bone or nerve, and such disease is called "sain".
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in full, then it is called "fistula";
and the surgeon must cut all around the skin, and likewise when it is thin, as with a cloth; and does not heal due to its corruption.
And if you have certainty that the flesh hardens, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the flesh thickens with pus, cure it with a clysteris (enema) like this:
observe if the breasts are swollen, and the sore in them smells of bad odor, Then apply the Egyptian medical ointment, which is made as follows: take asafoetida, oil, litharge, equally, and cook in one vessel over fire, let the mixture be red, and thicken like honey;
take from this as needed, make it into water and honey, And in cauterizing the breast, apply pressure on the wound. Leave the medicine for two hours, then remove it by pulling.
Do this repeatedly until the breast is purified and the pus is removed.
And occasionally the breast is cauterized with ashes, When this medicine is absent, and you take vine charcoal ashes, and pour water over it.
then wash, and anoint with ointment, until you know that the wound is healed.
if the patient cannot bear it, or the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes do not help. if you anoint with oil, honey, and a little bit of litharge powdered. or you anoint it with honey and sweet wine, as the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the blood thicken;
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the wound is well cleaned, If the clisterization of this one that causes growth of chaff within him,
and you take a plaster made definite, and make it with rose oil and wine. or you clisterize it with some medicines and ointments, as I have said the properties or treatment of ointments.
if the wound of the breast is small, and the plaster of the clister cannot enter, If a wound from a small sword is opened, put an Egyptian bandage on it. or Basilicon ointment, until it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, cut (or make) it so that only one inch or a clister can enter;
and if the hernia that protrudes above is in the lower part, push it down or lower than it is. For when the bow is fully drawn, do not let it catch char. and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see, arrange in such a way that the bow moves to the lowest point possible.
And if you cannot cover the chest underneath as you see, and arrange in this manner: let the arm hang loosely downward, and do not leave anything from the arm; and take consolidating medicines to put on the chest,
and stretch out one linen cloth that covers the entire chest; Then apply force to the puncture wound in the chest. That is, use a bandage larger than the first one. Then anoint the wound with oil or another cloth according to the size of the wound. and place it on the chest wound to heal the bone, and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days.
and he who is over the chest wound, remove it frequently to draw out the bone. And know what runs from the bowel, whether it is poison or pus or enough or digested, or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your remedy has been stretched out in this manner and you see the boil rising on the breast; If you know that breasts always swell, approach them with health.
and in the morning or at midday, when you are dislocating the wound. and change one other dressing, and renew the treatment.
And if the breasts are swollen improperly after many days, know that breasts do not always swell. And if subtle poisonous worms appear after a long time, do not despair of health.
for the healing approaches. For there are people whose wounds grow cold in their injuries and those who make it worse.
and if the belly swells with excessive gas after many days, know that the stomach does not empty.
And if the breast delays in healing and is extended, place drying medications containing moist substances but dry in properties. Similarly, define it as an ointment since it contains much vitriol, and this is the final medication;
Take the defined ointment, and make it with rose oil and an equal part of old wine in substance;
then cook and use it; and the same is more effective when heated and thickened. When the diaphysis (long bone shaft) is absent,
and you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them into powder, and sprinkle it on honey when it is above the fire; and then stretch one cloth over it and place it on his chest, and sometimes an Aristotle's long needle is administered, And roots of this celestial [substance], which is as fine as flour and chalk.
And roots of this celestial [substance], which is as fine as flour and chalk. And in the use of simple [medicines] or composites: grind them, make powder, mix with the honey I have mentioned, and use it. If the wound is long and not treated by this cure,
If the wound is long and not treated by this cure, Therefore know that corruption arises fully, and causes impression in the bone, or in hard members, or ligaments; If you treat the treatment of the fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the nail
Panaric is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the hand, or the foot, or by chance arises in other places;
and when it becomes inflamed, and no care is taken, one abscess swells up. and they will cut and throw down the toe as far as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may be cut completely;
and the rot reaches the bone as far as there is a foul smell, and the foot becomes wide and swollen, and the color changes.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, Then it is necessary that you remove all the superfluous part that remains of the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound.
and if the nail follows the flesh closely, and it begins to swell, and bleed. then you must put the medicine under the nail so as not to damage the flesh. and press it gently and lightly on top, And place on top of it the remaining part of the charmed medicine, burning and corrosive, to remove everything.
And if the corruption is in the bone, strike it and draw it out, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth become corrupt, strike it in one of its roots as mentioned before. Then heal while it is healthy;
And if it is wounded and bruised, and feels great pain, then you must first heal the wound; Then cut the nail of the spur-toe obliquely across from above,
And warn that the incision shall not reach up to the flesh which is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
If it happens, put something on top to alleviate.
The growth that arises in the hand of some men by chance is entirely fleshy. And sometimes there is bone or nail [in it], and occasionally there is a nail.
And in some cases they grow from the root of the joint, or their growth is in some of our fingers. The one that grows in any of the fingers does not move, and the one that grows at the joint of the finger, may move.
The thickness of a fat person is light, in this way: the root, with a broad spatula-like instrument.
A newborn from the joint root is difficult to cure; hold it covered.
In a newborn or one who was born prematurely, you must first cover the cartilage all the way to the bone, Then insert the bone into a suitable socket for it, then heal it until it is healed.
The swellings that come to the joints often come by birth, or by injury from a wound, or by burn from fire, or similar things.
If you must treat the swelling, it should be treated according to its natural forms; Then put between two layers or damp cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; And you put between two thin wooden pieces [or blocks], until the joints are joined, as necessary.
If it happens that one of its two [parts] comes with the palm, then strike the joiner [or joint] as necessary.
Of villagers
The veins are large, swollen, and full of melancholic fluids that come in many members of the body.
And it often happens in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, more so than others.
Therefore, you must sometimes administer purge for the liver, and then cleanse the basilica (small intestine).
The cure of iron is in two ways: one is to strike them and draw out black bile; The other method is to tie the vein, and drain it entirely.
The thigh is to be prepared in this manner: first boil the leg with very hot water strongly, until the flesh becomes tender. then hold the patient's leg from above the knee to the part below the kneecap; then make an incision in one place, or two, or three, of a large size,
Then draw out and squeeze out black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much black blood as the strength of the sick person can bear.
And then bind it and instruct him to soak himself in meats reddening dark-colored linens;
And start evacuating and healing again when the veins are full, which helps the sick person.
The elevation of it [the affected limb] is done in this way: lift the patient's leg, if there is much hair on it, then immerse it [the affected limb] in water and let the leg be submerged in hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
and if you do not have water, heat it over the fire, then apply it to the vein along the long part of the thigh or in the area below the ankle.
then scrape the skin with a knife, and strip the vein from both sides until it appears when you feel it.
And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or skin resembles as a white cord;
Then press the root beneath, until it is swollen in the skin, and then cut it obliquely light,
Then strike it in another place three fingerbreadths below; then skin the skin above the vein as far as it appears, then tie the root, as you have done, and cut it obliquely again, as you did before;
Then take another size [of something], if necessary; then flatten it [the size], and place it on the foot of the patient.
Then draw it out [the size] and flatten it to a second size; then cut it down gradually, until it becomes completely thin, and place it.
and if you cannot draw it out and lift [the size], then push an awl with a very thick double thread into it. And pull and draw it (the dislocated joint), and push it below the right rib, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes back into place. And be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, it cannot be pulled or lifted out, and harm comes to the patient.
And when you have treated it (the wound), put linen soaked in vinegar and oil on the place of the wound, and care for it until it heals.
And if the wound is contracted, twisted, and rolled up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, If you must cut it (the dislocation), do so forcefully, but do not cover it; pull it as we have previously stated.
If you must cut it (the dislocation), do so forcefully, but do not cover it; pull it as we have previously stated. The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein is curved and does not cut, so do not use it for opening the vein.
and is of large curve because if it is small, it would pierce the vein; but be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is located in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on land with no moisture.
and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to putrefaction that arises under the skin.
if it comes within the body and turns towards the outside, vein it between the skin and the flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it causes a very large swelling in the leg, Then the joint changes, and the vein begins to emerge, as a root of a plant does.
When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of wood from one and a half to two cubits long, and sew it.
and leave the wood on the leg, and every time it comes out, you wrap it around the wood, and sew it. and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover the base until it is completely out. If you apply it [cautery], it enters into the flesh, brings about abscess and pus or ill health.
Because of this, it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when treated, is of five or ten finger-lengths long. and one honest man came to me, whose it [vein] was ten finger-lengths long, and when you apply it, press a pound or two, and pierce it all the way through.
Empty everything within it; and let the matter inside be vacated, and bring medicines for decaying pus to its place every day, then treat it like an abscess.
Also, do not reopen this vein too often, especially when it opens at the joint of the arm or leg. And if it comes out much pus, and it frequently reopens; treat it then as we have said before.
Worms born between skin and flesh
This disease is called "malady of ox" in our land, because it often occurs in cattle,
and is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, moving upwards and downwards throughout the body, and it can be felt in one limb to another, as long as it goes under the skin or runs through it.
And is infested with putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, larvae and roundworms or belly.
And one doubts its malice, for when it passes through the body, it goes up to the head, and it comes to the eye. By chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it to be cured and drained, one cannot force it unless when it goes:
it is necessary that you tie the joint above and below with a strong and narrow ligament.
then strike above and pull hard, if the bone is turned in completely into the flesh, and you cannot feel it, if you burn with fire above, until it dies.
And the greatest harm it does is that it runs the oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the oil, hold the cork underneath it, then strike on top and pull hard;
and the patient must use body cleansing with dissolving medicines for removing bad humors;
And if they rot from eating spoiled meat.
The pain that comes from windiness (indigestion) This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in some limbs, and moves from limb to limb; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
and afterwards, it rose like a worm towards the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as live silver when it cuts from one thing to another.
The pain spread from that place and pierced into the shoulder,
And after a short while, it runs throughout the body until it comes to the other arm.
Then I found that it turns around the body as I saw it.
I was amazed at how it moves from limb to limb, because I had never seen this disease in such a manner before. Nevertheless, I had often heard that pain moves from one place to another, but I did not want it at all, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed. and because of this, such constrictive wind appears;
and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are fat and have moist bodies and veins covered.
And when you wish to treat this disease, if the patient feels that pain as we have said, if it opens as we have mentioned, and press above and below forcefully until the gas constraint is released to its place. and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
If the remedy for those who swell up with wind, similar to foul-smelling pills, serapin pills, and similar ones, is administered.
Arrows
Arrows come in various shapes and sizes depending on where they strike the body.
The diversity of arrows is that some have large points, small, curved, and hinged. and of those who have two angles, and of these who have tongues, and of those where it has parts; and when a limb dislocates, it does so in two ways: either in the principal member (the head), or in the member that is not the head,
either in the cerebellum, brain, liver, spleen, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it falls (the limb) into any position of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you later become apparent to you: Then it is necessary for you to know the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many positions. and when this sign is not apparent to you at all, and the arrow is not fully in, draw it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes the bone and pierces through it, and a soft spot appears on the skull: It means: "and possibly without discharge from the nostrils or ears; and possibly it affects speech and voice;" "and from the wound there comes out white moisture like pus, and also as if it were boiling with heat;"
And if this sign appears, refrain from treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces the body is that it is near the left breast and feels like it has been driven into a hard object, not empty. And by chance, the arrow may also become numb like hair, turn black with cold blood, and bring chilliness and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore, it is clear that death is imminent.
And the sign of an arrow that has never pierced the bone is when there is no pus-like scum jumping out from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and asks for cold air.
If the arrow falls on the bed of the wound, it is lodged between the ribs; it causes great pain and heavy breathing and moves all the limbs of the shoulder.
If the arrow falls on the stomach, it might cause something undigested flesh to jump out from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes or pierces the belly, and does not burst from the intestinal passage, there is no hope in treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow strikes into the bladder, and the urine bursts out and flows away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the hands and arms, throat, shoulder, neck, spine of the back, wrists, hips, legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions. When an arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, you should do this instead.
A certain man had an arrow that fell or lodged in the root of his neck: I pulled it, and drew it out through the fat of the ear from another side, and found it unharmed.
And I played with an arrow that had fallen in the oil under the paper beneath, And the arrow was withdrawn, and could not reach its point towards the flesh. And the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, with very sharp iron points on both ears; the wound was clean, and no evil accident occurred.
And it drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow had Arabic ears (i.e., cross-shaped barbs).
I was a barber, and sharpened it until I drew it, and the Christian was healed.
And draw an arrow from a man who is fallen or wounded, and I thought he would die;
And after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, loosened it, drew it out, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you wish, a man whose arrow has fallen or pierced his back, and the wound has been sewn up;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor finds any problem in any of his natural functions.
And you wish another man whose arrow has fallen into his face and the wound has been sewn up;
It stays in this state for a long time with much suffering, and many other similar symptoms.
Draw an arrow through the one eye of the prince's king, who was struck in the middle of the nose, and was slightly slanted towards the right side; and the arrow was completely straight.
I was called to treat it after it had been fallen for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I took it with a fine probe and did not feel it at all; and it felt a pain and discomfort beneath its right ear. I thought it was the tip of the arrow
I place on the swollen joint an attractant and digestive plaster, because the joint does not inflame. and the arrow's joint appeared.
and the arrow's joint appeared. I placed the plaster on it for several days, and healed the wound directly, and the patient remained in good condition for a long time.
until he felt the arrow within his neck for one day; and he told me. I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for many hours, until it was opened.
and I pulled at it and felt the head of the arrow which adheres to its place; then I pushed in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visible.
and passed the limit beyond four months.
And then pull apart the wound that I pierced with the pliers, and pull from both sides, and it cannot be closed.
Then I did not stop refining and inventing ways with instruments until I got it after a day with well-made pliers. according to its shape that comes at the end of this chapter, as I pierce it and return the wound.
And the eyes judge that the nose cartilage cannot be restored: I will set it (the dislocation) right then, and the wound will be healed, and the patient will recover completely.
You have been told about the quality of extracting some arrows. so that you apply your care to what I am not saying because books cannot fully understand.
but wise masters understand little about much, and especially about the present and failing things. True new work, and nine instruments, for the examination of foreign things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not enter the limbs where they are driven except in two ways: or through the flesh or from another side;
And that which jumps out from there where it enters is an arrow entering the flesh, and it may jump out at some point now.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is healed around it and allow the opening to close.
And if it is embedded in bone and cannot be extracted, leave it for some days and try to extract it every day.
And when it jumps out or does not, perforate it with a fine needle all around until the flesh is enlarged and then draw it out.
And if the arrow is placed back in the body so that it cannot be seen, probe for it thoroughly; And if you feel it, pull it with any suitable tool.
and if the wound is narrow and the arrowhead deep, and if there is no bone or nerve nor vein, make the opening large enough for the wound to be wide; pull the arrow out if possible, and if there are ears in the arrowhead like it holds on,
pull the arrow out if possible, and if there are ears in the arrowhead like it holds on, If the bone, which is fixed by 2 parts to the muscles that you can feel, and then break or bend the arrowhead of the arrow as much as you can pull it out.
and then break or bend the arrowhead of the arrow as much as you can pull it out. being careful not to break the arrow, that you may pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, push the lymph down to the joints around it, then pull it, for extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood opposes it (the cautery), bring what we have said about its treatment in its chapter;
and beware of incising the nerve and vein, and put a device as to how you can draw out the arrow without danger.
soon or later, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape he was when the arrow struck him, because it is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot do so, place him according to what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from elsewhere, opening anything of them, or the skin is swollen in some place as it can be seen or felt:
Then pierce it, holding it there until the pincers can take hold and then pull it out; if it jumps away now.
If it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone and widens the opening, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out;
And if it were of an arrow in it, push it all out;
and if it is dislocated, and you wish to administer a remedy for it, then administer one instrument of traction. so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then push harder,
and if the arrow is caught in the hair, push one instrument with pointed end entering in, to make easier extraction.
And if the arrow is touched (wounded), it is necessary that you cut around the entire flesh where the poison is, if possible, then heal the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow strikes or pierces the belly, bladder, flank, or side, and it is close enough that you can cover over it, do so;
And keep from cutting the vein and the nerve, then pull it out, and then cut the wound, if necessary. And heal it until it is healed.
The form of the tweezers used to extract arrows is similar to an eagle's beak, and here is its shape:
And they come in many sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of the common veins in the body From veins which one heals are thirty-one, of which the head is sixteen.
This means: two bands that are located after the ears, they are called the "double herb." and the two arteries which are in the two apparent temples. 2 veins are located within 2 eyes of the 2 eyelids, which are called "aspirates". The vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the nose's head. the 2 tendons which are at the neck; and the 2 veins that are in lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich". 2 veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins that are commonly bled are 5 in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head". And the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic. And the laymen call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side. And the laymen call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the left side. and this one from which one drains, which opens clearly above the buttocks.
The salvation vein is the one that is between the auricular and annular arteries, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot are three veins: one which is beneath the hollow of the left calf. and the second saphenous vein which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "nese", which is in the other ankle.
And in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The purification of veins that are located behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines. and the qualities of the purgative, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head.
and the qualities of the purgative, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head. and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. As long as the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: Find where the pulse is beneath your neck, and press there firmly;
then take the lance, and thrust it through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein; cut and the skin and the vein two fingers deep, and make the blood come out as you see it;
Then hold and bind it until it heals;
and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, is as effective for migraines. and softening, and the common treatment for eye diseases, and to the body of the eyes with tears.
And the qualities of the healer are as I say: and it is that the patient extends his neck, until two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse beneath your thumb, and then press inward;
then raise the pressure on the vein above your thumb index, and push the lancet beneath it; And open the vein high, and strike it (the vein), just like you did in two other veins, and make the flow of blood according to your need.
Then release the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then form a knot (to stop the bleeding) and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their dressing and extraction (of objects), where our book begins.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is worth just as much as the healing of the cerebral vein in the diseases of the face that are migraines and redness.
And the qualities are such that the patient stretches their neck while twisting it until the vein appears; then take the tool called "fosseur", whose shape is:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand (or something else), and allow the blood to flow according to the amount that you see; Then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healthy and never make an opening with a wide flame.
Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; and the vein must be crossed, for the bone is close by, and in case of an accident, the flames might break it when they are too fine.
The veins of the two arms aid the eyes, and the thigh, and the ankle, and the urine in oil, and diseases of the face;
And the quality of their blood is such that the patient stretches their neck in twisting by some rope, as mentioned before;
Then, let the blood be healthy and the vein should be long, about a finger-width wide, for there is no heat.
If the vein is thin, it may break; then correct the blood flow, as needed, and then tie it up with cloth, and bind it well.
The vein of the neck is useful for scabies, syphilis, and diseases of the face, If it comes like an inflammation and reddening that appears in the face, and especially when it is old;
and the characteristics of the pus are such that the patient strangles himself with his neck, then strains his genitals with your left hand, and take the subtle flame long, and stick it into the space between the two nostrils; because the vein does not open well in that way, and the pus will soon start to spread;
And do not go too deep [into the body], and correct the blood flow as necessary, then leave it for a night, for it is soon restored.
The salve of two glands helps in the setting of the fracture, and at the beginning of healing, and for many diseases, and to heal ulcers, and to stop putrefaction, and sores, and scrofula.
And the quality of the salve is that the patient lowers their neck beneath both of them, as we have said. And let the master stand above the sick person, and the sick person sit on one seat,
then open the vein along its length with a small incision, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary;
then tie off the other vein, untie the ligature, and squeeze the veins moderately, The patient must not strain himself; leave him until morning so that the wound heals.
On the healing of wounds The healing of mouth wounds assists in the cooling of the mouth and the corruption of gums, as well as cuts and swellings of the lips, and the nose and around it.
And the quality of healing is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said; Then turn the jaw, and look at the two veins, of which one is on the right cheek and the other on the left. and they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: Take both of them then, and if you do not recognize them, and you have doubt,
Take both of them then, and if you do not recognize them, and you have doubt, If you take the larger one of each pair, and do the same for the two veins that are mentioned above, as it is the same in both cases.
Of the saliva beneath the tongue The saliva that is in the veins beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic salivation, and it is for the tightening of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
and the qualities of saliva are that the patient should sit with their hands in front of the sun, lift the tongue, and look down at each side to see a black vein.
Therefore, one on both sides, but do not go too deep, for beneath them are the arteries.
The veins from which one commonly heals are usually healed according to two methods: [or "The veins that are commonly healed are done so by two methods:"]
or pricking entirely with a large flame of myrtle or subtle olive oil as you know to cauterize, and it is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirteenth is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
It has need to be used for opening large veins that contain much apparent blood and are troubled; And this is the form of olive oil flame:
And it is more finely pointed, and it is for healing subtle veins with thin blood.
The cure of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are under the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the master to heal properly, and he should drain the artery that is underneath it. If the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then it must be stopped as I have said. And the flame should not be pricked, but cut as a nail.
And if the abscess does not open clearly, you must force it open and change another one. or you want any drain from it, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens clearly. and stop the flame with a nail, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the location of the joint, then it is also necessary that you dislocate the arm and touch the joint until you recognize the pulses; then mark the location with a pen, and then bind the arm, and burn the vein with fire.
and beware not to cut into the artery when you see the location swelling, for that is the artery; remove it then.
And if you see it protruding upwards like a child's urine and the area is red and delicate, know that it is not from the artery: Hurry up then, and place your hand upon it for a long time, afterwards break your hand without cutting, which often happens.
Tie the arm and leave it like that, do not let the patient move it; and be careful, do not let him move it until it is healed.
And if it is not bleeding and the medicine is not present, and it swells up, then cut open the artery if it is open, because the head will shrink back; and stop the bleeding.
Take a piece of fir bark, cut it, take one half and tie it well until the next day.
If it bleeds, that's fine; if not, treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
And the stopping of bleeding is not always necessary in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the ligament on the arm.
The vein in the middle helps treat blood from the head above, and the body below, Because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalica, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the master to dig deep for the nerve that is beneath, and if it pricks too far through, and he finds the nerve, and inflates it and the patient grows weaker, and in some cases cannot heal.
and this nerve opens up many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument anesthetic; and cut the nerve as much as your power allows.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The sandbag of the head helps, pulling blood from the head and assisting the eyes.
It is necessary to sandbag while pricking with olive oil or myrtle fire, for it is the safest of all veins, as there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it.
Therefore, one must seek out the lighter joint, and not worry if it is necessary to try the first time, and then continue. And in some men, joints swell up, which requires the first attempt, but do not worry about it. The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is only done for the preservation of health,
and to avoid coming diseases; and the vein should be opened in one of the four places where it is available: namely, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic. it should be opened at the beginning of spring, in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
it should be opened on the first or third day, after two or four hours.
The medicine given for diseases has no fixed hour, but when needed, day or night, in all hours and at all times.
And it is not necessary to treat children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman in labor except during the fourth or fifth month. Nor should the elderly over 60 years be treated.
And when someone wishes to be treated, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary that the intestines are cleansed with a light clyster. If much feces are retained, so that the veins do not expel the waste products harmful to the principal members;
nor let the one who is excessively salted with meats, or drunk, vomit, nor those who are uric.
and if one is purged after a colic illness, vomiting, abdominal distention, repeated copulation, overwork, staying up late, and fasting, or when the power has been completely exhausted, or by something related to the weapon or body;
Then subtly balance the humors, if it lacks size, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have that power.
then, unless anything prevents it, into a bath for the purpose of subtly thinning the blood.
and heal the vein with the disease outside of the third part, as we have said.
and keep that day from work, pain, lust, and similar things.
And be tied and raised, and let the healer's hands be higher than those who are being treated, and rub the arm twice or thrice.
Then carefully extract the thread, for if it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct itself.
Then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and feel them.
Then wet the healer's hands with a little bit of old oil, then place your right hand's thumb on the vein beneath the area you want to treat. That the vein does not break and fail when piercing. For there are veins which run like cords to strain, and some of them are filled with pus. Therefore, when fire is applied, it pulls away from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these.
And if the vein is opened, the wound is too narrow, therefore, the surgeons should be cautious in these matters.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; but if not, then continue a little below or above that place where it did not open, unless the place is swollen.
And if the patient fears and the place is swollen, let it rest for one or two days and do not tie the arm. In case abscesses come up, do not enter (or touch) them with water, but start the healing process if it pleases the patient.
And if the perforation is small or shallow and you doubt that it does not bleed as much as you see, put the flame directly on the perforation itself.
Widen the opening slightly, so that the flesh swells; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh swollen, do not begin sewing immediately, and put a little lard oil on it, for it will cleanse the wound of blood, and the lard oil will solidify in that place.
And so administer the oil of linseed to each wound that you open a vein, for stopping the flow of blood.
And likewise apply treacle and poultice to them when they are placed on the wound; thin it and spread it if it is too thick.
If an abscess becomes large, which often happens when the wound is not opened sufficiently, If you hurry, put a damp sponge soaked in vinegar and warm water on it for an hour.
And you must do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it stays in its place after several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not matter. and if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh inside a hot poultice, plaster, or similar thing.
And many times there is abscess and appearance at the opening of the basilica: put your hand on it then, and if you find it soft with the pressure of your hand, this is a bad sign. Therefore do not put anything on top of what has been said, for by chance it may be in court without the artery; but make .i. plug (or pressure) dry to harden the place, then cure it with another remedy until it heals.
And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its power, and of the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, allow it to drain until it becomes red; and if you see it swollen, allow it to become subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are full and hollow, and need extraction of blood, it should be made a larger wound, and the veins wide.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it should be drained little by little, and it must be drained by cutting across, not by pricking.
and this way of draining is safe from corruption of blood and compression of nerves, and it is more beneficial than long draining rather than wide.
And for the body needing to drain, it is necessary to give moistened bread at the bottom of quince pits; if it is heated, let it draw blood four or five times.
And if it is of cold constitution, give it moist bread softened in syrup made from honey or scented syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, and a fragrant syrup.
If it is swollen, after the issue of blood, you should give him broth of meat and fragrant subtle syrup.
and use other things as we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood from the vein.
And if you wish to shatter some bone [or break a bone], and heal it again later, as necessary, when it has been weakened by long healing, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continuously.
If you wish to shatter some bone [or break a bone] after the first healing, and it has been strong, it should heal in 9 hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
If you wish to heal from another side, it should heal on the second day or the third day.
For there is much blood within the body which is already overheated, and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw a large quantity of blood, and open the vein until it gushes. then you should treat all conditions of health, and place your hand on top of the pulse when it is healthy, so that death does not come in its place. and this happens many times when healers are negligent;
And it is not good that when you dislocate the arm, and draw blood a second time, and the wounds are closed, that you push forcefully. if it is curved, that you extend the arm as far as possible, for it would be bad.
but let it [the wound] bleed a second time; or you prick with the tip of the flame until the congealed blood from the vein flows out. And place on it, i.e., a piece of linen soaked in hot water, and press gently.
And if the abscess has burst, leave it be and do not squeeze it until the abscess is soothed.
If you need to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place or in another vein or the other arm.
The vein in the arm is connected to the carotid artery because it is composed of them.
And the way of the wound is such that the patient plunges their hand into hot water until the flesh turns red;
then it should be bound slightly, so that the vein appears well, then it should be pierced crosswise, neither too wide nor too long;
and make a large incision, and pierce the vein near the joint of the hand, if it cannot be pierced, replace the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough;
if it is cold, do not immerse the hand in hot water, because it puts more in winter than in summer;
And the vein of this vessel is safer than all other vessels, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The vein of the right hand's saphenous vein is good for all liver diseases, and this is how it is done:
hold the hand and push into hot water until the vein is empty, if you can see it. And if the wound is transverse, and you cover it completely, it will cause no harm.
And do not go too deep for nerves are all beneath devoid of flesh.
Then place the hand in hot water, if the wound is frozen and cannot be removed.
And when you have let the blood as much as is necessary, place oil and wax over the vein to solder it quickly, and do this for each wound.
The salve for the left hand applies to the sickness of the mice, and do the same as I told you on the right side.
The salve of the soffion [a type of poultice] applies to all diseases under the body. as diseases of the mouth, retention of flowers, diseases of the anus and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its salve are that the patient should dip their foot in hot water and rub it on the vein until it fades away. And lay on top of the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes very deep.
Cut open the deepest artery or at the ankle, for that is more effective.
And if you cut above the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below and make a cut as in skinning; let the flames be anesthetized.
If the wound cannot be opened, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain well.
And if it is necessary to drain the first time, the second follows shortly afterwards above a little, for the flesh is salted. Do not doubt about nerve, as we have said, and do so with the tendon of the other side equally.
The flesh of the sciatic nerve is at the knee, and its draining relieves the pain of the thigh, when it is for hot blood.
And the qualities of his health are such that the patient submerges himself in water and pulls up the calf four times while twisting it.
For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, you should treat it in all ways that you can, and by crossing. It is better to cut it, for the limb is sausage-like, and it responds well to human hands.
It is better to cut it, for the limb is sausage-like, and it responds well to human hands. And if you do not release it, no remedy will open or close the small hole of the foot, and beware of nerves.
and make such a cure for the blood as you see fit, then release the ligament, put cotton on it and bind it; it is now healed.
Ventouse cures
Ventouses are made of horns, or hairs, or glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this cautery called "ventosation" is performed in two ways: either it is to be used on all fires, or without fire;
and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the ventous under the chin; And the boils on the two shoulders; and the boils on the ankles; And the boils in both arms; and the boils on both legs; And the boils on the two ankles; and the boil-formation does not deal with blood, unless it is small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
And therefore do not open them like you would when treating blood from a vein. It should not be administered (aministree) in any way, neither with fire nor burning fire, in any disease that comes from swelling, until the entire body is emptied (vuidiez).
If it is necessary for diseases to be bled, or due to custom, then we shall administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle as well as at any time.
because there are some who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head;
And if those who find repletion and redness in their face, head, and neck become dark-eyed;
and those who have a spot of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has swollen, and they bleed; and if there are those who think, see by night blood and swell and die and similar things;
And when we observe these signs, especially during winter months, we instruct to fumigate after 4 hours of the day.
The swelling of the mouth helps with the throat pain ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this fumigation is in place of the swelling of the head.
And it is not appropriate for those of cold complexion to use [the treatment] or who have scurvy, for it does great harm to them.
And therefore, the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases.
And those who frequently heal themselves become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the leech a little lower out of fear of forgetfulness.
The leech in the neck is located at the site of the head and the basilica, and therefore it has value for the treatment of the feet. And to cut through the channel of the pommel, and at once, and to fill it up;
It is necessary to push a little on it, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause distortion or obstruction of the stomach and heart.
Wind in the two costals of the neck is worth as much pain as a headache, and otalgia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the position of the artery of the basilica; and you must command the lord to put his hand on it, so he does not hit the artery, and there should be no bleeding.
The ventosations beneath the chin are useful for diseases of the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as similar illnesses that are within the mouth; and it is in the position of the salivary glands of the two lower lips.
The ventosations of the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
The ventosations of the sides are as effective as four veins in the arms. because it draws blood from these large veins;
And command the lord to not pierce too deeply, for the limb is bare of flesh, and knows beneath the dark and arteries.
The plaster that is on the buttocks is beneficial for treating piles from below, and for diseases beneath, and it must be large, made of flax, because it needs to draw well; and if it is fine, it would break; and this causes great wounds.
The plasters on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the entire body, and are beneficial for old rain sores, scrofula, bladder diseases, and reduce the flowers; they are in the region of the hips and knees, and weaken the body after long use, and bring pus into various conditions.
The manner of putting on the cupping glass is as follows: First, you empty it and fill it promptly, then apply it quickly and evenly, do not stop doing this until you see the spot turn red and swell, and appear the color of blood; then cauterize, and place the cups again, taking care in the positioning of the body, for there are some who have cold skin or clear pores: it is necessary to make a single incision, and it is necessary to make wide cuts, and a little deep one; and suck gently.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to make two incisions: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to make a third incision; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we must pierce it only once.
And if we wish to take much blood, we should often encourage [it]; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it fully, and we make sure that the arteries are severed suddenly,
and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow, that you anoint the joints of the veins with stimulating and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from the seeds of cucumber:
And if it is in the ivy, oil of watercress, or lilies, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the one whom you are healing has tender flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil on it.
but it must be washed after the ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of blackberries, or water of cucumbers, or water of porcelain, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture should rise with ashes of sage or of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And he who has large excesses should rise with old wine, or juice of vinegar, or decoction of dandelion or chamomile, or others similar.
and it is not advisable to bleed with a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but an hour or two after the bath; and one should not sleep after cupping.
and it is necessary that he urinate when he should be bled and when he has been bled. And guard if the one who is healed is colicky, and if the one without is too sharp and inflamed; it must take cold things, such as green apples, endive, lettuce and similar;
And eat fresh meat, mutton, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold constitution, let him take syrup of honey, sweetened weak wine, which is between old and new, and consume little bread, and little pulses (beans, peas), and small birds and sparrows.
And the day he will vomit, let him drink more than eat;
It is necessary to give certain men sometimes tricolor or muscat wine before vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; And let the wine be refined, but it is not suitable for those who drink warm [liquids].
The blisters placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, on the spleen, on gout, and on the stomach, the belly, the flanks, and the hips, because these limbs cannot bear to be wounded there.
and one should not use it except to draw blood from one member into another, As we place on the breasts when the nails swell; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place leeches on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the member.
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or arrow, remove by its attractive power accidentally the obstruction, or dislodge the arrow from its place.
and in this way it is done when placed upon the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness,
And these blisters are applied empty for suction only; sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
as in cases of pleurisy and such, and in this manner the blister is filled with hot water or with water boiled with herbs convenient for it.
The shape of the blister applied with fire is as follows:
And it should have two deep holes of about one and a half palms wide and long, and it should have one small hole around the middle, as when pushing an awl.
and made of ivory, soft before so that it does not cut the patient while placing it on the limb;
and have a rod of iron or steel passing through its middle to insert a handle.
and be large or small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
For, the varicose veins of children are different from those of adults, and thin ones from thick ones.
And this varicose vein should be placed thus upon the member:
Take a candle or thread and place it across the vein that is within the varicose vein. So that the light is at the bottom of the bladder (ventouse) so as not to burn the patient.
And then place it on the limb, your fingers on the opening that we mentioned earlier, so that when you see, if steam comes out, remove the bladder.
Wrap it in linen as before and reapply it often if needed.
In the bladder given in disease of pleurisy (pluresin), there is neither a pipe nor an opening, and it is not administered except when it is full of liquid, and is placed only on the limb.
And this is its shape: [This line does not contain any words that need to be translated, as "shape" (forme) is a direct translation of "forme".]
Snauses are not applied except in members where no bladders can be placed due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and in the naked parts of the skin, such as palms or soles, and other similar places;
and when the user finds snauses that are in sweet clear waters without purification, then take them.
And put them in a warm soft egg, until they are familiarized, and have nothing inside their bellies; Then it should be drained of veins and blood vessels, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply a plaster on top.
And when they are swollen and warm, if it is a place where blood vessels can be placed, then place a leech there, for that works very well.
If not, lift the wound from the dressing and clean it with warm water, then sprinkle it;
And if the joint becomes too warm after the body, wet a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the swelling is reduced;
And if the swelling increases, apply broken glass or similar substances on top until it is reduced;
or put half-peeled beans on the joint and leave them until they stick to it, then it will be reduced now;
and if you need more, take other swellings.
And if the veins do not want to be taken, rub the place of fresh blood, or you insert a needle until the vein bursts. and then lay them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they harden;
and when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle a little of aloe powder and crushed linen or ash on top, they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Understand, dear child, that the foolish person casts this chapter aside, who has never seen any old books, nor have they read letters from it.
and for this reason, knowledge in our land is foreign, since I never found any good of it.
and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have dealt with it in my practice, and through experimentation, and the custom of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what it contains, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are brought, just as I have done in these 2 chapters before.
Therefore, let us say the prologue of this book, the sums of speech and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a breakage or dislocation or twisting or quassure comes to someone, it is necessary that you hasten to treat the patient on both sides, if anything does not prevent you from doing so, such as frailty of body, infants, or old people.
If the time is not very hot or too cold; and eat cold meats, namely cold joints of meat, poultry, and mutton, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, nor fill oneself too much with foods that fill veins with blood, before you have doubt about abscess heating or spreading of matter in the limb; then the patient will return to a better state of health as he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that make thickenings, or he should have viscosity, such as cooked oats in water, and meat pies, and pork, and veal, and beef, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For this nourishment helps the bones to heal more quickly.
And know that broken bones from the elderly and the weak cannot be well restored nor joined according to their nature due to the lack of strength in the limbs, neither those who are too tender, such as a child's bones.
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone on top of it (gross tenons which splint and join the limb together), as much as possible in the same way as before; and not to move it at all, and for this reason feed him with large foods, as we have said.
And know that breaks (injuries) are diverse in many ways.
For the break of the neck is other than the break of the foot, or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking. There is a break that heals quickly, and another that lengthens, like the quill for writing.
There is a break that heals quickly, and another that lengthens, like the quill for writing. And if there is a break with an open wound, or just a small crack.
And each type has its instrument and proper tool for restoration, according to what the memory brings in its place.
And it is known that the fracture of the bone is caused by this: the joint is twisted, widely opened through displacement, and sounds when pressed with the hand;
And if there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
But it can indeed have twisting, a crack, or a small fracture. You must not move it with your hand, but put on the following medicines and then hold it gently.
And know that the breaks that go to the tree (or joints), and they are the two parts disjoined, you must now put them equally back together, otherwise abscesses will grow there.
and if abscesses come there, let it last for any day, as long as the abscess is healed. then put it equally in the muscles that you can easily and wisely move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are fragments; then bind it, as appropriate hereafter.
And if the bone is broken into pieces and divided into two parts, whether it be of the hand or foot, or at your hand if it is of small members, or at the wrist or arm, or at the elbow and at your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you must reset all the joints in their places with every means possible at your disposal, and ensure that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
align well the two bones' heads according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not good; straighten it carefully, and do not strain it too much, nor force it as those who make abscesses or contractions in the member through their work do, as we have often seen.
And when the member is set, punish the patient so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. and watch carefully that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. Because when it feels no pain, it is not broken, it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain;
Because when it feels no pain, it is not broken, it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain; and keep it straight so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken member are as I tell you.
Know that broken members are various in smallness and in largeness and in shape.
For there are small members such as arms and fingers: you should wrap them with soft and thin linen cloths.
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: you should wrap them with a wide and strong rope, for the thick ropes embrace the entire large member and tighten it uniformly from all sides, so there is no pain.
then tie light bandages around it four times or five according to the member, and tighten your hand a little on the rope, then go above the fracture and tighten less than the fracture, then move away from the fracture a little.
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy limb, then take another ligament and turn it around in reverse on the broken limb;
then go to the part under the break, and pull it gently, neither too strong nor too loosely, as we said in the first place above.
then place between the ligaments with linen or cloth strips until they are all equal, then tie it all up above with one bandage, and then place your splints well made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or boil, place warm soothing material on it and let the boil remain for some days;
then bind your limbs with a half-thickness large bandage or splint made from the wood used for clefts, or with palm reeds, and they should be shaped like this:
but it is necessary that the bandage placed on the fracture be slightly larger and thicker than the others;
And let it be as long as is required for the limb, whether small or large.
hold it steady on the stretcher in the same way as you did at the first joint, then tie it up with thread coming from above, as in the first joint when breaking.
the string should be tighter, closer; and it should be of moderate thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and of flax thread.
If the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish people who make their cords from twisted linen and it is a great error; for the cords cannot be even if they are too fine, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stitch.
And if the patient is impaled by the points of the splinters after setting a fracture in healthy bones, put linen or canvas padding under them so that they do not blister.
When the wound is with breaking and the ligaments are torn, I will tell the cure after this.
And know that it is not necessary to set a splint for all broken limbs on the first day. For large limbs, it is not necessary to apply splints immediately but rather after 5 or 7 days or more, according to the certainty of the abscess healing.
And here is the method of old emplasters for healing fractures, dislocations, and twisting: it is to take flour that is kept near the mill walls and mix it with a lot of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and it is the common method for emplaster healing fractures in various ways, and equally for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of making a plaster to heal fractures, dislocations and twists: take alum, radish juice, sulfur, asafetida and Arabic gum, mix .x. parts; add mastic and aloes, .v. parts; eight parts of camphor; then make powder, and mix it with egg yolk; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and benefits many men.
Another way of making a plaster for twisting: take mastic and amber, mix .x. parts; add mastic and aloes, .viiij. parts; vi. parts of camphor; Armenian pitch .x. parts, grind well, and mix with vinegar or egg white, and administer it.
Another way of making a plaster for disjointed joints and displaced bones, to relieve the pain occurring and cut the bone, heal the fracture: take new linen, soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it on the affected area. This plaster does not heal, but it is good for relieving hot abscesses and proper treatment of pains.
Another way of plaster to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground up earth-parsley, mix them together and make a plaster.
Another way of plaster to aid in the healing of a wound caused by an arrow and for treating an abscess. Take root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, bean flour, and mix them all together; boil with wine, and when the affected limbs are hot, use it with moist coriander water or vinegar.
Another way of plaster stronger than the first, for healing a hard abscess in the limb. Take roots of mallow, flax seeds, broom, clover and horehound, violet flowers and camomile, mix them all together; boil with salt water, sweet water, or wine according to the heat of the limb and its condition.
Hippocrates says in his book not to put anything on a broken limb for restoration except wax made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he states that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen says that something dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, should be put on a broken limb for restoration, as we have said.
Another way to treat wounds and pain is: take crushed mugwort and hops, or feathers of birds, and mallow, and equal parts, grind them together, and make a poultice with the mixture.
And then the dislocation a little while later, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not dislocate it by hand for many days.
If pain or itching comes at the joint, with no rest, swelling, or inflammation, hurry and dislocate it immediately, remove the emplaster now; take a light cloth and sea sponge dampened, dip in water, and lift the joint until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen wet with water or rose oil on it, and bind above a hot compress until you are sure of the abscess being heated.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain be removed, then start the treatment subtly, and a little plaster, and not to strain it too much as before; and treat it subtly until it heals.
If you see that the abscess has healed and turned red, swollen, and painful, and you need plaster and linen, start it again as you did initially equally.
If nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, do not remove it for 3, 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes let it stay for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the break heals, and the abscess approaches the skin.
Therefore hold it (the dislocated shoulder) more tightly than before, and increase its flesh as I said earlier; and if you see the joint dry out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot enter. Then warm it with hot moist heat every time you dislocate it, and do so for three days, and slightly loosen the ligament.
Therefore, through this process cut off the nourishment to the limb and hasten the healing of that which the foolish surgeon leaves twisted: it is bad, and it is a dangerous treatment, and I see nothing but weakening and correcting it properly.
In various ways of breaking Many breakings are of various kinds, and various shapes, and the causes are determined;
because there are breakings made by sword blows that fracture the bone completely from its base to the surface of the bone, as a chop or strike does; and this is called this type of breakage "haichure".
or if the sword strikes the bone from above and penetrates through, it is called this type of breakage "absolute"; and the wound caused by these two types of breaks can be either large or small.
And if there is a deep bruise or cut, or arrow wound, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And if the wound is deep enough to reach the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is hidden in the bone just as fine as a hair, and it is a small cut, for this reason it is called "hair-like" wound.
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling, or by similar things, causing the bone piece to go inside, and the wound looks like an egg when potters make pots over fires; if the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often in those who have moist bone heads, such as infant skulls;
and it happens in all these ways of breakage that small pieces are displaced, as bones; and I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all the ways of breaks by pulling on them, and the examination by probing, and the corruption of the flesh that is upon it.
The hairy appearance is known by those who, when the bone is exposed and rubbed on top, causes the break to open black.
In the treatment of a fracture, be aware of the patient's symptoms; if you see any bad symptoms such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, paralysis, high fever, hairs emerging and reddening, and other signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any doubtful symptoms, and you hope for salvation, start the treatment.
And when the frostbite comes to you for the first time, in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day of the month that you can.
And if this is the case, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the events that we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must make an incision in the broken part: and it is to grasp the patient's head firmly, and uncover above the bone in all possible ways, and over the wound area as much as possible,
And if the wound exposes the bone or abscess bursts, help with whatever is necessary, and it is to fill the area with damp linen soaked in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and the flow of blood is stopped; then start working around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two ways of treatment: one way is that you make a narrow cut in front, and this is the form:
And put another, larger incision next to the first.
And the second method is to have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made with iron tools; work carefully so as not to pierce the bone.
And if the bone is dislocated and hard, you should perforate it around [the area], so that you can administer splints with wedges, not penetrating more than the bone near the tip, and above the point there should be a margin or circle that prevents the tip from passing beyond the bone; and you should have several of them, so that each one comes to the appropriate place on the bone's thickness, so that you have splints for all [the parts]; and this is the shape of the four types of splints:
The quality for perforating around the broken bone is that you place one splint on the bone, then turn your hand until you feel that the bone has been perforated; then move the splint elsewhere a little afterwards, and do this all around, then cut the space in the bone between the fractures as subtly and lightly as possible, and as delicately as we have said, so that you draw the bone to your hand, or any of the tools you have like pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have perforated and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the dislocation with an instrument resembling pliers, but it must be thinner and more delicate than regular pliers.
And if there remains anything of the small bones, no scales, gently remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of work is that which the Gauls say, who are very wise; and it is praised much, and these are its words. First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture moves open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath it this lenticular incisure (as shown in its form):
And do not cut from one side only, and the parts are sharp on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly pierce the bone all around, and take care of the cloth that is beneath.
If it is adhered to the bone, strike the bone lightly, for one strikes it too much and with fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the cloth and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then after that roughness, remove the scales with a sharp rasp, using different amounts according to each place, in order to bring about the most suitable smoothing, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If the king shaves with great razors, and afterwards with finer ones, and never ceases to do so until it is well.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you apply the remedy according to his guidance; this is not something that can be answered by him who has put his study in this art.
And if the wound is open, it is necessary that you take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and place it over the wound. then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 4 layers, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; do this more gently so as not to irritate the wound, then administer another thread above it, but do not tighten it any further than necessary to cover the wound.
And let it [the abscess] remain for one day or two, until the abscesses calm down, then uncover and administer medicines like roots of lilies, flour of oats, incense powder, aristaologue, and similar things; from these things make a powder and put on the wound, and administer immediately medicines without bitterness.
Make sure the wound remains always clean, you must not let any ointment or bandage remain there, for when bandages accumulate on the linen cloth of the brain, they rot and cause pain, and it causes great harm to the patient; for when something sharp is placed over it, it bites through.
Therefore, take care that no bad accident befalls the patient as we have said, it is doubtful with uncertainty.
And if blackness does not come violently except through medicine that has been applied, then you should take a part of honey and 3 parts of rose oil, mix it with one cloth piece, and apply it to the sore. Then cure in the manner of cures that is necessary, until it heals.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck are broken above, or one alone, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your little finger or thumb into the nostril, and push the breakage equal to your index finger inside, and towards the bellybutton through the mouth, until the nose returns according to its natural shape. And do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the breakage is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach the place, then you must place it equal to the top of a ruler, a little larger.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should set it again, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has cooled down, then apply a linen cloth to the head of the wound, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you apply a bandage on the other side, if there is only one fracture; and let the cloths be as thick as they fill the wound of the neck.
And they say that you should moisten the cloths with butter and change it each day. It does not seem good to me, but it is better that they are moistened in an ointment made of egg yolk and flour; then leave the cloth, until the bone is hard, and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes feathers of geese are placed instead of stitches, and if one piece of cloth surrounds them, and the breakage is held, the patient is blown upon with breath; do as you see fit.
If abscesses come to the wound while you are working on it, place either alum or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a pinch of turmeric.
If abscesses do not come to the wound, apply an ointment from outside, made of sisamend flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light compresses on it, but do not bind the wound.
And if the break in the neck is small and it is broken into little pieces, take suitable instruments to remove it, then make an incision, and treat the wound with things healing such as fat, sinew, and bandages appropriate for that purpose.
If there is no wound within the neck, then treat it with linen and place woolen threads on it until it heals.
On the fracture of the jawbone
When the jaw is dislocated beneath and there is no wound outside, and only the break is outside but not broken in two, if one knows it slightly, it indicates that it is corbeled inside.
If the break is on the right side of the jaw, insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, place your index finger of the right hand inside, and gently push the break inward and align it with the other hand from outside.
And if the break of the jaw is separated into two parts (i.e., diastasis), you must provide two parts of extension until it is equal.
And if there is movement of the teeth or rupture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a broken cork over the mandible, and put on one double cloth; and place on the cloth a large and well-made splint, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and attach it where you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and encourage them to eat light foods.
If you see that the figure changes, release it on the third day and then reset to its original state; place a plaster over it with flour from the mill mixed with egg or meal of wheat; after removing the cork; and put a light linen plaster over the plaster when it dries, and if the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in four weeks.
And if an abscess arises, bring what we have said before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, observe that no piece of the bone has been removed; if it is necessary to remove the broken part, do so with subtle tools suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, stretch it by fire as needed.
Once all the pieces have been removed and none are left, stitch the wound if it is wide, and place one plaster suitable for this purpose on it to promote healing until it is healed.
of the forceps The forceps break often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is in four ways: it is fractured and dislocated in two, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
And the work is when there is a fracture with an open wound, that you have two assistants: one holds the shoulder where the forceps are broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then align the fracture to your hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither deformation nor dislocation.
And if more extension is needed, put a round cushion of cloth or linen under the shoulder of the patient, and make it as large as necessary; stretch and tie the bandage, and hold the cushion in place with your hand, so that you align the break as required.
If you cannot draw out the head of the splint from below because it is lodged in place, then have the patient lie on his side, and put a small pillow under the shoulder. Then push the shoulder downwards, so that the bone of the splint is lifted.
Then direct the break to your fingers and if you find debris, then it should be cut open. If the pieces cannot join due to any reason, hit it at one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the splint, to prevent it from flying out.
And it should seem like a spoon, not hollowed out, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the task at hand; and have two heads, as you see, and one of them wide, and the other narrow, as is the opening of the wound that you have made when treating the bones.
And when you are certain of the abscess's heat, if the opening is small or you doubt the abscess's heat, use linen and bandages, according to its quantity.
If the abscess becomes cold, moisten one linen cloth in rose oil, asafetida, and wine, and place it on top.
The binding of the bone, when it has wounds and incisions, is to put the padding of mill powder and egg yolk on top of the bone, place light stoppers on it, and put a spear under it if necessary. Then take a very large bandage of one palm's width, then put one double cloth cover on top of the stoppers, and apply the padding. Then take a subtle stick of three feet long and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; and place the stick on the fracture, turn the bandage over the neck, and under the saddle of the healthy and diseased sides, and tighten it from each side. When you see that the fracture holds the breakage properly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then keep it in place every day, and when the ligaments loosen, hold it tightly.
And make the patient lie on his back and place a small pillow under his shoulders to raise the shoulder; align the fracture of the joint with the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, until twenty days pass.
Then begin the plaster, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it in place until it is restored; and it is restored at most within 28 days, and less for some men.
of the shoulder fracture
It happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated from its place, and one can only feel it by touching; if it appears according to the shape of the break, and you reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways; then put powder from the mill on top with a lot of egg white, light bandages, and put on .i. double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle needle, about one finger wider than the shoulder, and if there are any holes in the needle at any place of the shoulder, fill those holes with linen bandages so that the needle heals evenly; and then hold it tightly with a strong bandage, so that the needle does not move from its place, and watch the ligament every day; and whenever it softens, hold it again, and adjust the needle if it is out of its place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 30 days. And when this number is completed, release it, and be sure, for it is not easy to put the bone back lightly.
If a part of the bone protrudes before and not under the skin, lift it up, extract it, and do what we have said to treat an abscess at the shoulder joint with warm cautery.
of the break in the thigh
The peas is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the tip. And when it is broken inside, it bends downward, and the patient feels great pain, lack of strength, and immediately vomits blood. The fracture opens the cavities in the broken bones, and it hurts very much.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you place one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and carefully align it in all ways, until the figure of the bone is as required; then you place splints and padding over the thin part of the broken bone, or a lighter staff, and wrap it in one bandage, and hold it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around to the back, and tighten it gradually, and check every hour whether the bandage has softened, if it has softened, you tighten it; and if it is necessary to unwrap, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and undo it, remove the padding, and direct those who have come in matters of care; then rewrap the padding, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the broken ribs
Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in large ones after the back, and at the chest within, and they do not bend easily except because they are slippery; and this is well known at the investigation of the joints.
And the restoration is that you put the fracture back in place as required. Then put a plaster on it and hold it with a splint if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is displaced downwards, the patient feels very great pain and swelling, as in pleurisy, because the bone points to the skin; and it swells at the ends, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have applied many devices.
And to those who say that it is necessary to administer foods which swell the belly, for pushing out the rupture.
But we do not do so, that hot abscesses come, if they have not come. And if they have come, he is cured.
And it was said to someone that vents (tubes) should be placed on the head, for draining pus, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the tubes will attract excess fluid to the head due to its weak position.
And it was said to someone that the head should be covered with damp linen in hot oil, and tents (something like small bags or pouches) should be placed between the ribs to make the wound even around it, then let it be treated with a cure for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient experiences great pain that he cannot bear due to the broken bone not allowing cloth, there is doubt for the patient; then it is necessary to cut above the head of the broken rib, and a splint should be placed underneath. Then you should saw through the bone, extract gently, and sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and let it heal with plasters until it is healed. And if an abscess comes out, then place moistened linen soaked in rose oil on top of it; and treat the head of the abscess as necessary while lying down on the side where it is located, until it is healed.
of the break in the neck
Never does a fracture occur in the bones of the neck or spine, and it rarely bends. And when it happens and you want to know if it will heal or not, if you see its hands softened and swollen and dead, and it cannot move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, it does not feel pain. Know that it is mortal in various positions, and if it is silent and feels good when stretched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured, if one applies treatment to it.
And when something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if there are injuries in the hands, and the back arches involuntarily; and when it is pressed on the stomach, it jumps involuntarily. And when it is pushed down on its back and wants to sit, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor at all in its treatment.
And if this accident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
And the cure is to apply hot poultice if there is an abscess, then put rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is soothed; then put one of the comforting and drying plasters on top and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed. If any bone dislocates, it should be covered with oil; extract the bone, then sew together two lips of the wound if it is large, with a stitch; then treat the wound with soothing balm until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken (which is called "head of the cow"), put your hand on it from the left side, and align it with the other hand to your power, then put the plaster and the linen cloth on top, if you need them; then bind it, and if there is any bone dislocated, make it straight, extract it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the pelvis
If the pelvic bone is fractured, there will be a slight decrease in the head, and it will elongate and bend towards the opening, causing pain at the site, and swelling of what is fractured.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, as long as you are over the fracture; and feel which part is fractured and the shape of it; and if the fracture is only at the head, then make the fracture equal, as natural.
And if the fracture is long or it bends towards the inside, then make the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. And when you have made it even, place the splint upon it, then place a rod or stick on top and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and immerse the limb beneath the ribs until the fracture is healed.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
If an abscess has come to the surface, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and place what we have said before on top of it; then return to treatment, hold it as necessary, if there is no bad incident; and this is the manner.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is that which is between the chest and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways; of which one is that you take a splint made of thicker material, in this shape:
And tie the two shoulders with two ropes, and bind them from above, and place the patient on one seat; then you cast the broken arm upon the splint, until it reaches the elbow, and have a protrusion of splint in the middle, then bind it above to any heavy object or the assistants extend it downward; then the healer equalizes the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And another manner is that you hold the patient on their bed, and hold their hand to their neck, then command two servants that one holds the place above the break with his hands, and the other holds below at every joint, and extend each to its part.
If the extraction is stronger, hold one joint below the break and one above the break, and each servant extends to its part. If the break is near the shoulder head, you must put a moderate joint below the neck and another towards the back, below the break; if the break is towards the back, you must slightly tighten it without strain, so that the break is level with the neck and the shoulder; then adjust the break as necessary, but keep it tight, unless an abscess swells.
If an abscess swells up, do not tighten it for more than 7 days, but put soft linen and rose oil on it to calm the abscess; then you can tighten it. The method of tightening is that you place the clamp on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; then pull the cloth tight on the shoulder and the arm so that the arm is in its socket, unless something prevents it, or the bone is not moving.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use stitches; place a larger and stronger splint above the break, with one inch of space between each stitch, and make sure each stitch is large enough to pass over the break from both sides; then hold the splint in place as I have said at the beginning of the chapter concerning the break, more tightly and lessen in width.
If you see the position of the splint and the tension, as we have said, during the time when you set the broken limb, and you doubt that it is healing well, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then examine every three days the sutures, to ensure that inflammation does not appear or swelling comes to the place, or new growth does not come to the limb because it is too tight. Follow our advice.
If no such accident occurs, do not remove it for less than four days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; place one compress of equal wool under the shoulder, and examine every hour of the day or night to ensure that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the sutures are not softened; follow our advice through the power of medicine, and give them the food we have previously mentioned, so that the food is initially subtle; and when it begins to heal, let it be thick. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset in forty days, and then you should remove it and administer baths and ointments to guide the healing. If the incision is ugly and swollen, wait one day or two months before removing it.
of the break of the arm
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius," the former being small and forming the forearm's outer side, while the latter is larger and lies beneath it near the elbow; by chance, only the large ulna breaks, or both break together.
When only the small ulna bone is broken, the repairing and healing are easy; but when the large one breaks, the healing is poor, and more difficult than when both break together. If it's the small ulna that breaks alone, you should stretch it slightly and straighten it.
And if it's the large ulna that breaks, you should apply more force; stretch it up one cubit and elevate the wrist of the hand higher than the others, while keeping the smaller bone lower than the others; have the patient cross themselves on their chest, with a cubit in front of them higher than their chest, so that the patient doesn't feel any pain; then extend the attendant's arm below to the patient's side or elbow, and another attendant above. And then align the bones according to their best shape.
And if in the breakage of bones, place each one back in its place, and if none is displaced that points to the center, and you cannot restore it to its place, then saw off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the breaking open, I spoke of it in the singular chapter, take care.
And if in the beginning of healing, abscesses occur frequently, then apply a bandage made from oil and white beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and stick one bandage above it subtly until the abscesses have subsided. Then remove the beeswax, and put the plaster of flour powder with egg on it, then place the splints, and the splint for the break should be more prominent than the others, and a little larger; and know that it must have 7 or 9 splints in various positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; and hold the break higher than the other parts, and always less on the sides, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages above the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the threads, which are used for binding, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And check the member and the ligament afterwards after some days. And if any bad accidents come to a member, such as pruritis that comes to the member, you must irrigate the member with hot water until the itch is appeased; and do not allow the member to rest afterwards. Then proceed with the setting, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, give advice accordingly.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too narrow, you must soften it a little, and let it be for some days until the swelling subsides, and then set it.
If none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then do not remove the splint for up to twenty days. Or inquire about it after ten days, and place his hands at his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in thirty or forty days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
Of the break of the hand
The fracture of the hand occurs frequently in the back of the hand and the fingers, but only a few breaks occur at the wrist.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or fractured, the patient must cross their arms and sit upright in a straight position; then place their hand on an extended cloth, and extend the broken bones, aligning them with mirrors until they are well set; apply the plaster and bandages, unless abscesses appear, then put a splint according to the size of the break; and swaddle it in one linen cloth.
If the fracture is around the palm near the abdomen, make a splint from cloths and instruct the patient to wrap it around their broken hand; then tie it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as wide as the palm of the hand, and tighten it as necessary.
And if the break is on the outer side (of the bone), it is necessary that you place a splint above and another below in the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and compress the ligament between the fingers.
And if the break occurs in any of the fingers, equal it as necessary; and hold it with the sole and, if you see, place a small straight splint to lift the break and keep it from moving; and if the break is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, equalize it, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or bind them all together in one holding, for movement is harmful, or place a splint on it, as with a finger; and take care in the restoration and the placement of the abscess, and treat those who come, as I have said.
of the broken thigh
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when it twists forward and backward; and restoration is such that a ligament is tied above the break, and another below. And the patients lie on their faces, then each of the ministers extends his ligament equally to its equal part; and this is when the break is between the bones.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one ligament should be towards the knee, and other ligaments below the break. And similarly, if it is near the knee, then the ligaments should be towards the knee, and the extension downwards; then set the bone equal to its two hands, according to its natural figure, and then put the plaster and stitch, except for abscesses do not come.
And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it cool down first, then return to your work and treatment; the ligation is done in this manner. You should place a bandage of strong material doubled over twice or thrice and let the excess hang, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put one long stick between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the other end of the stick to the top; then turn the leg and the bandage above it, then tie the bandage to the break and tie a splint on the bone of the leg; then use soft cloth between the leg and the thigh to make the compression equal, then start tying four or five turns around the break; and as you go higher on the break and tighten less; then take the two stitches that you put between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then go below to the top of the stick, tighten so it does not move from its place, then let it stay, then there should be no abscess or swelling nor any similar problem.
If there is a fracture, loosen it and direct the pieces as we have said many times; and if there are bone fragments that protrude, they must be removed if possible; and if not, the fracture should be opened and drained; and treat it as we have said until it heals.
And sometimes the leg is broken in such a way that stakes are set, as in the shoulder or arm; however, during the restoration process, the patient does not feel any pain.
And know that the leg is restored in about a day, or slightly less or slightly more, according to the various complexions [of people].
of the street of genoails
Know that in the knee joint there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is not just a crack or a puncture, but rather an opening, or a wound, which affects all the flesh and causes pain everywhere, and this is felt by everyone.
And the restoration is that one equalizes what is uneven in its ends, as much as it can be assembled; then place the splint, and put a round stick if needed, and tighten it as required, then inspect all the dispositions that we have said about other breaks, such as abscesses and others; apply to each accident what is necessary for it, until it heals.
of the break of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called correctly "ham" (or shinbone), and the others are called "fibula"; and it happens a breakage similar to that which comes in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the procedure is the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg twists in all directions.
And if the slender bone (tibia) is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; it turns sideways. Then you must apply extension, make it even, and align the joints equally; however, if the fracture is misaligned and there are many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align it according to your ability.
And when you have completed your task, take two splints of wood that will support the leg from both sides and be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap them with two bands, one above and one below, and bind it in the middle so that the leg cannot tilt to the right or left, and this is good; nor should anyone apply a splint of wood longer than the length of the leg, and place it under the leg as a restraint for movement, and properly make it at the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; treat it until it heals.
of the bone fractures in the foot
At the ankle there comes no fracture, but sometimes the bones of the foot do have a fracture and nothing else except for a slight crack in various positions.
If there is a fracture in the bones of the foot and you see the bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if he were walking, then place your own foot over his, where the raised bones are, press hard until they return to their place; put splints and bandages on, and put a small flat table under the patient's foot with two hollow holes, then tighten it around the foot evenly; when you have wrapped cloths around, and other things that you need.
And when four or five days have passed, undo the linen, for you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or dislocated.
And if any of the two [shoulders] are broken, restore them as we have said about the arms of the hand; then place a splint on the broken shoulder according to its length and let it be slightly larger, then place beneath the arm that tabula I mentioned, and hold it in position; and if there are 2 or more [broken], break each one separately, place a splint on each according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the tabula beneath the arm; and let it be so that the tabula is placed above the belly of the arm, facing towards the back, so it covers well.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, after what we have said; and treat each accident as necessary.
of the fracture of the bone in the thumb
When the bone of the natural womb is broken, make her sit raised, then incline her to the part of the back and hold her from behind; then fill the hollow of nature with cotton, and put as much as one stone in it; then turn the woman, lean the back slightly and lift the buttock bit by bit, then jump the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the break will be restored. If you see, take a bladder of nettles, and attach a spout to it, and push the entire bladder into the nature; then blow strongly into the spout until the bladder is inflated inside: the break will return; then fill with cotton, and leave it for some days, until it heals.
And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the fracture of the pelvis; and these breaks should not be concealed from him who applies his study and skill to them and reads my book. For fractures indicate in many ways the right path of restoration: therefore, attend to this.
In a spear (shaft), when it is broken, take an owl's throat and insert the shaft; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for 3 or more days, and it will heal quickly.
of breakage with wound
For the one who has a breakage with a wound (especially if it is large such as the bones of the leg or shoulder), he must be bandaged now, just as the bandages that we have said testify.
And if the wound is healed, then treat it with vinegar (if you have nothing else), then immediately proceed to set the breakage in that same hour or the following day, unless an abscess has come forth.
And if an abscess has come forth, then wait until the ninth day, allowing it to heal before touching or working on it again, for doing so would cause a bad outcome.
And if the bone breaks and appears above the knee joint, you must put it back gently into its place with slight extension.
If the fractured bone does not align to put it back into place, you must use this tool which is made of iron, about 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the mirror that he grips 3 or 4, depending on what is needed in each bone-setting; and it should be round and a bit large, so that it does not bend during your work on the limb, and pointed at the tip, and large from the middle forward, as follows:
And it is called "palancha", so the curved bones should be placed on the top of the visible bone; and push it once until it returns to its original position and is level with each other. If the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the top of the bone until the instrument has control over it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do as much as you can to put it in its place, then moisten a small linen cloth in black stiptic vinegar, and carefully if it is in summer; do not put any ointment or other substance on the wound where there is oil, which may cause decay and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open, and cover the entire area, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with a fracture; and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, causing death or rotting of some kind; and may the bindings be softer and more supple than other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear that it may become infected, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, do not put splints on it; instead wrap around it, in place of splints, hard cloths, and bind it. And after one or two days, if you see swelling at the wound, remove whatever you placed there and apply healing ointments for wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is healed and healthy.
And the limbs should be set in such a way that the bone slips slightly downwards easily.
If it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but slides back, as there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you try to keep pressure on the wound and remove all the loose fragments that cause pain.
If a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, it is necessary to treat it, as described in the chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open over a limb, like the bones of the leg or shoulder, and similar large members, do not draw it out, for many times death may come; however, leave it as long as possible; perhaps it will heal itself after twenty days or thirty; then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
The arriving bruises on the sore
There are often many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is unpleasant to see the appearance of the limb member; and by chance, the limbs cannot perform their natural duties.
Therefore, be careful: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, such that you take any of these things or all together, and crush them with a sharp wine or with plenty of egg white or with oil; then put it on the wound in poultices, and bind it well, and do not unbind it for many days; and then break it open, and start another one, as long as the nodules are removed; or you bind above a piece of plank well made; because the properties of plank are that they remove all swellings from the limbs. And if the nodulation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut off the top, and make the excess apparent; or you shave it at any razor, as long as it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after treatment, the members are weak and delicate in many cases: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many sutures, and the nourishment could not reach the member; or because of excessive drainage; or because of excessive movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, which makes them weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body thin, until the blood multiplies in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and comfort; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts great nourishment to it, and drain it often with cold water, until the nourishment goes to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
twisted limb after health
When a limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless do not lose hope; do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this treatment is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death; nevertheless, if the swelling and torment are fresh, it is necessary that they be treated with hot, soft water or softening herbs such as vismalve leaves, radishes, mellilot root, and similar things; and you make a soothing poultice, such as dyaquilon; or you take figs with fat, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by constantly and repeatedly rubbing it with wet hands. Movements should be brought to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is swollen and hardened, just like stone, and it requires iron to be removed, then it must be covered up to the bone, incised carefully with a subtle instrument; and cloth and bandage should be applied in treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to someone, it must now be returned without delay.
If one waits, the joint swells, and perhaps it can be reset to its place; therefore, it should not be moved until the swelling has subsided; many times it causes pus and other pain.
Therefore, when this happens, first have the patient cleanse himself, then leave him to rest until the abscess subsides; then immerse the member in hot water and oil, then gently manipulate it, and treat each member according to its location.
And I have ordered the chapters concerning shoulder dislocations down to feet.
of jawbones
It rarely happens that jawbones should be dislocated in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and saliva flows from the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, wrapping its tongue around with speech.
When small dislocations occur, they return through various positions.
And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it immediately, do not delay.
And in such a manner as the minister holds the head of the patient and pushes one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand should be placed aside to provide balance; and command the patient to relax, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And he shall bring it back into its place.
And if it [the dislocation] is reduced with force, most certainly it will recur, especially if they are the two jawbones together, anoint them with hot water and oil, until they are gently reset; never force to reduce it, as we have said.
And when they [the jawbones] are gently reduced and the mouth of the patient closes well, cover it with a moist cloth made from rose oil and beeswax, then secure it lightly with several strips of linen.
Let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be positioned between two pillows so it does not move to either side or make an effort, but take light food until the pain is alleviated, and let the jawbones heal.
And then let him eat lightly, and he should not labor at all in opening the mouth to eat or drink, until the mandible is well swollen and healed.
If the two mandibles cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their places, fever and accustomed sores come, and possibly rupture of the belly, and possibly the vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a disaster; and many times he who experiences it dies within eight days.
Of the noose
The noose cannot dislocate from within its continuity and the ribs, and it is occasionally dislocated outwardly, and one can feel it.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and stretches out his arms; then presses the joint forcefully with your palm, and it will return; then place the splint and bandage over it, and hold.
And the joint which is facing the chest cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it occasionally dislocates, you reset it to its place as we have said; then place the splint and bandage over it, hold it, and command the patient to rest until he recovers.
And likewise, the head of the shoulder is returned to its place when it is dislocated from its joint.
The dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder dislocates in only four ways: one is when it dislocates at the socket below; and the second is at the hip part; and by chance, it may dislocate above, but this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder blade nor inside by the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those with little fat, because it can jump out quickly; in those with enough fat, it jumps out rarely and returns quickly.
And sometimes happens to some men, percussion or breaking, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you should verify [the dislocation], as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it is turned towards the inside [of the joint], and you find a clear difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one. You will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder and under the inside at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an eye socket. The patient cannot return their hand to its place or make any movements.
And likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it should not be hidden, because you can clearly feel it with your hand.
This method of dislocation is not only to return it when it is new, but also when the infant is sick.
The method is that the minister raises the patient's hand up, then puts his thumbs under the dislocated joint and pushes it upward to its place; the minister then lowers the hand and places it down, it will come back quickly.
And if it does not come back as we have said in normal hours after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. And bring them a soothing and calming ointment such as the decoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and bring it.
Then the patient should lie on his back and place a piece of even-sized cloth beneath the affected area, neither too soft nor too hard, then the person in charge should place their heel on the cloth and lift the head of the shoulder properly, pulling the hand of the patient.
And another assistant holds the head of the patient so it does not move downwards; that shoulder immediately returns to its place, and if you see it dislocate again in this way:
and it is that you have a man who is larger than the patient present; and he should be facing towards the side, and push the shoulder of the patient under its joint, and lift the joint upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air. And another minister draws the hand of the patient towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return immediately.
You may also reset it in another way: and this is when you insert a long needle into the earth, with the head of the shoulder being as round as a pea, and neither too thick nor too thin. Then he should be placed under the patient, but with soft cushions beneath, and the patient lying on their back on a long bed. Then stretch out his hand away from the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, perform this treatment: take one tison of two arms length and four fingers width, which has a round tip to enter deeply under the ascle (or shoulder joint), according to this form:
Then lay the rod over the patient's shoulder, so that it does not prick the patient; then place it under the shoulder of the patient; extend your arm along the rod; hold the limb on the rod and the arm at the wrist, then place the arm on one side of a small bench with enough space for the hands to be placed underneath; extend the other hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side; the joint will re-align itself in the process.
When the joint is in place, regardless of how it may be, you must place a spherical pad of wool under the shoulder; then apply the plaster made with powder from the mill, incense, and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then press down on the shoulder underneath while turning the string around the plaster, and tie the hand to its neck, keeping the hands in place.
And it must be applied ointment, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal sooner; and afterwards apply more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is moved out of place due to moisture which has come or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries to it three times, as mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
If you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm above, then know that the nerve at the base of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the thighs and hips, or backside, is made by a push and extension of hands, and other force is applied to it; and care should be taken until it heals.
And after healing comes stiffness in the member and delayed movement; the patient should use baths many times, until the stiffness subsides and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and it returns to its points; and if it has dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and dislocation cannot be restored because it can clearly be seen and felt; and it dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the ill shoulder with the healthy one, if you can clearly see it. For the joint is separated, and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset the dislocation as soon as an abscess comes, for if an abscess comes, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely set again, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death may come.
And the restoration is such, when it can be returned in this manner, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and its arms should be spread out, and the hands of the patient according to the cut thereabout, both above and below, and push the joint to its sockets together, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when the patient doubles their hand over their hand, and pushes the root of the displaced palm back into place.
And if it does not return to its place, then apply strong extension. It is that two people should extend the arm, and each of them should hold it still during the extension; then turn the arm from both sides, then wrap a doubled long and wide cloth around it;
And when the doctor joins the joint to his hand, he should oil it to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place until it returns.
And when it is in its place, he should put on a plaster made of flour with egg, and pull it back into shape, and tie the arm around the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then untie it.
If the joint is closed in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint does not bind well, renew the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like that for some days until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if it feels pain after the repositioning of the joint and it becomes stiff, bathe and rub it well and press until it is relieved; or you place a sheep's fat pad on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it enter water again. And when it bleeds, rub the joint gently, then replace the fat pad on it, and then let it enter water again; and do so two or three times until it is healed; if you see, place warm moist sheep's wool covered with butter and press it on; it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is displaced and the repositioning is easy, more so than other joints; it should be returned to its place as quickly as possible, in the hour itself when it is dislocated, unless the ligaments are inflamed or there is an abscess hot.
And the repositioning is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and place the mirror so it is level, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the jointure, and pushes it until it returns.
Moreover, it is necessary that you watch if it is properly in place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's hand dorsal side on the table, and have the patient place their other hand above the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
And if not, squeeze with plasters to ease the abscesses, and let them remain as they are until they begin to heal.
If it cannot endure it and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the dislocated joint remains.
And the patient should not refuse fire until his hand is healed, and it cannot be strained by any means altogether: therefore understand that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other device for healing except to strain by fire cautery in this case, and by chance nothing else is of value.
And when the hand is healed, place it in a splint as we have said, then strap and leave for 5 days, then release and leave it in this state.
If it cannot be moved well and there is no swelling, moist with warm water and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on one side, sometimes at the back or palm.
Then, the finger is straightened, and you push the dislocation towards your fingertips until it returns, then hold the finger's head, and turn it towards the side where it is dislocated;
And let it rest for 2 days, and then make it even on the third day; and bind it tightly, as we have said, and release it from time to time, and move it around, and rebind it tightly; do this often until it becomes narrow.
And the same applies if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before until it heals, and the same applies when it is dislocated from another place.
The dislocation of the vertebrae in the back
When the vertebra of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, there is no remedy, for death quickly approaches the patient.
And the signs are that excrement passes involuntarily, it cannot be held, and multiple limbs are weakened, such as the two legs or the two arms or one.
And multiple times the vertebra becomes paralyzed in four parts; that which becomes paralyzed at the rear is called "gibbotization".
The physician should observe whether the swelling has arisen from childhood; if there is no remedy or healing for it in its entirety.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the old methods of cure used to speak in grand words, where there was not much benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling which comes before, there is no remedy nor healing.
And also that which comes directly between two sides, can only be cured by the one who comes from behind, as I said;
And that the patient should be extended on one side, and have pressure underneath him so he does not bruise himself;
then insert one thorn into the head in the earth and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the patient's buttocks, and another at his hips, thighs, knees, and ankles;
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and others at the feet, among the four tendons;
And be tightly closed, the tendons as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine forming, until it returns.
And if it does not return through this cure, take a board four feet long and shaped at the end, and place the patient on the side, and push the head of the board under the side, then put the middle of the board on the spine. and place the mirrors feet on the other head of the board, and press hard until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the turning tool that turns by hand.
And it is that you insert two needles into the patient's head, one in each arm of good size, and between each needle, outside and inside, a palm's space in length;
and in each needle have a pin or turnscrew, so that the needles do not move, and between two needles have one turning needle, like cords twist, and in the two twisting needles have two small pins of a palm's length, to twist the turnscrew;
and then tie the cord that is between the seated needles to the turnscrew towards the head, and another cord towards the other turnscrew, and each of the attendants twists his turnscrew along the entire cord, and the master equalizes the spine as we have said.
And when it is even, place a desiccating plaster on top with abundant egg, then pound it, then hold the head of a board of 3 feet long against the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it up with a rope, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nursing until he recovers;
If anything comes at the end of his health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the stick as we have said before; sometimes they also administer a piece of wood.
And sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine near the spondile, and it is thought to be dislocation; but it is the bone that opens up, so one must not have any presumption: perhaps death may come as a result.
of the dislocations of the shoulder
It is known that the shoulder and shoulder blade joints come from dislocations only, and they are not dislocated in the same way as other joints; the shoulder joint is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, front and back, more inside than out, less so in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the sick leg is joined with the sound one, it is longer, and the sick knee joints are more open than those of the healthy ones, and the sick one cannot bend his knee in the fire. and is the loosened joint filled with abscess pus, because that the knee joint comes there.
And the sign of one who is about to die, is that this event is contrary to those mentioned earlier.
And the signs of one whose leg is straight according to the accomplishment, are that it does not double the knee due to pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
And the signs of one whose backside event occurs are that he cannot stretch his knee nor bend it, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is in its place below the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are as follows: first, you should examine whether the dislocation is old and if it stays in place according to its position, there should be no treatment; and there should be no presumption that it can heal on its own.
For the fresh dislocation, which is of the four kinds of dislocation, you should hurry and turn the joint, pushing it inward and outward, moving it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, there will be no need for further treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, then you must call for one strong man, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or tie him to the thigh; And another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands beneath the shoulder blades, then tightens a cord of rawhide around the thigh; and another holds the head with the cord.
And they all extend below at once, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If it is not dislocated, treatment for its similar condition is required. When the dislocation occurs at the shoulder joint, you should remind the patient to lie on their unaffected side, then place the rope around the thigh's root, and under the angle (shoulder), then draw the rope upward towards the angle and towards the armhole.
Then take another assistant with you and grasp the large thigh of the affected limb, stretch it out in an extended form; it will return to its place now; this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then tie the feet of the patient together tightly with a strong rope above their heels and knees, and extend the affected leg two feet more than the other;
Then it should be hung by the head from a post, and it should be above the ground .ij. [two] long arms; then instruct one servant to embrace the thigh, and let another servant hang with the patient, who will then hold the thigh, for the joint is now returning quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the side [of the body], the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of a dislocated shoulder, and draw a rope over the affected leg properly, and above it also.
Then place two ropes, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert one rope between the thighs of the patient in the dislocated position; And plant the damp cloths around [the area], so as not to prick the sick person, then extend each of the assistants toward him, and the mirror place equal to his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place it on a table and press as we have said in the swelling, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately as I have said, and place the mirror on the bad angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the shoulder, it is not necessary to stretch the patient below, nor lift up on the earth, but rather he should be in the same position as when the hip was dislocated, as we have said about lying down on two hips; and he should be supine (on his back), and the limb extended as we have said before, and pressure should be applied on the joint to the table;
and will be at the right point when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and place the pillow under them, and hold with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
And it rests for 3 or 4 days, then dislocate [the joint], and place a splint on it; and if you see that they are even, hold them steady as before, and let it rest. 3 days; then dislocate it, and make it move well, until the limb is comfortable.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: inside and outward, behind; and do not dislocate it forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and his foot on your feet.
then take his knee in your palms, pull apart between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee joint. Have another servant extend his foot until the knees return to their place, and the signs are that it bends slightly at the knee.
And apply the poultice on top, and tie the leg to the thigh tightly for 3 or 4 days, then release it; and let the patient rest, do not make them move at all until the limb is comfortable.
And if the member is not broken, provide strong stretching as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it heals.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes completely dislocated from within and outwards.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it bends towards the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction is easy, and it should be gently extended to the hands when it is only crushed.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit straight, and tie one minister (assistant) by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand two times, then lift it up, and push the foot up firmly;
and do this two times, as we have said, in pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the procedure, because it will return again;
And if it cannot return in such a way, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and firmly fix one peg tightly into the ground between his thighs, and tie strips around it so as not to prick the patient.
Then the ministers should dye the thigh, and another minister should extend the leg to his hands or one link, so that he lies on top of the leg on the neck of the leg. Then each minister should extend himself equally, and the peg should be close between the thighs of the patient to keep him when he is stretched.
Then place the hands equally on the dislocation, and let another servant hold the healthy leg below; the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, apply the plaster and poultice on top, form the limb, tie it to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the calf, so that the bandage is not too tight.
Then leave it for 2 or 3 days and if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it; then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and allow the patient to walk after 4 days. And if it goes before that point, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess swells there, you must soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the two
When the two are dislocated, they must be stretched out gently without strain, and it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back between the shoulder and the hip, you must make the patient sit. On a flat surface or table straight upright, put your foot on what opens these joints, then press your foot firmly until it returns.
When it is even and does not open, put a table with two legs under the foot of your foot. Then press firmly and leave for three days, then release it. Let it rest until it heals.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies.
Do not be presumptuous in the cure, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and unless you are merciful and patient, do not be bold.
Use at first soothing warm compresses for an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health. And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place immediately, so that the abscess subsides.
And when the limbs are at their place, administer soothing things to the abscess, and treat the wound, as necessary, with ointments that dry;
And if with dislocation there is a break, and small bones are displaced, set the bone, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
And beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for it is valuable to you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your weapon and body. Amen.
