I, my very dear son, have completed this book for you, which is the end of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have finished it by its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is entirely unknown everywhere, the science and craft are perishing and decaying, and nothing remains of it from foreign lands except for small descriptions of the ancients that the hands have corrupted. And because of this (cause), errors and vanities have come, and intentions are closed and wisdom is driven away.
It seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work accompanied by the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good master of hand is found in our times, the art of medicine is prolonged. And one who undertakes it should be summoned in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of limbs, and their shapes and joints and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of bones, and the movement and the resting places and the veins moving and the stationary ones, and the location of their origin.
And for that reason Hippocrates says that the hand without work is empty, and even in the art of surgery.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned matters, let him take care not to err and not to operate on humans; thus, I have seen many times more of those who engage in this science and abandon their science and experience.
Because I saw a foolish man who took out one abscess of scrofula from a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
And I saw another man who removed a stone from an old man's side, and the stone was large; he carried with it a piece of his bladder, and the man died within four days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it he would die.
And there was another physician who treated one of our land's duke who had his leg broken, and with the breaking, he had a wound; and these physicians in ignorance set the break over the wound using strong force, and did not leave any splint on the wound, leaving it thus in one piece; and he commanded that it should not be separated; and it remained like this until the leg swelled completely and the feet came to destruction.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come and separate the leg; and when I separated it, he was relieved and felt no pain.
But all the corruption had already been set or the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop moving through the member until the entire member was completely destroyed.
And it is necessary for another person to flatten an abscess and then burn it through the evil of his power.
For a chancre, when it is pure of black bile, it should not be touched with iron if it cannot be completely removed from that place where the corruption is.
And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: surgery where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you be careful so that the foolish person cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons in haste, and approach your patients gently and firmly, and use the best means so that through God's grace you may be saved and praised; and leave despairing diseases of great sickness; and withdraw your weapons from that which causes doubt, and be vigilant within yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen warned in some of his admonitions: "Take no care for an evil disease lest you be called a foolish healer."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and the cauterization of medicine for fever, and they are ordered from head to feet; and concerning the forms of instruments, and the irons for cauterization, and everything that is necessary in this work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about blisters and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are ordered and concerning the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from head to feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
Therefore, remembering the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
The quality of the aid, and the harm, is the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and many of the wise spoke about it, and agreed upon it; but they did not reveal their words easily, for I shall repeat it.
I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it be two complexions: namely the hot complexion with matter, and the dry complexion with matter.
In hot and dry constitution, some say that fire cautery is of great aid; and others say the opposite: that fire cautery has no value for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases with heat or dryness; and he who says otherwise says that fire provides great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from human bodies. For when you examine the body of a man and his moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it sometimes through experimentation.
And every way, do not interfere unless it is the one who has proven it and who knows by long experience the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their occurrences and the duration of time; we have no fear from other complexions, especially in cold and wet diseases. And all men should conform and agree to the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and it does not go beyond the member that is burned, and it does no harm to another member unless named.
Burning medicines come from one member to another when displacing, and bring diseases of great suffering to the sick member, and possibly kill the patient.
Fire, because of its high power and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this if there is no excess.
And I have found this for you through experiment and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is true about things; and because of this, I apologize for the length of the word, since I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it combats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be done and chose companions.
And I say that the cautery is suitable in all times, because the harm happening below is prevented by the help of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauteries are for necessary pain before and immediately when a greater evil cannot come to the member.
And never think of it, dear child, as the foolish do; for the sickness that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not only medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine due to its speed of action, and the virtue of its work and dominion.
And sometimes the sickness comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its power; and in it are gathered the superfluities by the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, and that is to see; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth more than medicine afterwards, but their intentions are false, and cauterizations are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any sickness, and they are ineffective, then we administer caution, and it is effective. Therefore, it is appropriate to know that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not only according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they did not say otherwise except for the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; and they said that the tips of cauteries do not produce pus, but this is not true because I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; and golden cauteries are more effective than iron ones, as they claim.
And although you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold and when it has cooled down; and if heated too much, it becomes red-hot; and thus there is enough hindrance in this.
And for this reason, we use fire cautery, which we have found appropriate for our work.
I have ordered you this chapter about the head from the neck to the feet, because the path will be easier to find.
The olive oil cautery
This cautery is good for both moist and dry conditions on the skull, and it is used to treat a disease known as "soda," as well as various humors that descend from the head into the eyes, ears, and cause many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine, cleansing the head four times or twice, according to what the virtues and age and the accustomed state of the sick person can tolerate; and then you shall make him lie down on his back after cleansing the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crosswise between your hands, place his hands on a soft surface; after placing the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your fingers will meet, it will bleed, then heat the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
And place it on the bone marked with ink, and draw and pull your hand back and forth, gradually turning; then remove your hand immediately if you see the bone protruding even slightly; and if you do not see it, continue heating the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after that take a little piece of silk, put it in warm, soft cotton, and place it on the bone, leaving it for three days; afterwards place soft wool over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
And as the ancients said, when the wound remains open longer, it drains more; and for this reason, if it heals faster.
And said one of them that the fire cautery should be left until part of the bone is burned, and then heal the one who was burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
And the others said that the fire cautery should be left for so long until it sinks into the bone as deep as one vertebra which women put in their vagina because the humors issue out quickly; and then the wound should be kept open for a long time; afterwards, it should be cured and closed.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good to me in all things, except for some men where there is fear; and I think I should leave it; because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other members; and even when the head of the sick man is weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems more healing and beneficial to me, and from this use I work together for salvation.
of ancient pain in the head
When the whole head has chronic and lasting pain, it is necessary for the sick to use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purges of the head and oils and plasters; and if they make a cautery as we have said before, it does not work.
Take care if the shoulder of the patient is strong and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said above.
Perform cautery on top of each corner of the head up to the bone, as previously mentioned, and perform one cautery called "vasselz"; it is in this place where bellows are placed; hold your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauterizations of the corners should be finer than those used for the midline of the head, and here is their shape:
on the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes in part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases have been done; but nothing helps: then cauteries are applied according to two ways, namely with medicine that burns and with fire.
The cautery with medicine that burns (is) that you take a hot stone, remove its bark and cover one end with two pieces of cloth, then place the temple where the pain is, in such a way that you can place the hot stone under the skin; and when it has been placed, hold it well and leave it for twelve hours; then release it and treat the area with onion juice, leaving the wound for two or three days; then put cotton soaked in butter over it.
After the treatment with onion until it is healed; and if you see that you do something with certain burning medicines that I have written or tenth part treat on burning medicines.
The fire cautery is of this kind. Heat the iron as follows:
And it is called "clos" because the tip is shaped like a small claw with about an inch of curvature, and it has a small appearance in the middle; place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and press the iron slightly, until half of the thickness of the iron is burned; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, and draw out an abundance of blood.
After putting cotton on wound dressing, place it on the spot for four days; then put damp cotton in vinegar, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this abscess using the iron called "cultellare," at the tip, be careful not to strike the artery in this abscess that is not ancient.
From migraine
When treating migraine, as we have said in the division of diseases and it does not benefit, and you see that fire cautery as mentioned earlier in medicine and iron does not help; then you must heat the cautere called "cultellare" until it is white; and place yourself on the side of a line half a finger's length long, and strike once with your hand, and hold so as not to cover the artery and do not reach the bone; and guard against the jaw that closes when eating, and nerves have no gaze at the closed mouth and spasm does not come upon the patient, and guard against loss of blood from the artery when it is cut or has been cut with great fear, especially for those who are unaware, and are neither educated nor experienced; leave the work in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be done in this book.
If you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you find, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
From the pain of cold ears
When the ear brings pain from cold and medicines soluble and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", as follows:
After the point is made all around the sick ear, or around the two places where the pain remains in both, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked its location; and have 10 points around each ear; after treating the area until it is healed.
Of the torment of the mouth
Cautery treatment should not be used except for those moving from inflammation, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a cautery at similar conditions that come from scabs and nerves.
When treating this condition of mouth torment moving from inflammation and purges from the head and gargarism, it is not sufficient, so you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little distance from the temple, and the third in the jaw; put the cautery on the healthy part and make the cautery towards the upper part of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a fist; leave the cautery for as long as half the hair is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the appearance of a surgeon's instrument we have mentioned, but it is somewhat more subtle, and the blades should be slightly larger; after treating the area as I have previously said, let it heal when it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then administer four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one at the base of the head, and one in the area called "navel" as we have previously stated, and the final cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; let it be treated as we have said before.
diarrhea (from Latin lithargyrios, meaning "stone-like")
For this illness, give the patient large years and round pills made from cerebrum; afterwards, anoint the head of the patient entirely, and place the plaster of mustard seed (sinapi) on the occiput which is written or treated as a plaster; and this is the method of cautery: do it as I have said.
If it is healthy in this way, it is good; and if not, perform four cauterizations on the head from neck to collarbone, with two inches of space between each cautery; and treat as usual, and if you see it healing, apply one cautery at the midline; and if necessary, apply two others on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy; and let the cautery called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is required that the head be cleaned for years and as we have said before; after that, the head of the patient should be shaved, then make a fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and 1 at the back and 3 on the spine of the neck; and if more is needed, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, make 4 fire cauterizations on the spine of the back; let it be until the most painful spot is burned, then lift your hand; after that cure it until it is healthy, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for the phlegmatic one, and it is first necessary to clean the brain for years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from thinking about taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give them a gargle and chew soft foods frequently with good meats; afterwards, place the head in the middle, and apply 1 cautery as we have said before, and 1 cautery on the fontanelle, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, apply cauteries as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be with olive oil as I have said.
If the patient is an infant, apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy, the superfluidities or corrupted and putrid humors produce thick phlegm, then apply cauteries with such cauterizations as we have said to those who have paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what was stated earlier in the division.
After the head of the sick person, make a linen bandage well made, just like a circle, and place it around the head; cross the patient, and hold them firmly from all sides; then apply the liniment, which is made from old butter; heat the linen gently to a suitable temperature, so that it can be pressed on the person without causing discomfort; after emptying the circle from inside around the head, let it cool; and do this to the sick person once a week with good governance, until they are well.
If you wish to cauterize (a wound), make multiple pricks all over the cautery. This method of cauterization dampens the brain greatly, and then put soft cotton moistened in butter and linseed oil on top.
Of the eyes (lit. of the hairs) When the eyes (lit. hairs) come first according to the signs that I have said in the division, then start and give the patient something cleansing for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe many times while fasting.
Afterward, command him to recline his head, and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples where the affliction of the eyes is in both or in one; and burn all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and watch for bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with your power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incising the cautery how to stretch it; and sometimes, a cautery or hot iron is made between the two bones.
for the removal of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and habitual and are above the veins, or from the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, flu-like excesses, then he applies the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the work to the eyes: one cautery in the forehead, two cauterizes on the temples, and two cauterizes or hot irons between the two bones; and if necessary, cauterize skillfully above the eyelid with a small cautery.
The body weeps tears from within the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, but it does not help, then give the patient three hot-coated cuccumis; after these, let him drink strong wine and make a cautery or oil cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" over the two sores, one under the hair; take care not to cover the artery. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then perform the cauterization with this cautery called "olivare". Here is its form:
And make two cauteries on the two sores as long as the sores themselves are; and do not leave the hand off it until the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
the hair that pricks the oil Sometimes the hair of the eyes is converted to tears and pricks the eye, and then cauteries are performed in two ways: either by fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a clean place; afterward on paper, draw a figure like that of the fennel seed pod, and begin with the sign to shave the hairs. Then put cotton moistened with egg white and musk oil on the eye, then heat the cautery in this shape:
After cauterizing the figure that you have marked little by little many times, let the coagulated blood be burned at that spot; and the signs of the healing of the work are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs lifted to the point of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put soft cotton drenched in butter so that the burn is removed; afterwards, treat with ointment until it heals.
And if afterwards the hairs grow, and the paper is softened again start the cautery on that same spot as you did before; and if the hairs are bent, cauterize until the paper returns to its natural position, and they become even, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, each one ounce, grind them together well; and make it quickly so it does not cool, then spread it on the parchment as you did with the myrtle leaf, and place the hairs on the paper; if the patient is suffering from only one oil, you should work in one, and if both oils are involved; put cotton dipped in egg white beneath the oil; and let the sick person's head be in your healthy hand and show the medicine to them, and press a little and move it all each time the patient feels pain from the medicine as they feel it like fire. When you have made it [the patient] stay still for a long time, give him medicine to his body. And when the bite has passed, lift up the wound and examine it to see if the paper is raised as it was by constraining fire or incision; and if it is thus, then it is good. If not, continue with more medicine on the wound or the medicine has not worked yet, until your treatments are equal, and your eyes placed correctly; then place cotton soaked in butter over the burned area, afterwards cure the wound with the ointment called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your treatment by keeping a great watch so that the medicine does not irritate the eyes, and if the paper becomes softened after, and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the medicine on the wound that has been properly soothed, as you have done before; afterwards cure it until it is healed; this is the shape of a mullein leaf:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, according to this it should be your guidance; do not deviate from the right path for the one who studies this art.
Of the cure of fistula by cautery
When curing a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures are not helpful, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and the assistant should hold his head between their hands so it does not move or shift; then put a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or linen cloth soaked in oil on the fistula; after that, heat the cautery which is pointed at the fistula; and make sure the tip of the cautery is shaped like the head of a quill pen, with the cautery itself; if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also look like a tent; but in any case, this shape is more useful for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, draw out the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, open it, and draw out the puss forcefully; afterwards place the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the neck near the oil, so your hands do not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the oil fat and corrupt it.
If you are starting the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, continue the cautery again once, and another if needed, and leave it for 3 days; then put cotton soaked in butter on it and the ointment of desiccative until it is healed, and if after 40 days it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients would speak of. Understand a fistula, and open the area; afterwards put in the fissure one subtle camphor candy of which this is the shape: And they make the quantity of a .З. of plug; and hold your hand or firmly fixed, and the patient should not move at all, until the plug melted reaches its oil; and it is necessary that you put above the oil on the patient cotton soaked in egg yolk or oil: the plug will guide the wound's healing, and the healthy part heals marvelously.
If the wound is healed by the cautery we have said, it is good. If not, then administer hot mustard and bring the wound back to the body heat as required in its own proper place.
cavities in lips Often cavities occur in lips, which are called "hairs," and similarly in children's lips.
When treating these cavities as mentioned in the previous section and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery spatula according to this shape:
And place it immediately into these cavities until it reaches the bottom, then treat the area with cerote (cerote is not defined in this text but could be a medicinal substance) until it heals.
From the abscess of the throat
If the abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it has become purulent and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the previous sections, but it does not help; then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after emptying or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until the iron becomes cool at its point; and do it once or twice, after curing what has been said in treatment, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, you must find the cause and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
toothache
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then place the head of the patient in your lap; after heating the cautery to the desired temperature, place a cane on the tooth; put the hot cautery inside promptly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; afterwards, remove your hand and continue with the cautery as you wish; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, then rinse thoroughly.
And in this manner the moving teeth are held firm and the softened gums are kept restricted, and the corrupt moisture dries out.
of the tooth pain
When pain in the tooth comes from cold or wetness, and medical cures are of no use, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautery with butter is as follows: take butter from a cow, and heat the end of an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a cloth, wet it with warm butter and apply it quickly to the painful tooth and hold it until it becomes cooled; repeat this process as often as necessary for its virtue to reach the root of the tooth. If you find that the linen and cotton are wet in cold butter, apply the hot iron to the tooth until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
The combined cautery with fire is as follows: take a cane of iron or copper, and make it large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth. Heat the cautery, from which the shape will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; repeat this process several times, as the pain will disappear by that day or the next. It is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of the cautery, and then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery:
When scrofulas are caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey medication, then heat the cautery hair as described above, and have two openings for the smoke to exit the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use the same size cautery and leave it for three days; place moistened cotton over the burn until the pain subsides; afterwards cure the area with ointments and salves until it heals.
When moisture conquers over the channels of the throat, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards do cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go up to the throat, but a little. Afterwards do .i. other cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the shape as before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
When moisture conquers over the channels of the throat (toust), and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards do cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go up to the throat, but a little. Afterwards do .i. other cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine (col au chief de l'espinee), and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the shape as before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy. When the disease of the throat and illness are due to moisture that is cold, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and the disease is old, then let two cauteries be done on the forceps in visible places; and one other cautery on the most painful spot between the breasts; and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the shape as said before.
And if you wish, perform the fire cautery by pricking with all the cauteries called "poins", whose form is as described in the disease of the ears; and let the cauterizations be no more than 30 or around that number. After healing the area as previously stated, let the cauteries be at three inches according to this shape:
And since the cauterizations are lighter because you do them in pairs of two.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Place the patient on his back and on his side; after that, press the lower part of the breast with the hollow of your left hand; if the joint is dislocated internally, then heat the iron (cautery) shaped as two nerves which are at this place.
and cauterize the breast for as long as it pierces the ribcage, and the figure of the iron (cautery) comes with four cauteries; and this is made with the cautery that has two nerves, because the figures of cauterization are called cauteries; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, and this is the shape of the cautery that has two nerves.
And sometimes it is twisted around this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After putting on the cautery and crushing it with oil, let the patient rest and keep the limbs still for a long time until he is well comforted.
If it is dislocated on top, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
the cautery for pleurisy
The ancient ones said that one should apply plaster cauteries to the bladder using the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, dry it, make it as big and as long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, heat it over fire, and cauterize one cautery between the groin and neck, two small cauteries slightly descending in the part below the beard; two more near the fifth costal cartilage and the sixth, declining a bit behind a little; one at the anus, one above the stomach, one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the anus, far from the cautery between the shoulders; do not press your hand, but do it openhandedly, as when smelling.
And an old one said that a man should use a cautery similar to a razor, heat it and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; the pain subsides, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. However, in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mice, that is as we have said in the division of cures and it does not help at all, then apply three ways of cautery, all good.
The first way is that you make four or six cauteries in a row, according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery as we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, let the patient lie down on his back.
And another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the cavity that is near the mouse, where the patient's wounds come towards the left side, and raise the elevations that you lift the cavity according to the cavity, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After heating the two nerves inflamed so that their pores are pierced from the other side, then pull out the cautery, and thus it will have four. And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery on the two nerves. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is worth noting: the other treatments mentioned before should be done first.
After heating the dropsy (a swelling due to fluid retention) so that its pores are pierced, and then pulling out the cautery, it will have four. And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery on the dropsy. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is worth noting: the other treatments mentioned before should be done first.
Cautery is not useful for dropsy, except in the manner known as "asclytes". When you cure it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the abdomen, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the site of the pain; and let the cauteries be close to the thick part of the skin.
After letting the fire cautery cool for a long time to expel pus, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle as shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, as it has been previously described.
of the swelling on the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is edematous, and filled with water citrus, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; dip your hand with the cautery without turning it. And do not enter too deeply, otherwise the water citrus would be forced, and let the cautery be according to this shape:
After making .2 (two) cauteries in each leg with the tip of the knife; let the cauteries be long, one under the thigh in front and the other outside the leg; leave the cauteries over the wound to heal for a while until the water subsides; then take care of the other wounds as we have said.
swelling
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive properties that are in the stomach and intestines are obstructed, it cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, do this: make one large cautery on the stomach according to what was mentioned earlier about the cautionary for the stomach, apply a circulating caution; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, each one a subtle clavicle cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, apply cautery on the joint, one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach in addition to the large one, because the cure is beneficial where there is good aid.
of the cure for hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are founded, either one or more, and they are old and are of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not help if cauteries are made: .iij. above the spine of the back, that which is completely turned away from almecdate hole by hole and triangular, and .i. cautery below the anus. 2 dois;
and if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then the face gets .i. large cautery on the stomach, as mentioned before, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the spleen with all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After curing the place until it is healthy.
of the charnositeit which is named "thelul"
When you apply the cautery to althelul, heat up the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it completely on top of the althelul being cut; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, thus cutting the vein; do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards, use the healing balm until it heals completely; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alchatim, it will provide more aid.
from an improperly treated wound
If the patient cannot bear incision or opening, which we will explain in its place, this disease comes that can only be healed by cauterization.
1. When any abscess comes, and it becomes swollen and corrupted due to moisture, one must examine the whole situation carefully and know how deep the abscess has penetrated.
on the disease of the kidneys When pain of cold comes to the kidneys and with large swelling, and it does not take in women, then you must perform cautery on both sides of the kidneys using the cautery claw that we have mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be four cauteries in a row, and it will provide more significant aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold or moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery in the area outside of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on each side, and both should be as long as the knuckle; and make one cautery outside the back, or two if needed; and let the cauterization be clavicle-shaped according to the previously mentioned form.
of the anus When the anus is cold and moist, and cannot conceive, and the flowers (semen) are corrupted and their term ends late; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it must be done to him four cauteries around the buttocks, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let the cauterization be clavicle-shaped, as we have said.
Of the hernia
When the viscous hernias descend into the belly of the hernia, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the location of the hernia can be seen visually in the area of protrusion; if so, you must cauterize the patient over the belly of the hernia with a cautery resembling a circle and sign before the hernia, as it turns, so that the hernia is within the circle; and if the cauterizing is like those who have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, make four large olive-oil cauterizes, and make sure the cauteries are as deep as all the others; and cure it until it heals.
of the pain of the hernia When pain comes in the swelling of the hernia, and it is due to coldness and moisture; the patient is treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not work, and the disease is ancient: therefore you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills.
After that, perform the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: either with burning substances mixed with medicines or cauterization by fire. Cauterization by fire is according to many ways, one of which is as follows: you should cauterize on top of the swelling of the hernia four triangular cauteries according to this shape (see figure), and make it deep and large, with a space of the thickness of a die between each cautery. The cauteries should be made of olive oil; sometimes they are performed in the middle on the head of the hernia, for which there are four according to this shape:
And if you see, if you cauterize the cautery of the circular shape which we have mentioned earlier in dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in such a manner that the circles encompass the entire shoulder, and all the edges of the cavity are burned.
And this is the way it's done for sciatica, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach down to the thigh or leg. If it reaches down to the thigh and leg, two cauteries are performed where the patient says that the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle .5 inches, on the left side a little bit; and let the cauteries be cutlery type, and burn the thickness of the cavity; if the patient feels that the pain extends to toes or close to it, cauterize where they feel pain 3-4 points or 4 at the cautery which is called "points".
And if necessary, do more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a cutlery or circular cauterizer, and take great care in all your cauteries not to burn the nerves and large arteries, and avoid causing greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who performed cautery on the foot of the leg, and they let it swell completely, both the legs and the feet, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a stomach solution from which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this method. // The wise will say in the cautery of the hip, as follows: Make a rod of iron that is as thick as a nail of the thumb or slightly less, and let it be between-the-cheeks (i.e., transversely) or from one between-the-cheek to the other of a space equal in size to a nut of the index finger; and the between-the-cheeks should be 2 fingers apart, and they should be round, and it should have one iron handle well made; and this is the shape:
Let it be heated until it is completely red and scalded with hot irons, then place it on the sick person's hipboast (a term used to denote the iliac crest) and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a hot iron and let it rest for 4 days; then apply an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its sight, and few do so who employ it; however, this is one of the good cauteries which can endure it, and where it is used.
Of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or impact or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these resemble cauteries unless for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is required after this that the patient is emptied of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on the back where the pain is, three lines signed with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the power and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see, make four cauteries or four at the middle cautery according to this form:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; and you will find it in the lower spine of the back and in its appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this form.
The cautery should increase each part of the spine. And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing .2 or .3 lines, and the points should be close to each other. Afterwards, cure the area until it is healthy, as we have said; but take care not to apply the cautery in a gillyblister that is near a nerve.
of the pain in the joints
When the pain in the joints is due to moisture that spreads to every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which people call "podagra" properly, and when it is from cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this way: make the mould for the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you press on the thigh bone, make a fire cautery over its entire length as they claim "point". And if pains come up to the joints and this often happens, make a fire cautery on each thigh for four or three times on each part, using an olive oil cautery; and if more is needed, do it again, but don't hold your hand outside for longer than the flesh burns.
If pains reach the thighs and back, administer the cautery as described in our chapter. If pains are in the hands, make incisions around the wrist lines; if there is no pain left in the fingers, make incisions on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, take good care of the patient and think about medicines. For if you take good care of him and purge the fluid, he will be cured with God's help.
of the rupture of the hernia
When hernia comes in anger, and the bulge descends towards the groin and this is new, it should be noted that when you wish to cure it, it must not eat anything that day; and it should use things which ease the stomach, so that the feces descend from the stomach. After doing so, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to pull his arm as far as possible towards the affected side, and then take hold of the bulge with both hands, and press firmly over the hernia above the bone of the little finger, and at a certain sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the shape specified below:
Then straighten out the bulges to their place; and the minister holds his hand where they do not return; and work well on the patient's thighs, and put one cushion and one belt under him on the thighs, and another one across the affected area that holds his hands; then place the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bulge does not swell while you apply the cautery; and do not burn it; and in this way, may the patient not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. The cauteries for children should be subtle according to their size, and those for adults as large according to their size; after three days, cure the wound caused by the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; after that, treat it with other ointments until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his excretions be relaxed for a long time, so that the bulge does not swell when he gets up to go to the chamber.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, offer him a well-made bandage and keep it for forty more days; let him have good rest, that he should work little and take care of not overfilling with drinking and eating, and not letting out too much urine; and when he does this teaching, then he will be completely cured. And I shall say afterwards the cure of cutting in its chapter. of the wound from the belly
When wounds appear in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they are not growing more, make one cautery of cautery according to its size, and burn the third part of the fat; afterwards cure according to what we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at four angles according to this shape:
But first, make a mark at the joint and draw a line above the incision, and another below it, and place your hand on the entire fire-cautery. However, the first cauterizations are lighter and more mobile.
of old pain in any member When pain comes in any member, either from a fall or an injury, and that pain lasts long, and the medicine does not cure it, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, strength, and location of twists and pain. If the first cauterization is healthy, that's good; if not, repeat another cauterization on it, for it is customary that it changes in the nearby member, so you must make the cauteries as long as the patient remains unhealthy.
To mix or compound (medicines)
The cauteries are sometimes used to aid in mixing or compounding (medicines), and especially the patient who comes from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care that the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither dissolves nor remains, and you doubt that corruption will affect the entire patient, then perform five cauteries on the head: one on the forehead near the hairline, two on the temples, one behind the ears, and one on the nose, leaving your hand long enough for the cautery to reach the bone, and so that scorches come out, allowing vapors of the gross humors to escape; and cauterize on the mice as necessary.
And if the mixture is scattered everywhere, it clearly perishes, then you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery on the nape of the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the crotch and another opposite it, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the ankles, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware of the nerves that are near the last calcant, do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more you perform cauterization, the more help it provides and benefits the patient; and know that the sick do not feel pain from cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in manuals of ironwork. Afterward, clean the site with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it heals.
Know that by prolonged application of leeches, there is greater benefit; and know that the sick do not feel pain from the leeches as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary to apply the leeches according to the size of the affected area and the type of wound, as you will find in manuals on leeching. Afterward, clean the site with saltwater several times until it heals.
When a swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then you perform cauterization on the affected limb according to its size and smallness; and the cautery should be about the thickness of a finger. Then cure it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes one performs cauterization at the hand, foot, or back, at the nerve endings that immobilize the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; but no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the nerves moving the body.
Of swabs (or bandages)
When the disease called "albaras" occurs and the medical devices have no effect on it, then cauterize with a shallow cautery of a certain size according to the thickness of the skin, until the blister is removed and its color changes; then cure with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from colon and almonds, of each one part; and mix everything together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it heals.
They cure scrofula (scrofula is a term for a chronic skin disease, often associated with tuberculosis) through cautery.
When the abscess begins and you wish to stop it, cauterize with the cautery that appears like a circle around the abscess. And although the wise say to cauterize also in the middle of the abscess; and though this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once; and a more proper thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circular", as we have said about cauteries.
The inflammation which cannot move
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing due to the excess that it causes or due to the age of the patient when he is decrepit (meaning very old) and has little blood, or because of the time; and you wish to hasten its healing: then cauterize it with small cauteries all around, pricking; afterwards leave it in this state. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it pierced through entirely with the fire cautery, heat the cautery as follows:
Keep your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it moving through in this manner so that the course of the purgation is clear. Afterwards, cure it completely when it is perfectly healthy.
treatment with fire by iron
Another kind of disease it has, which is called "corrodens", and nothing else but an eating away of the limbs, for it eats the limbs just as fire dries out damp wood. If you see this disease in a place that can be cauterized with fire along with heat, then heat the cautery small and large according to where the disease is; after the cauterization of all parts until you eradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, cut out everything corrupted. And leave it for 3 days, and put soft ointment made from crushed cauterized pieces with oil on the burned areas until the burns due to fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure by ointments generates char, or if after 3 days, char is not healthy, then repeat the cauterization on the remaining corrupted parts. And this eating away is sometimes cured with medicine for ague instead of cauterization with fire; but nevertheless, cauterization of fire is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for ague in the division: take it as needed.
The hairs which come to the feet
Frequently, a disease called "clos" arises in the feet according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that scalds the foot. And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways. This includes cautery by fire, and cautery by hot water. Cautery by fire means heating one cautery comb as is a feather of a quill, made of good iron to the size that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and there should be narrow margins; place it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes out at the font of the nail; and leave it thus for four days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a poultice of evil herbs ground with oil, and leave the poultice on top of it all night, and the nails will shrink and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the wound with healing ointment until it is healed.
And if it is turned inside the body (by external injury), and this frequently happens in hands and feet, you should apply hot water cautery; and it is done in this manner: take a cane made of iron or quill, and place it on the nail and the blisters (boils); then put the cane on top so that it encompasses all around, then place a small amount of hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the margins of the cane reach the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way through to the root; and let the patient endure a little bit of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as it is, and it will be uprooted from all its roots. Do this repeatedly until you have treated all the injuries in the body, and then cure them with healing ointments that promote healing.
The cure for trembling
For some who tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever, or something else, it is necessary that you make four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one between each spine; and one at the shin, and one on the stomach with olive oil cautery; this will stop the trembling, and the healthiness will depart from the illness.
of putrid boils
Sometimes the body is affected by swellings that are putrid boils due to decaying large matter. In the first instance when they appear, it is necessary to make a cautery on each of the heads of the pustule: one with fine wire from myrtle wood, which should be inserted in the fire or with long root of aristolochia or cauterizing lenticular. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter from them is discharged, and they become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Often there are great discharges of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes out to the exterior, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; it is a very grave thing to let it drain out.
And in all cases, when it happens, quickly put your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is stopped from flowing out; then take smaller and larger olive oil cauteries and heat them all to red; then take .i., whether large or small depending on the wound and the location in which the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you have your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped from flowing.
And if a jump occurs when you place your finger on the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are near the fire.
And do not stop doing one after the other until the vein is completely sealed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and avoid any other harm coming to the patient; and know that when blood stops flowing from the artery, it cannot be properly restrained if it is not through one of the four methods that we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop blood; and tie and hold it accordingly.
Whoever applies tight bandages or places hot substances on it, or similar things, will not benefit if the above method does not help.
And if this happens to anyone and he has no remedy or medicine present, then you should place your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it is held in place above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but the cold moisture should be often applied that is very cold so that the blood remains congealed and thickened and held in place; and proceed with the investigation of the one in need of cauteries and medicines.
We have already told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicine, and we discussed their origins, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter on the head down to the feet, and I will continue in this chapter in the same way so that those things which are more easily found can be understood.
And as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come to be treated. Some come in such a state with their disease that they die quickly due to the insanity caused by their illness, and from the great cruelty of their condition; and one should fear this. And from these who give you counsel and say: "Wait, I am healed"; the patient is arrogant. You should not readily agree to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more importance on your honor than on your desire, and be careful rather than rash in what you are certain of, and from which you can take and learn; and use prediction and indication in healing your patients so that salvation is attained; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting praise.
Dearest son, may our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Moreover, I have organized this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have previously discussed from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those things that you may need.
The head full of water
This disease often comes to children during childbirth, and sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and for all those I have seen, death was swift; therefore, it seems to me that it is worthwhile to seek out remedies in various treatments.
And I saw an infant whose head was swollen with water, and it grew larger each day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture gathered under the bone above the siphatic, between the brain and the bone; and the procedure is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make an incision in the head a wide opening; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can flow out; and here is the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, as follows:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that I show, the incisions where the head parts are open, and when you press it from inside with your hand, it does not respond; then you should make four incisions in the head as follows:
And after the incision remove all the moisture entirely. Then close the wounds with bandages and powders, put vinegar and oil on it and let it be until the fifth day; then undress it, and treat the wound with lints and ointments, and allow the swelling to subside, and give the patient dry meat from a boar as much as needed while the member is comfortable and healed.
And another way of incision is to observe where the abscess is largest, and assemble the pus; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Therefore, cut where the abscess opens, and collect the pus, and make an incision accordingly as you can; but be careful not to cover the artery; and let blood flow out so that the patient may die in a proper manner from the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of rheum
When a disease called "catarrh" affects any of the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery with which two arteries will be touched.
Therefore, when you wish to cover the arteries, let the patient bend his head back; afterwards rub the area of a rough cloth on him until the arteries appear, then tighten the patient's neck with one rough cloth; then look where the veins are located, and they are found behind the ears, and there they will be found; then mark the veins with a sign, then touch one and the other with a sharp spatula of 2 inches until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done wide around the neck.
And if you see (it), push the spatula beneath the artery and strike it from above, cutting as deeply as two fingers' width.
When the vein is cut, it jumps out without ceasing continuously upward.
And if the artery does not open by itself, then you must measure the width of three fingers, then dig deeply until you reach the bone; and the amount of blood that needs to be released is 7 cubic centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery. Then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without being siphoned off, then do not open the abscess as you have prescribed, but hold the wound and bind it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
From migration
When the old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes and heat in the temples and ancient forsenee and similar things, and it is treated with medicines and cures, but none of them help, we should cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have said.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should bend down the hair on his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well due to its beating, and can be found easily except in some cold men; and if it is found, the patient should pull out the neck of the artery with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and wet the place with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula as follows:
Then gently scrape the skin to reveal the artery, then pull it up towards the pulse-takes (pinceures), and remove carefully the cords that are beneath each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it at the tip of the unguis (uncine). Then chop off that part according to the size of the two shoulders (chiés). For if it's not chopped, it will not move at all.
Then draw out the blood from the vein for six inches, and if the artery is large, you should tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound of the incision, and there is continuous flow of blood; then chop off the excess between the two cords at that hour itself, and if you see, then cauterize the cautery with the knife to the bone until the shoulders are chopped; this work is performed when the patient does not have fever and he has a hot constitution.
For the cauteries are helpful for ending moisters: because it is of greater aid to moisters. 1. In the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tweezers on top; and when you pull them apart, heal it with dry medicines that cause heat, and with tweezers, until it is healed; and if there is no incision in the artery as you work, hastily cover it with cautery, or use vitriol and hold your hand on it to stop the bleeding; and if you don't have that available, place your finger on the area until it stops bleeding, and freeze the area with cold water frequently, and hold it as needed; and the more tender and lighter in the extraction of the artery is, the more you should cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery, but the incision should be thick to keep its heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it retains less heat. And it should have one fingerbreadth of space between the two blades, and then when you have signed both leagues, and heat the iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be spaced apart because the cautery is not welded to the entire thing throughout; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Tears
When the tears from the eyes run down the veins that are above the head of the fire, and no medicine cure helps it, and you see the patient wrinkle his face and feel feverish like shivers; and if they are tender and moist so that the hair on the scalp falls out, and the eyebrows are scalded and burned by the tears, this requires this treatment.
And they called it the "contused cure" in ancient times, and you should make incisions on the patient's forehead where he has hair, then make four equal cuts along the length of the forehead; one cut should be as deep as two fingers moving downward from the forehead, and the other two cuts should be at .ii. costelz above the eyebrows, but take care not to cut the arteries that are at the .ii. costelz above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ii. mandibules, and each incision should be the size of 4 fingers joined together.
From the incision that is above the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts along the bone, then do the other side from the middle incision to the second one, and then pull out this spatula.
insert the instrument called "culter" (which is pointed on one side and soft, not pointed, and its shape is:) And place the cut edge towards the raw flesh at the discretion, and the cut should be soft towards the bone, and press it until it reaches the mid-incision. And cut all the veins that descend from the head to the eyes while the incision is continuous up to where the skin opens, and then make another incision in the mid-incision towards the other side; and then equalize the bleeding, and express the juices for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton cloth into each incision, and put damp linen soaked in wine and oil and ashes on top, and ensure that no pus enters it; on the third day, untie the ligature, and apply a large amount of strong vinegar, then the cure of ointment with basilicon and oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
the removal of the eyes
When a person comes with an acute catarrh, you usually see soft and small eyes, and the vision is dimmed, and burned paper particles; hairs fall out, and the head throbs in pain, and the patient coughs; then know by these signs that those substances and this catarrh do not come from anywhere else but from many veins, and the remedy for it, if there is one, is to cure the veins.
And instruct the patient to bend their head backwards, then make a large cut across the forehead and another wide one. Begin from the temple on the left side to the temple on the right side, and let the incision reach the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating; when the bone is exposed, drain all the blood onto a sponge, then press between the two lips of the cut and place old cotton, and bind it with linen; then cover it with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to cause an abscess to heat up; when removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat it with things that encourage char growth.
Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and make a plaster with it; administer it to these wounds to encourage char growth throughout.
of the stopping of ears (blockage or congestion)
Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, beasts, stones or similar things such as iron; seeds, such as peas, beans, and lentils; or flowing substances like water and oils and similar things.
If a stone or anything else falls into the ear and does not fit in the ear or grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, pour some purple oil or camphor oil on it, then bring extraction; and make him vomit from condisci, and stop his nostrils when vomiting comes, and place pieces of fabric or wool around the ear; and hold the ear above. Often times farting comes with this cure; and if it does not fart, bring extraction with fine tweezers as follows:
If it farts with tweezers, that's good; if not, bring extraction with a fine thin hook; and if it does not fart with this, make a cane of beeswax and push the head of the cane or the hole of the ear forcefully, and stop the area around the cane with molten wax so that air cannot enter with the cane; then pull it out carefully, as often times it will fart in this way; and if it does not fart in this manner, take glue from where you get it, put it on any instrument that is sharp for this purpose, put some cotton around it; then press the glue against the stone or whatever it may be and pull it out. And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to cut the ear before abscess pus comes and spasms; and the method of cutting is that you first anesthetize the patient with the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to the measure of its power, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or the meat hangs; and let the cut be like a moon, until you reach the bone, then break it as best as you can, and suck quickly with your mouth; and the cure lasts until it is healed. And if it is pus that is swelling, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one thin, subtle sponge according to this form:
and make an incision of that pus. But do not do it when you think the pus is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is even.
In the water that falls into the ear, instruct the patient to use warm condiments first and fill the ear with soft cotton. Let the patient lie on the affected ear. If it jumps out due to this, that's good. If not, take many small and light pebbles according to the size of your finger, heat them slightly in fire; then insert one or two of these heated pebbles into the ear, and place another stone on top of the one in the ear; do not stop heating the other pebble with fire until the water completely jumps out, making it jump out entirely; and if you see, take a feather, and press one of the stones in the ear, while holding the other head with fire until the larger stone is burned; then repeat this process with other pebbles until the water completely comes out, as we have said before.
In the extraction of animals, if it is small like fleas and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large that can be felt, introduce tweezers for extraction; and it is easier to remove whatever is in the ear.
In the removal of parasitic worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and use distillation methods, and the cure does not help; if you observe no worms, take a piece of this form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. Push the most subtle head into the ear according to the degree of pain of the patient, then squeeze firmly all the way along the cane; do this often until all the worms come out. If they do not obey to come out, stop up around the cane with cotton as I have said before; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations there; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear to this extent, it is the form as you see:
Let it be made with silver or tin narrowly to a small opening, and above wide for distillation; and for pressing the distillate into one instrument of tin well made for this purpose, take one scraper and wrap around its point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you choose from your medicines into the cane, and let it be in the ear; then push the scraper into the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or turned over in the ear; and the patient should smell the scent inside, and the distillate should be heated with a small flame as if you were distilling it in the ear; but make sure it's not too cold, for the medicine will not be effective.
ear stoppage (stopping/blockage of the ears)
No child is born without any ear defects; and this same thing happens in men due to an injury of the ear, or pus born within the ear, and this injury sometimes goes all the way into the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes it only affects one side of the ear, and one can clearly see it.
Therefore, if it goes all the way into the ear and cannot be seen, it is grave treatment in many conditions, and in that case you must put the diseased ear in the sun and look inside: if you see the pus appearing, then open it with this spatula as shown here:
And be careful to make it sharp both in front and behind so that it does not pierce the ear; if the pus is from pus or flesh of the ear, then hold the tweezers subtly and gently remove it until all the pus is removed.
And if the swelling is deep in the ear, take a subtle sharp instrument and heat it slightly over fire, then place it into the ear canal. If you feel the swelling, as the patient feels pain in hearing, make a small incision gently, ensuring not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a linen patch according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Keep the dressing moist with rose water and powdered vitriol for each day until the wound is healed. If you see the ear swell up, it is necessary to remove the dressing and replace it with another moistened dressing made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling goes down; then treat it until it becomes healthy.
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are either cauterization or distillation treatments.
Of the flesh of paper (meaning "skin")
This is a remedy for hair that comes from the skin when it is moist and dry; you should stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and strike at their roots with a spatula; then apply powdered vitriol to the spot.
And if it cannot be plucked out (the hair), then cauterize with the subtle cautery of lentil seeds, and cauterizing after incision is useful; and many times they heal, because nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots burn away and do not return.
Of the hail (meaning "hardened lumps under the skin")
Often in paper come out some things that resemble hail in shape and hardness, and for this reason is the disease called "grandine", and it is a thick mass of moisture on top and underneath the paper; the treatments are as follows: take care to ensure the grandine becomes silent from both sides, which is an easy thing to know; then make a large opening, gently peel each side, then grasp with pliers and crush. If you cannot crush it without piercing the paper, do not worry the patient; if the tear is large, assemble it with stitches, and care for it until it heals; if it is small, do not apply force, because oil restores it soon and causes harm.
If the grandine descends inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, grasp the grandine with pliers and crush it and press from both sides; if the paper is pushed back by the incision, do not worry; when the grandine is crushed, apply saltwater oil and care for the area that causes harm until the patient heals.
of the fat of the hairs
Exinach is a grease that is impregnated in cloths made of paper above, and this happens more often in infants than in adults, and it greatly irritates their eyes, and they wake up with catarrh at mornings, and cannot endure the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore, they lie on their faces immediately, sleep on top, and their paper cloths are moist under their eyelids that the exinach spreads in the oil. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of work is that the patient places their head on a clean surface; then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, then place it over; press with your hands on either side so that the exinach is enclosed within the circle; then make a slit in the center of the moistener with a sharp lancet, but not larger than the wound made for venesection; and cut the skin completely until you see the exinach; and from various positions comes exinach from the incision, according to the form of a white piece of fat.
Then take a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand to the left and right until it is spread; and ensure that you do not stray in the incision, that you come entirely to the oil, that you do not pierce it.
And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, lift a little on the cut lightly until it opens; then pull out as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and vinegar, and place it on the wound, and hold bandages.
And to those who grind oil and place it over to corrupt the moisture that has remained. Then heal it until it is healed. If an abscess arises hot at the site, treat with plasters soothing it until it is healed.
hair from paper
When paper-like growths grow on the eyelids other than nature, and are nourished, they harm the eyes, and cause diseases such as customary tears and swelling of the paper-like growths, until it leads to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways of cure: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine for ague according to what is mentioned in the previous chapter on cautery, or by incision and stitching, or by caustics, as I shall explain.
You must put the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper-like growth on the eye towards your left hand; if it is reversed, that is good; if not, poke an awl with one thread over it; and cut off the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull one thread along the entire length of the paper, then shave it; then make a hole in the part below the paper, under the hair-like growths, all the way from the great tear to the small one; then pull out one thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen under the paper, then sew a figure similar to the comb of the blackberry bush, and regardless of its shape, it must be according to the quantity that you see needs to lift the paper which is designated for all.
And if there is a need to remove a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper has become softened; then you make an incision on all the lines that you have marked, starting from the great tear to the small one; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs, then insert the hook in one of the two angles of the cut, then scrape it all out; then bring the two lips together with a stitch made with an awl and a thread of fine linen, and squeeze out the blood, and make it adhere to any sticky substances, if you wish to do so; but if not, leave the stitches and wait for 2 or 3 days before curing the wound without stitches using drying and constricting agents, as the paper will reattach itself at the edge of the wound and by its assembly, but the stitches will rot (as the ancients say), and this is laborious work without fear.
And in another way, you shall fold the paper into a shape like the fennel of myrtle, as we have said, three times according to the form shown below:
Then fold what is above the small areas equally according to the shape shown below:
And if you cannot hold the pliers and the parts are not equal, take a needle with one thread and place it in the figure; put another thread from the large armhole, and the second thread from the small, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have said; then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments.
And sometimes the hair of the paper turns: it is necessary that you use what has been said about incision; but stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is as follows: and it is that you fold the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, and then make two stitches by hand, and two thin threads equally long as the paper and the thickness of the spatula; take hold of the two corners with these threads; next, bring the two stitched parts together subtly over the top of the folded paper covered by oil, and bind the two stitches from the two sides together; leave it for some days, and the skin that is being bound will die, rot, and fall off, leaving the wound open.
If it takes too long and you must forcefully apply the remedy, cure it until it is healed; when the wound is healed and the paper can be removed, and no more hair will grow; this is the form of the two stitches that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
The operations are such that you take a fine needle, and insert one silk thread of the same fineness; then bring the heads together delicately, and let the length of the threads be about a palm's length; then assemble another fine silk thread briefly, tie the ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your lap; and expose the operations to the sun so that they are visible, for it is a delicate and small operation, then pierce the needle through the entire chase in the root of the hair adjacent, and make it pass quickly through the skin until you pull it over the natural hair; then remove the hair up to the chase, and insert the removed hair into the chase if there is one or two or three or more; then stretch your hand so that the hairs come out from under the chase with the natural hair.
If the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the chase away to where the thread you ordered has been placed, so that the chase comes out through the hole and can be seen by oil vision; then you will pull the chase and the thread, close the wound and the opening, and leave it for 2 or 3 days, until the hair adheres in its place and new flesh grows; if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from natural growth, and let it grow with that one until it is elongated and then clean it.
Of the corruption of the oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or corruption comes in oil, there are two kinds: natural and unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut or burn, and similar things.
And the way of working with it is to split that suture, separate its lips, put dampened flax within, and leave it until it heals; and you must not use anything in its treatment that dries or constricts. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first; but it works with things softening, such as fenugreek; and the decoction of water or ale and flax seeds should be cooked, and immediately cooled down into any oil, and wrap it in a cloth, and cure it with these.
And the treasures of your cure are that you keep it from healing in the same way as it was before; and this work we have said is not without remedy for this disease, so that it does not return in the same way as it was before.
of the chyle which comes in the oil
This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things; and the procedure for this work is that you take a needle, in which there should be one double thread, and poke it into the chyle, starting from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads reach two heads of the chyle; then raise the chyle above the needle, and cover it with a .1-inch wide spatula.
And if the bone of the shoulder returns to its correct position, that is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the gap, turn the bone, make two gaps where the bone is inside the shoulder; let the heads of the two bones from the two gaps be at the four angles of the incision you made, so that when they are assembled, the figure should be like the letter with the name "Y Greek"; then remove that cartilage, according to the amount it protrudes outside the bone, as a result of which the shoulder is; then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen; then treat with the medicines for softening and for drawing pus, until it heals.
If the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary to make a flat incision beneath the hairs of the shoulder, as described above; then separate between the two edges of a linen cloth, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the shape of the illness, because it is very different in shape, and wise masters prepare engines of all possible power to make the figure return to its natural form. The patient themselves, according to what is necessary for the operation and the application of instruments in various positions.
the sudden dislocation of the shoulder
When this suture happens in the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is sealed with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor blade beneath the paper, lift it up; hold it with tweezers, until you grasp what is near the spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too deep so as not to cause pain to the patient because the spatula is too sharp and pierces the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and the whole assembly heals, and sometimes there is infection in the sharp oil and leaching of sweet water and colic; then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil and place moist wool on top abundantly of egg; and after the third day use the colic and other healing things until it heals.
of the nail of the oil
Know that the nail is of two kinds: one is nerve-like and resembles a hard horn, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white frozen moisture; when it is touched by iron and boiled in tweezers, it cannot be moved; and both appear starting from the large root and grow little by little until it covers the entire eye and all light and movement of the oil.
And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you pull out the hairs; then take some paper in your hand, then pinch the nail with small tweezers, and extend it; then take a needle, and put on it a horse hair or cow hair or ox hair, and one strong thread; bend the tip of the needle slightly and poke it into the nail, pierce through it entirely, tie the nail with the thread, and extend it above; then scrape off all the skin surrounding the nail root, down to the flesh around it, including the gristle and sinew up to the head of the nail, then chop the remaining part in the root of the nail up to the quick, and scrape off all the subtle tissue and small forces, leaving only the natural flesh or root; and sometimes the nail should be extended only onto the onyx alone, and the thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue surrounding it, as described in this form.
And be careful that the tissue does not touch the flesh and break it, and that the gristle is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a little amount of broken seed oil, and make a collyrium from litargirium, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with whatever is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerve-ridden and you cannot push the needle in, and the onions cannot enter, it is often cured with medicines for this kind of nail; and they grow as I mentioned in the division, and if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take a sharp spatula according to this form:
And the nail above shall be finely reamed, and if you see that it does not shrink at all and the reason persists, distill oil of collyrium made from litargyrium and red collyrium and crushed sulphur from your mouth into it; anoint the oil until the next day; then repeat the procedure according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing prevents you in the oil, as in the treatment of an abscess, first milk it, and heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the procedure as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the sore harms the oil greatly, suspend it at the onion and chop a part of it and not all, so that tears do not come from it; then distill into the oil collyrium red which is made of litargyrium.
Of the flesh which grows upon the eyelid
In some men, there sometimes grows red flesh upon the eyelid, covering it and pressing upon the lower and upper eyelids, resembling a rosebud of balustrade. And this happens when the patient puts their head in water, then they open the eyes, and all that red flesh should be cut off with scissors to the end, and you must take care not to wound the oil gland at the surgery; it is an incision like the spatula which we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and small forceps with which one extracts the seed, as the shape after this chapter shows.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of seals crushed or distilled red collyrium resembling corrosive medicines, and place a piece of cotton with egg white on top to ensure that it stays warm; if anything remains, and the wound is not closed, and you doubt whether it is healed, leave the oil and heal the wound with things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your surgery until it is healthy, and do this every time red flesh grows in the eye by this method.
But nevertheless, you must treat each small wound with natural means; and for an accidental wound, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
the veins of the eyes
These are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they perform their work and weaken the eye all day long. Therefore, it is necessary to first examine whether the eye, in which the red vein is, is healthy, and has no other disease except for the red vein; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then press those veins all along according to your wisdom, and let the fingers be subtle and double according to this form:
And let them be two points in one body according to this form:
Then make these veins subtle and gentle, and squeeze the blood out one after another, until you see them moving away from the oil; and be careful not to pierce the oil with the tips of the spatula-like instruments, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so as not to burn those veins; and when you have done that, if it distills green and red oil into a colander for correcting what is congealed within the blood.
And if you cannot collect everything in that time, make a plaster on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and the abscess is certain to heal warmly, then continue as before until it is healthy again; and this is the form of the pressure:
From the fistula of the oil
The ulcer called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I said earlier, and it is not healed, there is a trap in it that you cut open above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, you will see the corruption and the blackness; if the joint is all the instrument as in this form; it is called "rough head", and it should be made straight by heating a rod of iron as shown here.
Place the exposed bone in your hand, then turn it between your palms and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption is restored; do this once, then restore the position of healing herbs.
If the joint is swollen and pus forms, and the body of the bone is swollen, and remains in this state for forty days without changing or becoming abscessed, and any harmful accident does not occur (knowing it is healthy); if this is not so, there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to the wound as shown here: You should open the bone a second time with iron, with hot medicines, and when it is exposed, take a rod as shown here, which has four angles and the rod should be thin up to the head as you see here.
Then place it on the bone of the dislocated joint, and move your hand away from the oil (poc), then turn the whole tool (foret) all the way until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand on their neck; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the flesh swells and hardens, the matter goes to the neck; it is easier for the patient.
of the dislocation
If the eyes are fully open and cannot be reduced or diminished in any way, you must tie the patient down; then clean the area with warm water, apply a plaster made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then secure it using bandages and cloths. The cloths should be soft enough that they can be folded four times and stacked one on top of the other according to the size needed; then secure them with a stiff bandage and renew the plasters without cutting to allow the area to heal. When the plaster has dissolved, remove it and if the eye is healing, it is good; if not, repeat the application of the plaster, cloths, and bandages until the eye heals.
The double rupture of the ruptured membrane.
When disruptions occur in the ruptured membrane, and fumigations come out like grains of resin, and it is frightening to see; then if you find it covered, the treatment is such that you thrust an awl into the root of the affected area from beneath up to where it is above, then another awl with a double thread from the edge of the tear; and make it pierce through, and leave the first awl according to its position; then tie the end of the double thread around the eye of the membrane and tighten it well, then withdraw the awl and apply soft oiled linen on top; and let it stay until the threads grow with the membrane, then heal the oil from healing substances as long as the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held in place by the membrane from both sides of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, pierce it with a fine spatula coming from oil, remove the white albugine and drain the eyes, then insert a probe immediately; then withdraw it until it is healed.
From the bowl of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is not other than the swelling that forms in the eye, appearing like an eye-shaped ulcer but it is not an ulcer; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a flat and straight seat. Then take the head between your hands with two fingers, and move it until you see the swelling rise to your eyes; then pierce it, and let the light pass and let the patient see things as he usually does; and if it does not drain below, know that it is an ulcer, and if the drainage of the swelling is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, take the spatuline (a medical instrument) made of thin material and place it on the corneal membrane and the cornea, along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the cornea, until the swelling issues; and when it is issued, distill in the hot, sticky eye oil or a mixture of honey and water or fenugreek boiled with honey into it, then heal it with another cure until it is healed.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
We have similarities with the eyes in division, and that which is necessary for piercing; do according to health. You should make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light due to the sun, and hold the oil clean and squeeze very hard; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eye is on the left, or on your right hand if it is on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or take with your left hand if it is on the right; then place the instrument's point beneath the crown through the thickness of a nail in that area of the oil at the lower part of the smaller eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and hold your hand still until it pierces through the oil, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space; and the measurement of the way almagda should be at the full length of the measurement of the distance from the pupil to the end of the nose; and this is the crown of the oil; you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument up to the location or the eye, and press it down along another path. If the eye bursts now, the patient will see in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
After a short rest and if the eye rises along the second path, press with the instrument, and when it is completely inserted and it does not rise anymore, turn almagda gently by moving your hand slightly; then put a little bit of gem-oil back in the eye, and squeeze the oil out from inside. Then place oiled cloth or dampened wool soaked in rose oil and abundant egg, and bind with the clean oil. We and those of our time put crushed comfrey with abundant egg on it.
And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard hairs, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Then pierce only the conjunction, and do not go too deep, but make one thin layer, then insert almagda as we have said; and in the completion of the work prepare a bed for the patient, who should sleep on his back in two layers; he must be free from all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his position until three days; then untie him in the same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then re-tie him for seven more days; and it is not advisable that you do this during the healing or immediately after the incision, but it should be done when the wound heals quickly.
When an abscess opens, you should untie the oil before the seventh day, and direct those who soothe the abscess; and when it is soothed, you should then untie the sight and place a bandage of one linen cloth over it for any duration, and remain in that dark room. And then gradually leave the room, piece by piece, and convert to his case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country, they make almagda piercings, which causes bleeding, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of almagda forms, because those who do not know them see them; and they should be of arain properly:
And the heads of these should be of the same subtlety, and the rear in four angles sharp.
On the skin near the nose
Sometimes there are various types of skin growths near the nose that resemble scorpions with many legs; and if there are such growths or a growth enlarged with a dark color, and a growth soft with light color. In this case, for those soft growths not enlarged, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and pour onion juice onto these growths and pull them out; then hold that which you can grasp with the sharp, thin spatula until you know that the entire growth has been removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be held, you should cut it with very thin and light instruments until nothing is left; and if there are abscesses or wounds, use the remedy as appropriate; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them so that the pus is drained and all the growths are removed, then pour onion juice or vinegar onto the wound.
If the bladder does not work and moisture enters up to the palace (which means it is healthy); and if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is pus in the bone above, so the instrument will not come; then you must insert a large linen thread into the bladder as far as possible, pull it out while smelling it until it comes through the bladder from inside the mouth; and children in school often do this, and it is easy for anyone who wants to do it; then hold one end of the thread with one hand, and the other end coming from the mouth with the other hand, and know each other while we are holding the thread; do this until you know that the thread has rotten the pus; then pull out the thread, squeeze the blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the bladder as before; do this for four days or more, until the ointment has corroded everything that remains of the pus; and then put a plank cane in the bladder for some days until it is healed, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the bladder, as one distills oils and medicines from the bladder.
And it should be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it thus; and if you see (a tumor), make a closed cane, and let the instrument be filled with oil or any liquid to purify the bladder; and have one handle on the bladder to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
On the flesh near the nose
In the head of the nose often arises a disease called 'telul', which grows and becomes large, appearing noticeable to the eye; therefore it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and burn it completely with cautery or hot medicine; and if it is delayed in being cut until it has become large, beware if it is hard, of a dark color, poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as this is an abscess inflamed, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft touching, not dark colored, you can cover it completely, but be careful that the patient does not feel fear, and treat the area with drying and constricting agents.
when the nose is cut and closed
Know that when solutions of continuation come in one of these cartilagines (joints), it benefits little, except for some men. Therefore, when this happens to anyone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together with a stitch, heal it until it is healthy; and if the lips are already separated from one side and the other, you must cauterize all the parts around them until they bleed, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder on it, and incense pulverized; and place some plaster of strong or another plaster binding on top of the powders, and leave it until it dries, then heal it with ointment until it is healthy.
The manner of stitching is that you bring together the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in the abdominal stitching; or with thread, as we said before.
of the lips of an abscess
For men, within the lips there occurs an abscess hard, resembling grains of peas, smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, cut above each tooth, take it with pincers and crush in every part; afterwards apply the leech (leive) juice after the incision of vitriol powder, until the blood is stopped; then apply the lard (aisil) to the wound until it heals.
From the jawbone
Often, a swelling arises on the jawbone, which the ancients called "albulus"; you should hold it with tongs and crush its root, letting the blood flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying powders to the area; if the swelling returns after the incision, as often happens, then you should crush it again and cauterize; it will not return after being cauterized; these are the forms of tools for covering.
The sores
Sometimes sores are assembled at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the teeth turn black and greenish and decay, as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell; you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and scrape the sores or the scabs that appear, until there is nothing left; and do the same with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowish and other spots, as long as they are cleaned; and if you remove what is at the first sign, it is good; if not, repeat on the second day and the third, as long as you have finished everything; and know that the teeth require various types of instruments for scraping, according to what the work shows, because the one who scatters the teeth has different shapes than the one who scrapes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
It is necessary that when you treat the tooth of its pain, you delay pulling it out as long as possible, for this should not be done; for this is a very high substance up to where there is no excuse for shaving. Then when the patient is forced to pull a tooth, you must be certain of the correct tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, thinking it is a good tooth and pulls out the bad one; yet the pain does not subside until the bad one is removed, as we have seen with many lords; and when you are sure about pulling the tooth, first scrape around the tooth thoroughly using a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your fingers or subtle pliers at the very tip of the root and gradually, until it is well loosened, firmly hold the pliers; and keep the patient's head in your lap so that it does not move.
After removing the tooth carefully to avoid breaking it, if it does not come out easily, take one of these tools and gently push it from each side, as you have done before. And if the tooth is perforated or split, fill it with gauze where the holes are; and pull it out delicately with pliers so that it does not break during extraction; and be very careful working around the gum to extract the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, which will cause the patient greater pain due to the root remaining, as well as returning to the patient by the malice of the root more painful than the first. Be careful that you do not act like ignorant lords, who sometimes break the chariot and fail to bring what we have mentioned; but often they bring about this great illness through the roots that remain or the chariot that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is removed, wash the area with wine or oil and vinegar; and if bleeding persists, which often occurs, use vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with which one silences the teeth first, should be long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be large enough so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of good iron, and be toothed for gripping.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains when pulling a tooth, then you should put cotton dipped in butter on it for 1 hour or 2, until the gum is softened, and then insert the tongs called "algefri", which look like tweezers; and they should be made inside just like a chisel and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tools, then you must expose the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as forceps, in this shape:
Be large and thick so it does not break, and if the root jumps out with them, that is good; if not, help with all the instruments, as the shapes come hereafter:
And if you aid with this instrument having two arms, in this shape:
And other instruments which are before the teeth, and of this tool that appears like large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
And this tool should not be breakable, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the wise master finds his own instrument by himself, according to what his work and the disease show, because there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to diversity in ailments; and if it breaks a cart or another bone where it should not, then it searches for the tools that are required, which I have told you, and assists with gestures, as follows: And be large and firm to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can hold and remove; then restore the place of medicines suitable for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then apply all this tool:
When the teeth appear not according to natural shape and are misshapen, even in virginal women, you must know if the tooth is not born after the dent, and is not properly aligned, and cannot be treated or filed: then cut it off; and if it is erupting with the tooth, take this instrument which has the form of a small beak, sharp at the tip, made of iron;
And the handle of the chisel should be held often for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, file it with a small flat file as shown here:
and it is like the file used to make needles; and with the flat file grind the tooth little by little, so that it does not move too much while grinding; then flatten the end at any rasp, and if the tooth is very sharp and bites the tongue, you must grind away the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose
If the teeth are loose due to percussion or falling out and the patient cannot chew food without them chattering, and you have tried medicines to hold them in place but they do not work; then you must restrain them with a golden thread, because silver threads become greenish and rot, but gold threads never do; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to tighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then put the tweezers between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more; as long as you see fit up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering until the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and skillfully, so that they do not move at all; and let your knot be near the root of the tooth so that it does not escape. Then grip the loose teeth with tweezers and assemble them, and place them back in their original position, ensuring that they do not prick the tongue; then leave them thus tightened for as long as possible, and if they loosen or the thread breaks, tie another thread; if it remains and serves for a time, then it is the form of teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy and two loose teeth, according to what you see:
And when a tooth falls out and is replaced back in its place, freshly and as we have said; let no one interfere who is not skilled and patient, and sometimes the shape of an animal bone is made and placed where it is missing, and it is tied as we have said, and remains for a long time.
Cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue, naturally or by accident due to injury; the treatments for this are as follows: open the patient's mouth, keep their head steady, lift the tongue; then cover the nerve-containing ligament with a wide bandage, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, if there is tightness or not; and if it's due to sudden injury, insert an uncine and widen the ligament; but make sure the cut is not too deep, as there is an artery beneath; after you have done this, apply a rose or cold compress to the area; then place a linen tent over the tongue; keep the patient warm every night, so that it doesn't heal; if bleeding occurs, apply vitriol powder; if the wound doesn't heal, cauterize it slowly with a cautery called lentiginout, which is good for this. Then cure it with other treatments until it heals.
and if you see it of a faint color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it's declining to blenchor and there is moisture, then insert an uncine and make a small incision with a thin spatula from both sides; and if the wound doesn't heal at your treatment, apply vitriol powder until it stops bleeding, then return to your treatment until you remove all the pus; then apply a cold compress and let it heal with other treatments until it is healed.
abscesses of the throat
There come boils within the throat which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds. When you cure them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the reason of blood flow; but let it ripen, and then you will cut it open, or it will burst by itself; and if it is of a pale color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover. But first check if the abscess has cooled down and been calmed. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in your hands, and open his mouth and take hold of the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue under the entire instrument, in this way it is formed; and whether it is made of silver or subtle brass like a knife:
Keep pressing the tongue on the entire instrument and you see the abscess. Then take the hook and stick it into the almond, and pull it up more than you can; and draw any cloth away with it, then cover it with the instrument, forming something that resembles a fist. However, the chief are curved and one end to the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or brass:
And if you do not have this tool present, use pliers of this shape:
Then when you have caught one of the almonds, take the other according to the same manner, and after incising, gargarize the patient with hot sharp and thin instruments, and if there is evacuation of blood, then gargarize the patient again with hot sharp and thin instruments, or scorches of pomegranates cooked or myrtle branches, and similar things, until the wound is cauterized; then let it heal completely; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat instead of the two almonds, if these appear, cut them in the same way as the two almonds.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, namely one of small size; and I had pressed closed all the throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the obstructed conduit, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within one or two days. The abscess was so high up that it had been pushed into the throat through both openings of the neck. I quickly pierced it, then pulled out a large portion of pus; afterwards I closed the other opening of the neck, opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue; after piercing the abscess again, I cut off a part of it, and no more pus came out except a little blood; and thus the conduit of the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink water first, then wine, and did not stop cutting down on the abscess for long time; the abscess grew again and filled the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I deceived it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it did not grow anymore; and I left those parts, and let God do with them as He willed after me.
Of the eye
When the tear-duct (uvula) is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; if it is large and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are subsiding, and it is subtle, you must cut it; if it is round and swollen but not long, it should be assembled; if it is red, bloody or black, you must make an incision in it. There is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it as I have said, according to its thickness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, press their tongue on the instrument we mentioned earlier; then make an incision in the uvula, pull it out, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for making the incision of the two almonds. It is not necessary to cut beyond the natural limit, because if you do, it causes pain and discomfort afterwards. After the incision, use what was said earlier about making the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it heals. If the patient is afraid of being cut, use an instrument for cauterization to overcome their fear. The method of cauterization is very painful. It is that the patient puts their head in your safe hands, and then you press their tongue on the instrument we mentioned earlier or in the chapter of cautery, and hold it with hot live coal, but not too thick or too bright; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this shape:
And if the patient has hair or some substance that you can put medicine on, such as the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument entirely over the medicine on the uvula; and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine but do not reach the throat or the pharynx; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it against the uvula, for about half an hour until you see it redden and the bites of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton on top of the uvula, allowing the cotton to stick to the uvula; and repeat this process until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you need to start the cautery again using the medicine, do so, and after the cautery rinse around the uvula with cotton dipped in burr, clean what is around the medicine; wash with cold water and treat with gargarisms until it heals.
This cure is more effective than incision, not just cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this way, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and wormwood, and put them all together or some of them in one pot, add ashes, and make it boil; the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and have one vessel with a cover inside the pot according to this method: And it should be made of silver or lead, and one of the eyes should be held shut by the patient until the steam rises into the eye through the channel, until the eye is putrefied; afterwards, it often needs to be repeated, until the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the abscess heat, because many things happen then; and do not do this for anything other than the decline of abscess heat. And if this is not present, take a channel and put an eggshell cracker inside the patient's head, so that their mouth does not get too hot; because the eggshell cracker does not let the steam burden the mouth, and it is good cure together with safety.
Often it sticks in the throat, bone or fish spine, or something else; therefore you should pull out what can be seen, and press the tongue against the sun until you see movement of the object; and if it does not open and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will expel the object. Or, the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or a small piece of dry bread; tie one thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; when it reaches the place, it will stick, and then you can pull it out. And if it does not come out as we have said, take a piece of wood according to this shape:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that nothing harms it or pushes the bone inward; it is better if the patient puts the instrument, because he can move it or the thing is easier to move; if he pushes it down, or pulls it out completely, keep the instrument equal until it is out.
the vein of the throat
Sometimes, the vein in the throat is treated with medicine as I have said in the division, but if this does not help, then look at the throat of the sick person in the sunlight, and when you press his tongue against the instrument that I told you about. If you see the vein, cut it with a small scissors or fine tweezers suitable for this purpose. And if this is not effective, take a curved needle, insert it into the throat of the sick person, then bend the tip of the needle one hot iron, and repeat this frequently. Dip the sick person in cold water all day, then take a full ounce of cold water in a glass, open the mouth, pour it in and make him drink, and move his hand frequently; and as soon as the vein feels the cold water, he will vomit.
And if it does not fall as we have said, you should fumigate the patient with asafetida, at the instrument I mentioned in the treatment of the eye; do this many times, for it will not cease easily. The method of fumigation is that you take a pot or one containing charcoal, and cover it with a perforated cloth, and the head of the instrument should be placed within it; then pour your fumigation, and the patient places the head of the cane in their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but comes up to the nose; and the smoke will now cause sneezing, and if it does not fall, continue the fumigation many times; let the patient suffer thirst, eat salty and alkaline foods, and drink no water; then it will be necessary for it to come out by this means.
The form of the instrument to treat the nose, is like scissors curved for entering the throat; and resembling the beak of a syringe, and it should have sharpness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see below its shape:
Chapter on abscesses
Many things resembling abscesses are mentioned here, according to what comes later in this book from one and the other; they differ in perforation and incision, and it is in .ij. ways that one is similar to the other, and of these, which holds moisture. And the second way is about the places where they are on the body. Because abscesses of the head are different from those of the base, and abscesses of the charnut place (possibly a type of joint) are different from those that come in jointures, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if abscesses should not be perforated while the bowel is still immature according to its completion; and if there are such as it is necessary to perforate when they have become hard, but do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that come out of joints. Because when abscesses come out of joints, and they are left until they ripen around, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, causing contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is from the main part of the body, and perforation is delayed until it has matured, it will harm the main part; or if it is from the base, perforation should be done before it matures; and it is not advisable to perforate a hard abscess without digestion completion, except that one which is from the base, which can penetrate completely, and be lengthened inside, and a fistula forms; and it cannot heal in a long term.
And you should know the time for perforation of the abscess that is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the subsiding of fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and the opening and narrowing of the abscess's head, and other signs; and you should make the perforation where it depends more on the abscess, and where it has opened up; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus.
1. When the limb is broken, this should be aligned accordingly. And when an abscess is in a hard place, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion as we have said. For if you pierce before that, the body will fill with much pus and the wounds may become hardened and deeply infected. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the size of the body, depending on what the limb requires.
If the abscess has no head, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain part of it; stop up the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing wrong; do this several times gradually, until the pus comes out completely. This should be done very carefully, especially with weak patients, women, children or old men who are debilitated. The pus may sometimes jump out with the discharge of the pus, which could kill the patient, and you would not be to blame. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large hole, bring linen or old cotton threads; and if it is a large abscess with many holes, it is necessary that you bring a thread in each hole so that they come against each other; and if you have pierced the skin of the abscess and shaved it around, it is necessary to fill it with old cotton or wool from flax without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then unbind, and cure it with ointment until it is healthy.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and linen cloth, moisten one linen cloth, and place it on the wound several times. If the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and the powders I mentioned in this book to the affected area, and if it is winter, or the wound or abscess is very nervous, you must put hot tents and moistened linen on it; and if it is summer, and the wound is fleshy, you must put moistened linen on hot oil, or cold water and oil, for up to three days as I have said; then open the abscess and drain it, and care for it until it heals.
This must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to approach treatments for abscesses, and now here is the chapter.
on les doibt traiter par cautere de feu, et si c'est li soros qui est gros ou si c'est en estete, il faut les fistraire ou les aignorer avant; et s'il sont durs et ne puissent pas fistreier, alors les coupez en peus et empoignez le tueu par dessous la poix, et mettez feu au cautere, et on les brande comme il se peut, et ains qu'il soit bien chauffez, pesez le cautere et mettez l'en une vase d'eau, et le tirez hors du tueu qui est oste; et lors que li soros seront toutes ensemeies, si les clavetiez ains qu'il se refroidissent, si com il covient.
1. For small abscesses that come on the head, there are methods known to us, similar to those in poultices, as with a plum-stone; there are some fat ones and others with moisture, like boils; and some hard and stony ones, without any doubt that the arteries do not work against it. And the operations of the neck should be tried on every instrument called "entromissoire", from which the following shape is derived, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, it must be done above the long way. And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when nothing is left; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; otherwise, in water and oil, and apply to the wound, leave until the next day; and those who remain will heal by themselves. And on the second day, repeat the cotton, as before, on the third day, until you know that it does not stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains one nut-sized fat, press according to this form, along the long way; and pour your eyes (or drop) on it, and scrape from all sides, and apply all your care to draw out pus where it lies; and if the arteries work against it, do as I have said before. And similarly with a stony abscess, and treat and cure as I have said.
And the incision above a hard abscess and a moist one is lighter because they contain little blood. And if some of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and from those I pressed an abscess on an old woman's head; I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had cut into it, it would have made as much wound as a stone. In other abscesses coming from heads, whether they be those that come on children's heads and the roots of the ears, they should be opened all days as long as possible to let pus out; and they should be treated as appropriate.
of scrofulas
Often this abscess occurs at the neck, under the armpits, and in hollows, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are swollen and infected one with another. Each scrofula is properly located within its own side, as we have said of the lump on the neck; and these scrofulas have many appearances. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some malignant ones that do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see a good disposition in touch, and it resembles the color of the body, and is silent from all sides and not affected by the vein of the neck or the artery or conduit, and is not deep; then you should cut it open from above, and remove the skin from each side, and put two lips of the curette on the incision, if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the neck; and pull gently and gently, and be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatula too aggressively or too deeply, so that your hand does not slip, and look not too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
If you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to finish, put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and hold the wound closed; let it stay until the abscess is calmed down, and let the wound soften and start to break up. And when the pus is drained, return to your work, as long as you complete it; then check whether there remain small scrofulas at the root of the main scrofula, if so, cut them and cleanse them. And if at the root of the scrofula there is a large vein, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang out, without harm; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and heal the wound.
And if you cut the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, as there is no need for excess due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, draw pus, and sew it as we have said. Scrofulas with excess growth, pierce where it has matured; and pierce it in the same way as the one mentioned earlier, depending on it, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply an ointment of rejuvenating char, until it heals.
If you make a bloodletting from the artery, then you must bind the veins that are near so that the bleeding does not continue, and close the wound with clean cloths.
The ancients spoke of the size of the throat, but I have never seen anyone in our land who performed it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have quinsy, it is required that the throat slit called "epiglottis" should be opened; and no help should be given by these [affected areas], because all veins and the entrance of the sickness are in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in two tonsils. When the sickness is in the channel of the tonsil, it is required to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it under four circles or one small slit through the middle, between the four circles or by the amount of the incision of the saw, not in the cartilage.
And if the neck is to be cut where the epiglottis is located, there should be no cartilage and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, then it must be that he stretches the skin of the throat all the way to the chin, then cuts through the cartilage until it reaches the trachea; and cut away the vessels of blood if you see anything, and then close the opening with suture as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the trachea, which bursts through the broken neck and by the lack of voice.
And leave the wound open for a while.
When the hour has passed in which doubt of strangulation exists, bring together the two lips of the wound and sew it closed with care, taking care to avoid the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing until it is healed.
Abu'l-Qasim says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the bird pecks out his eyes. Then you tie the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe through his nose and he breathes through the wound, and thus he is preserved from death.
And for this reason, the ancients commanded to keep the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in 3 days or 4. Then they ordered to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed;
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a girl take one dagger and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
And I was summoned to treat it, and found it just as dead.
I found the wound and discovered blood coming out of it, and that it had not opened or led the vein except through the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I quickly sewed up the wound and cured it until it healed.
And there was no danger to the maiden except her voice became red, and she returned afterwards to her position.
For this reason I say that in the treatment of the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia" and is a large abscess with a yellowish color, and it is common in women.
And it is according to two ways: nature, and accidents; where the natural has no device.
And accidents are according to two ways, one of which is similar to fatness in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us by artery. and there is fear, and it should not be worked upon in haste but only in the small one, and it should be proven and examined with all the incision. if you prove it similarly to fat, and it does not swell at any vein, then strike it as we do the nose, and draw it out completely if there is any. And carefully examine it completely, and treat it as necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
from us
Many ways of ours there are, which I will explain all the similarities;
And now I must tell you all the difference between a notch and a dislocation.
A dislocation is characterized by heat and fever persisting until the inflammation has passed, and then the purulence is complete; afterwards, the fever and heat subside.
A notch has no heat or fever or pain, and contains a blister, which is its own sac and is the same color as the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes larger.
And there are two types: fat or moist, and they have the same colors as I mentioned in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to the care of the sick, that you examine and test first all the instruments called "entromissoire," according to its shape or chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiry for abscesses is that you take or more moist place that you find within the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated to the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
then draw out the instrument, and be careful not to let it slip out.
If moisture runs out of the wound, make it have color as I said for other abscesses;
If no moisture comes out after the incision for the abscess, know that it is filled with fat, then make a cross-shaped cut on it, take hold of it with forceps, and peel it slightly from both sides and pull the covering or coat that you draw out healthy with it;
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, pull it off in pieces so that nothing remains.
If there is nothing remaining, the nose repeatedly returns many times;
and if a little remains and it does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound, apply hot things for easing the abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if the nose is large, make two lips on the wound, and treat it with remedies that cause growth of flesh.
and if the vein is swollen in contrast or other cases where you are forced to act quickly, use the leech of vitriol powdered, leave it for 2 or 4 days until the wound starts to heal, and let the evacuation of blood stop; then return to treating the part that was left with new dressing.
Here are the first two sentences translated into English:
and are like the needles used for sewing silkworms, and they are of citron wood, iron, or silver, and yellow ones are more effective, and black-handled ones are more suitable for encircling the swellings of a fistule.
and they come in three types: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
The shapes of tumors are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and some tumors have two bumps in four ways;
and there are tumors with four bumps in four ways; and there are tumors with two bumps in four ways as well as tumors with one bump only, and they are all necessary in their place.
The tip of these [tumors] where they are cut is sharp, and those that do not cut completely from one side are the ones we scrape the nails with, so as not to hit the vein or nerve.
And of these instruments, the cauteries are held in loops, so that the patient does not harm themselves at the opening of abscesses;
They are of four kinds: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
And it is not used except in soft flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, and in similar places;
And sometimes another small instrument similar to a pair of scissors is used in this shape, with which blood is drawn:
and it is put to the place that stops bleeding from veins, arteries, and sometimes returns according to this large shape:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they resemble female breasts:
and remain swollen and ugly, and whoever wants to treat them should do it according to this shape of the line B up to G: Then cut the fat, apply medicine on the wound with soothing herbs, then stitch together the two edges of the wound to heal it until it is healed.
and if the wound sinks downwards and is swollen due to its size, as it often happens with women, split it into two halves at the top, through two similar cuts; Thus one part is kept connected to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line encloses the smaller one according to this shape, from this line b up to line g; Then, remove the skin that is between the two lips, and take out the fat, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
And if it is not healed, or the incision has not been completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. and leave it until it drains out the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it heals.
From abscesses of buttocks
These abscesses that come from the buttocks are cases of hard scrofula where there is moisture contained within them.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when the entire bowel in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula (or scrofulous lesions), then make incisions in it as we have said before in scrofula incisions, and if the wound swells, apply a cautery as we have said before.
The cutting of an artery.
When the artery is cut and the skin is sealed over it, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
And if it is known in this way whether it is for the artery, then the abscesses are long within. And when it is felt with your fingers, it indicates tightness; and if it is for the vein, then it appears wide open.
It is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the shoulders and angles and near the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, the iron cure should be removed, and the one that is on the head should also be removed, and in the case of inflammation of an artery, they should make a long incision through the skin above it.
Therefore, the iron cure should be removed, and the one that is on the head should also be removed, and in the case of inflammation of an artery, they should make a long incision through the skin above it. Then open the abdomen as usual, and carefully separate the aorta from the intestines, while it is exposed.
Then insert a needle and pierce it through to the other side, and tie off the aorta with a double thread, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the space between the two ligaments with a lancet until the abscess comes out, and let it drain.
Then apply the cure that is called "beech bark," as long as the pain persists. Then heal the one with ointment following this, as long as he is healthy;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, then you must paint your hand with it that you can from the abscess to all the skin. then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one double thread so that you pull it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I told you, or bind one of the two sides with two strings.
And if you doubt that the thread did not enter, push another needle through all one thread beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four leagues;
then press the abscess so that the excess is inside it, then press the excretion of pus and leave what is connected;
then place on one damp cloth moistened with vinegar and oil, then provide it with treatments of tents and liniments until it heals;
from abscesses of nerves
Just like abscesses can occur in the artery and vein, so too do abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured or from excessive labor, and similar things.
This happens more often in the shoulders and thighs where there are joints, and this is called grave abscesses, its color resembles the body's color, and it causes pain in many ways.
And when it is pulled out, the patient feels pain, but not through the whole body, but only under the skin.
And it must be completely immobilized from all sides, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below. One who is in the joints should not be covered by iron, lest it contract accidentally.
And if it's on the head or forehead, make a small incision with a lancet. If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and strike its root.
If it is large, hold it with a linen cloth and peel it, then remove the bone and stitch up the wound until it heals.
Large lumps hanging Sometimes in bellies and nowhere else, there is a disease called "fungus" because it resembles mushrooms, and its roots are thin, and the lumps are large (both small and very large).
and I saw one man who had two bellies that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were cut open, and ran constantly with moisture.
I cut them open and found in one 16 pounds, and in the other 5, and the operations on incision so that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arterial blood is white and moist and a thin root.
If the thigh is injured by a splinter and the fire cautery is at hand. For in cutting the thigh often come too large discharges of blood, and if it flows without your notice, then you should hasten to apply the cautery.
and if you see the patient afraid and frightened of the iron incision, take a well-made thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
and then tighten it and do not stop tightening the thread until the artery is cut through, and feel it working; and if the roots are large, beware of cutting through entirely due to the belly, but you can certainly cut through half.
Then cauterize to prevent its return; then treat the wound and be careful not to cover the thin, dark-colored, insensitive tissue with milk-like secretion.
For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of syphilis afterward.
when the boil bursts out
if the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or a break in the syphilis, and is on the abdomen and among some of the boils, as it happens in other routines, or from blood that leaks out from veins or arteries according to what is described before, or from wind;
And if it is caused by the rupture of the sack and the outburst from the bladder, its abscess color resembles that of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various outlets. If it is caused by the outburst from the intestines, then it is more various. When you press it with your hands and it recedes, it returns again, and sometimes if it is sutured, it grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to hard work.
If it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and opens easily when you press it with your hand without constriction. If it is due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a certain quantity.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to touch, and the work (procedure) is that you look to see whether its appearance is from the blood of an artery, or a vein, or windiness. You must let the healing proceed. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if its appearance is from the intestines or the bowel, you must instruct the patient to strain their anus, and extend themselves straight, then press all around the belly. Then command him to rest between your hands, then go around the wound that you have marked with the lancet. then spread half of the abscess on top with a large spoon.
Then spread half of the abscess extended on the cord and insert your index finger, and seek the intestines. If you find it seized by the cord, undo it (the dislocated joint), and push the intestine to the exit of the abdomen.
And if you find the anus, grasp it at its edge, and trim the excess.
And if the artery or vein becomes blocked, it will go around easily, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two thick threads, and insert the needles around what you have made in a cross shape that you are causing to pierce.
Then press the abscess for four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the space as much as it can bear, and cut the dead flesh by itself. or you strike it when it becomes thin and can be pierced, then treat it as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said.
or you strike it when it becomes thin and can be pierced, then treat it as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said. Draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as necessary, and suture the place.
draw the boil
We have said in the division the similarities of boils and how to treat them with medicine, and how to handle the cure with iron; and we will say that boils begin in the armpit, and great caution is needed in its treatment; and the ancients said that when a boil is in a place where it can be shaved like a boil that is on the breast or thigh, and in similar places, and it must all be removed when it is at the beginning; but when it is large and old, it should not be approached, for I have never known anyone to heal it; nor has anyone healed one before me.
And the surgeries, when they are in place and can be removed as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him urinate if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient. That is, boil a clean linen cloth or bandage to perform the surgery; then pour your unguents or salve over the sore, and the entire head of it, and the bone from all sides, leaving nothing behind; let the blood flow freely and press well on the place with your hand or something, and if the discharge of blood makes you oppose the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is scorched; then treat it with another cure until it heals.
The translation for this line would be "of hydropisia." Hydropisia refers to a medical condition in which there is excessive accumulation of water or fluid in the body tissues, specifically in the abdominal cavity. Here is a possible translation for the given text. However, please note that it's essential to consider the context and historical period when analyzing medieval medical texts such as this one: Lay the patient on his back on your hands, and the ministers press the stomach towards the lowest part of the hip, then take the curved spatula according to this form: And it should be incised through two parts, sharp at the tip, but not so deep that it reaches the intestines when inserted, and it must not pierce.
Then look if the abscess is directed towards the intestines: If it is, you must make an incision beneath the navel four fingers' width straight up towards the point of the elbow; and if the abscess is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side of the navel four fingers' width; and if it is due to wind, it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that excess fluids do not run to the weak place.
then pierce the skin with the instrument and push it, and place your hand between the skin and the abscess as when peeling an apple to a thickness of one nail or less; then pierce the abscess until the spatula reaches the water level, which is the level of the abscess, then pull it out, and push this instrument from where it is shown here: It is similar in shape to a thin silver chain, and made of light bronze or steel, and has an opening on its lower part, one small hole; it is slit from one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve feathers:
On the head above is the almond-shaped pulse point, such that when the instrument comes to the water, then you should press now on the instrument; empty it then either half or one third part, because if you see more than what is necessary at that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit due to the weapon, or they fall down in a faint, or approach death.
but empty according to the strength of its virtue, and according to the patient's condition and their pulse; then draw out the instrument and hold the water, and it is now kept in check by the cautery that is above the wound, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then begin the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering from the water, and draw a small amount of water.
Do this every day and be careful not to let too much water remain but only a little. And if you have doubts about the patient, and leave much water, cure it with burial or hot sand, and through sweating or bathing and sunbathing, and apply medicine that dries it; until it is healed, cauterize above the stomach, the liver, and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Of the stopping of the penis There are children who are born without foreskin or the foreskin is small and not in its place. If it needs to be circumcised immediately, then you must pierce it with a very thin spatula according to this shape; then put a thin piece of cloth from a plank on the pierced area, tie and hold for 2 to 4 days. When it wants to urinate, remove the cloth, make it urinate, and then replace it; and in case there is no need, because the urine that comes out does not close it. If the foreskin is small, it can be treated with a piece of cloth from a plank as we have said, and it will expand. Those who are not born with the foreskin in its place are circumcised, for no one is born with the foreskin on the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before raising their penis; and they cannot enjoy sexual intercourse because the matter cannot reach the marris (a part of the female genitalia), and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of work is that the patient lies on his back with his head raised slightly like the shaft of an arrow, and his buttocks likewise, so that his genitals are in a hole, as required; and be careful of blood leakage which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a pressure to stop the bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
of the penis ulcers Often this albath appears in the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly skin; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you should treat them with a .i. oncine (once) of subtle substance, then scrape them off and cleanse thoroughly, afterwards apply moist cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healthy. And if the elbow is diseased, putrid and swollen, you should apply a cautery. When you have burned it, and if the elbow is inside the arm, with some part within the flesh and some part outside, you must remove the diseased part that is inside first; and when it is healed, heal the outside. For when you heal it together, the bones of the arm are not secure and there comes darkness and corruption in its place; you should scrape everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour that is made from the peel of pumpkin seeds and wheat, then heal with other treatments until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries should aid in two ways together: for bleeding and corruption; and if the bones of the arm are corrupted and retracted, you must insert or lead a splint made of wood along the arm, and make the patient urinate; and when the hair is detached from the tip of the bone, which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you must cut off one layer of skin with one instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and deliver the bones of the arm on all sides.
And if it is difficult to speak about this, you must cut one strip of skin from the tip of the bone and flesh with a small knife; then you must squeeze gently for 2 days, and put a thin linen cloth moistened with cold water on it so that it does not heal immediately.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not the same as other wounds in terms of continuation; however, when we perform this work of our own free will and specifically on children, it is necessary that we do the best job and make it as easy to heal as possible.
I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for it is not in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the greater part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one day, and with great force, and in a novacule; however, there were those who were careful because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is cut and delayed, the one below will be damaged.
Now cover it with copper, and the pain is doubled; and at the amputation which is deep in the limb, the point of the member is not secure; and at the amputation of the nail by chance the iron escapes, and ruins the work, and many times there is no need for amputation and I have seen it.
In the amputation which is made all through the thread of iron I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the saw cuts exactly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you saw equally all the time; but that the thread be well tightened around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not tie him to the rod except to tie the thread around it only, and then release him in all the ways that you can. Then make it be between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the mark and blow or say a spell, and draw it up until the head of the arrow is in; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the site with a double thread, then tie it under one peg to another link; hold it at two fingers by the second link, and break between the links, then quickly untie the knot and pull the head of the arrow out;
Then make it be between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the mark and blow or say a spell, and draw it up until the head of the arrow is in; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the site with a double thread, then tie it under one peg to another link; hold it at two fingers by the second link, and break between the links, then quickly untie the knot and pull the head of the arrow out; Let the blood stop little by little, for it is the poison; and put powder on it and on the powder one cloth glued with a soft egg yolk cooked without salt, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and let it be treated with another cure until it is healed.
The shape of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and pierced, and they should be equal in size to the knuckles.
The error of the amputation is when the cartilage within is cut; therefore, you must stretch it with your nail so that the joint becomes abscessed; and strike it evenly. And if you cannot hold it with your nail, take tongs, and then strike it.
And if it exceeds three days, and that which is beneath the penis becomes swollen, let it be until the abscess subsides, and scrape lightly; then strike it as you can move it, and be careful not to damage the penis.
Then treat the joint with things that are submerged in a wound of powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if you strike it with excessive care, and it goes beyond [the limit], it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healthy.
Retention of urine
Retention of urine is from obstruction of stones, or frozen blood, or pus, or frozen matter, or similar things as we have said in the previous section;
and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that it is retention due to a stone in the bladder or the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over their knees; their feet should be placed on the back, and they should extend their abdomen from the upper part of the back, and hold the patient as tight as possible; then the neck of the bladder is compressed to force the stone out above, so that the urine is relieved.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must administer extraction with all the equipment called "syringe", of which this is its shape: It should be made of subtle silver thin hollow reed, like a bird's feather; and the tube should be a palm and a half long and delicate at the tip.
The method for the discharge of urine is to take one double thread, tie its end to a piece of wool or cotton and insert the thread's tip into the syringe; then attach excess length of wool and push it up to the tip of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and an egg yolk, and make the patient sit on one seat, and you should rub the bladder and the penis with moist oil of olives and cold water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis upward toward the anus; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it come up to the empty vessel, and this is not done according to the order for this reason, because the guide that leads it is twisted; then the thread is tied to all the wool pieces, and the urine follows the wool, then remove the wool, and correct the urine.
And fill the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is prepared.
On the diseases of the bladder
When scorches or blood comes in the bladder, or pus is assembled there and you see it distill liquids and medicines, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed with three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; and the spout at the top so that the medicine flows out well through the rod without addition, if possible to draw moisture, and push when necessary;
And when you see that your medicines are thrown into the bladder, place the head of the goat in the moisture, and draw it through what is within; if you draw the moisture towards the goat's head, and then push strongly the drawing back; it will enter the goat's head, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the shape of the subtle enema with which one cleanses the bladder: it is as follows:
And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is higher; below it, there is a chain or cord; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you want to enema the bladder with in it, then tie it between two cords using a good double thread, and heat one end of that moisture over fire; then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming towards it, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like one does with a thimble, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
From the stone
We have said in the division the methods of stone and its extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone caused by the rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate in size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder occurs more often with children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder, resembling urine in its subtlety; it opens the narrow passages, irritates the patient's organ, pricks it many times, and then binds it; and much of these leaps cause the foundation to weaken; and the healing of children is easy until they reach 4 years old, but it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is a moderate illness for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, first cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders seeking for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, bend and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and protrudes slightly upwards. Then make him sit between your hands arranged below, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining towards the bottom; then press and touch it with your fingers.
If you feel the stone within the cavity, hasten now to cut into the stone above it. And if it does not fall out with the touch of your whole hand, moisten your left thumbnail, if the patient is a child or an adult who is still weak; or use your finger, if the patient is a fully grown man; and push it into its foundation, and try to remove the stone. When you feel it at your fingertip, push it towards the bladder's neck; then press firmly and push it away in the direction where you intend to cut.
Instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand upward and remove the skin that is under the testicles in the area where you make the cut; then insert the spatula spreading, which gives it its shape.
And place it between the area between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but to the left side of the scrotum; and it should be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be at its base or on its foundation, and the incision should be long horizontally, but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance, the pressure must be applied to it (the affected area), which is the foundation, so that it jumps out without exerting too much effort; and know that there is a stone or an angle, and edges: it should be pulled out; and if there is one that is swollen, resembling a plum and round, from which the dislocation occurs lightly.
Therefore, where there are edges and margins, make a larger incision; and if it does not jump out, then you must pull with pliers (tongs) that are shaped like a file at the tip to extract the stone without causing it to escape or break; or you may use a small curved instrument placed at the tip to push against it; and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, widen a little hole with a drill and remove it without cutting.
And if there is more than one stone, first push the largest one at the bladder's neck, then strike it, then pull it, and remove the smaller ones afterwards. If it is very large, it must be cut into pieces, making a larger wound. There are two possible outcomes for the patient: either they die or urine comes out immediately because the bladder cannot heal; but you should still try to extract or crush it using pliers until you pull it apart in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it closed, then place a damp cloth in oil and wine over it, or in oil and cold water and rosewater, to calm the abscess; afterwards reassure the patient on his neck, and do not undo the bindings until the third day.
And when you undo it (the bindings), immerse the wound well in oil and water, then apply the ointment "dyafinicon" and "basilicon" until it is healed.
If an abscess and corrosion come in the wound and congealing of blood forms in the bladder, and urine is retained, which is known to be done without effort with urine: then put your finger in the wound, and drain that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will rot and burst;
Then clean the wound that is fresh, easy and dry, and assist in all ways you know, until it heals; and it is necessary that all the herbs you use to treat it, you bind them on his thighs, and apply the medicine on the affected area.
If the stone is small and it cannot be led out with a rod or pushed in, and urine cannot come out; then heal it as I say next, you should cut it many times, except that you excuse yourself from cutting because of this cure. I have already proven this so.
Take one iron rod in the shape as follows and sharpened at four angles, pointed on one thread:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft of the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder; then push the awl gently into the shaft, until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl little by little into the stone, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone inside the shaft. Soon it will be broken, and will fly out with the urine, and the patient will be cured.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread around the stone and another one above, then push the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out and untie the lower thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
from women's stones (kidney stones)
It often happens that a stone is in the womb of women, and if it ever occurs, it is a great distress for the cure, and it is forbidden for four reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman skilled enough to examine her, especially when she is chaste.
The third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is deeper than that of a man, for which it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear.
And if you need to do this, then you must take a midwife who knows well, and even if one is difficult to find, do not give up on one chaste midwife; and present a wise bailiff in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do whatever you command regarding the incision of the stone.
And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then her husband must insert his finger or tip and search for the stone; and if he finds it, he should press it down under his finger, and advise her to push her pelvis with her left hand against the bladder.
If he finds it, she should move it gently from the bladder entrance towards the root of the thigh until it reaches the root, then press on the stone at the root of the thigh near the mons pubis, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that area. She should not move her finger above or below the stone and should cut it off at its first small part.
Then push the root towards the loins if you feel the stone and keep pressing until the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some have grains. Know their appearances to determine the outcome.
And if the wound bleeds excessively, apply vitriol powder to it and hold for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work, until the arrow is expelled, and have tools that I told you in the extraction of the arrow for men to help you in your work.
If the wound is an artery that has been cut, place powder on it and hold with bandages and not repeat this action, and leave the arrowhead and do not extract it, for fear the patient may die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wounds have closed, return to your work, until the arrow is expelled.
Of a fleshy hernia
An aquous hernia is nothing but a gathering of moisture or pus, which is beneath the bladder that contains the egg; and it is called "pus," and sometimes it is specifically in the egg's membrane itself, if one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the bladder between the pus we have mentioned; and this does not happen except without any reason.
And the growth of this hernia is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and the matter spreads out.
And sometimes it comes from striking the temples, and this moisture may have multiple colors: either it is a declining color to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white and watery. This happens more often.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, it is the abscesses reason, that is, long like the shape of an egg, and does not open the temples, because it has moisture all around.
If there is moisture in the tissue itself, it is the abscess reason with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg.
And if moisture is between the hide of the testicles and the white sack, it can be felt well; therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, probe it thoroughly all over its extent, so that you may recognize its form as described earlier. Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that comes afterwards.
Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that comes afterwards. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be purified according to our power and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, on something slightly raised, and put a lot of cloths under him.
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the arm at one of the two joints near the shoulder.
Then take the spatula, strike the skin near the shoulder along its length until you reach the bone tip, and make your incision straight in dividing the skin as far as the white fat, and remove the thin layer of skin according to your power.
Then pierce the white fat deeply with one broad hole and remove all the fluid, then put your fingers back in, and stretch the white fat upward; do not touch the skin of the shoulder but only the fat; strike the ribs carefully, if you don't strike it properly, the fluid will return.
If the egg (meaning: fetus) jumps out of your work (procedure), reset it in its place when you have completed the operation using the forceps; then, stitch together the two levers of the keys (bones at the joint) with a suture, and then treat the wound as you would any other injury until it is healed.
If you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to bind the vessels that are suspended (attached) with caution, fearing the release of blood; afterwards, cut through the suspension and extract the egg, treating it as we have said.
If the wound is divided into two equal parts (meaning: there are two branches), know that this is two rami (branches); then cut through the other part as you have done with the first equally, drain the blood, and place damp linen soaked in rose oil into the wound.
And put another dampened wool in vinegar and oil on top of the two cushions, and cover with double cloths, and bind it all together with the linen string according to this form:
Then take two cloths and use woolen padding according to this appearance and sew them together at the belt of the braces. The first head take on the foundation until the back, and the other at the part of the handle; and the second head on both sides, and the rest should be tightened in the buckle of the bracer.
And sometimes this small ramic of fire is used as a medicine in the place of iron-cutting, and it is that you take one sharp cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the cushions, and heat it as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the water is exposed;
If one takes the fire-cautery according to this form, and pierces it through until it is hollow, and peels off the skin with this subtle cautery heat:
And be careful in all ways until you reach the marrow; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healing; and beware of bleeding, and be cautious of the works of amputation.
And if anything happens contrary to this, or abscess or bleeding or something else, then treat what happens contrary to this, according to what is mentioned before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work due to its horribleness, you should perform perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are sure by the signs that we have said, piercing is necessary there.
Make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below the whole spatula-width wide, and make the perforation long along the body; and let the holes be large, so that all the pus flows out.
then put cotton on top of it and bind it, and leave it to drain the remaining pus, then treat it until the wound is healed.
And if the white linen cloth does not allow the liquid to flow from the wound's mouth, you must insert a reed or instrument used for draining liquids from abscesses, as described previously; and enlarge one or two holes in the wound, and verify that the liquid returns, and it heals after 6 months or so, and when it is healed as before, the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess in the eyes
For in this section of the treatment, where there are many possible positions, it seems to me that moving is beneficial.
And I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Then many abscesses come from the body, and similarly from the joints; and this is in many cases.
This is due to excess of bitter and acrid humors that spread to the joints, or from blows;
The color of the abscess is similar to that of the body, and no pain is found, and it is a severe abscess.
And by chance there is an abscess that is hard and rough, of such color, and sometimes comes from an artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to an artery, it can be recognized by the hot position of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers. and you should not touch it at all.
An abscess caused by swelling of a vein can be recognized by the appearance when pressed with fingers.    This translation may need to be adjusted based on context and grammar rules as it is only a line-by-line translation without considering the overall meaning or structure of the sentence.
And can anyone well make an incision on this likeness, and on the others. Then you cut the fat of the eyes, and the yolk above, and the white is separated from the membrane, and all the suspensorium of the eye is released from all sides of the eye.
If the egg is already soft with these newborns, then you must draw out the egg, and cut it.
And if it is outside the white or in that which is inside the vessels, you must release all that softness and cut it round.
And if the birth of the hernia is at the rear end, you should cut it all out and extract the egg as we have said.
When your work is done, apply the wound with moistened linen in rose oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it heals.
of the abscess of the kidneys
This is an abscess enclosed in a covering resembling a small bag, with the softening of the kidneys, And the patient speaks hoarsely when going.
and the remedy for this disease is as precarious as the one before.
However, we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then attach the suspension device for the lower abdomen to your chest, To all the bladders which are near to the penis, stretch them out straight, and brand them, masters.
then pierce the swelling sharp wide across the bladders, until they are exposed.
and then scrape from each side, as we said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
then I insert an awl with a single thread of flax and tie it at the first place where the vein appears, and tie it directly to the other end. Then grind (or pound) the shoulders straightly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture.
Then heal the wound as one would another, so that no cowherd's stool should fall into one of its corners.
because by this, no harm comes, and if all the cowherds come, it is necessary to draw the stools from them all. so that the eyes do not lose their secretions due to the cowherd's stool, and they dry up and cannot help themselves.
From the rupture of the sifac The occurrence of this case is through the incision that comes or sifac, or extension on the abdomen in the area of the flanks, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
and this rupture is either due to sifac or extension of it, and these two methods of movement occur from various causes: either by percussion, jump, fall, lift of heavy load, or similar things;
And the signs when it is of the extension of the dislocation, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; And the abscesses are even up to the full extent, because the intestines push the dislocation after it.
And the signs when it is of the section of the dislocation, are that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin near, and this is due to the outflow of the intestine and the body turning away from the dislocation.
And sometimes the intestines come out through the hernia, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, therefore it is necessary to escape from them.
The method of the work is that you instruct the patient to insert their hand inside the intestine into the wound, if they can reach it. then lay him on his back, between your hands, and lift his legs.
Then place the intestines above, and cut all the skin of the scrotum along its length; Then insert fingers into the sides of the waist according to what is necessary for opening the wound, and so that the eyes can come out.
Then scrape the fat that lies beneath the skin of the cheeks, until the white fat is fully exposed on all sides.
Then insert your index finger into the following cheek, between the first white fat that lies beneath the skin of the eye, and the second white fat.
And remove the one that is behind the eye, and between the second white fat; then turn your right hand within the cheeks of the eyes, and raise the white fat to your left hand, and lift the eye towards the waist with all the white fat. And command the minister to stretch out the arm upward, and dislocate the one that is nearer behind the elbow.
And command your fingers if there is any intestine entwined or white pus, and if you find anything of the sort, push it into the belly beneath.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and push it into the back part of the pus, which is behind the skin; after the waist, then cut the parts that appear to be from the threads, until there are four threads left. Then assemble one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie it with the ligament below the hinge of the shoulder, with a strong cord of 2 parts; Then wind the threads of the tendons together, and tie them with a cord of 2 parts, so that no one of the vassals who feed it can enter within, unless abscesses do not come. and make the knot straight along the first long cord of 2 fingers, and after these 2 cords leave the sinew which is below the hinge of the shoulder the great one of a finger's length;
and afterwards according to the roundness that the egg carries; then strike in the part which is beneath the skin of the joints, as much as it needs correction, and bend, as we have said before.
then apply dampened wool in oil, and put it on wounds, and there bring the thread that we have said. And sometimes the whites are cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
For this often happens, and leave the ligament until it has chosen to slip [back into place]; and if it is slow to fall, then moisten with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it slips [back into place].
Then cure the wound with other care, until it is perfectly healed.
of a carnous hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a branch which is together with the bone, in this manner that you tie the vessels, after the cutting slightly below.
Then press it together and treat the abscess of those who work it, until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes comes rotting in the groin, as we have said, and open the vessels; and do not remove any intestines from the hernia, and if it is done, it is too much, and repair it every hour.
And if it remains too long at this point, the wound or abscess swells so much that the internal contents are expelled;
This happens through the extension of the abscess, which is inflamed and angry, as we have said, for it becomes swollen and opened;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
And it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then you strike the swelling of the wound enlarged according to the thickness of three fingers;
Then extract the pus that is beneath the skin which surrounds it, then take the iron and place it on the apparent part of the swelling;
Press firmly on the stomach, then place the two apparent parts of the swelling on the head of the iron and press both;
Then remove the iron head, and do not strike or extend the swelling, nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the anus.
Then heal it with wound treatment. And when you bandage the wounds, if they become infected and the wound is healed, as long as it is healed.
The fistula (li sifac) is closed, and it has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterization is performed in this place, and it is closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Many times the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men, because the charms that are inside are softened and it is visible; and when one wants to heal it, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, and you bandage the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then bring together the two lips to a stitch, and if you see, sew first the excess skin that is softened with four or five stitches firmly; then bandage between the stitches, and heal as other wounds, until it is healed, and stitch the thread.
The punishment or correction (of a patient)
In our law, the punishment or correction (of animals) is mentioned, and I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the animals respond when questioned about their ailments and cures; the other, because we often need to punish certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and pigs and others. I say then that punishment or correction is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, we seat the animal in warm water until the skin is softened; then we grab it with our hand, holding it until it is reset and you no longer feel it. The punishment of cutting (castration): you should dye the animal and press the skin around the testicles with your left hand; then tie the suspended instrument, and strike above each one as many times as you have well cut off the scrotum; leave a small amount of fat and the subtle fat that is on the vessels; this method of punishment or correction is more effective than the one done by attraction because in the case of attraction there may remain some part of the testicles, which causes the animal to desire lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Hermaphrodites (intersex individuals)
Hermaphrodyte is according to .ij. forms in humans: one such form is between two openings, as the figure of nature for a female, who has hair and sometimes urinates from it. And the other form is in women, who have something above the penis like a rod and two openings. The treatment of the male and the female is that you cut all the adjacent parts, and treat them like other wounds; in the second form, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the openings, there is no treatment.
The translation for this line is:
Tentigene is an adjacent part on a natural part, when it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as one hand, and that is its treatment. You should dye the excess of the tentigene with your hands or onions, and lightly cut it; do not go too deep, so that no bleeding occurs, then cure it with another treatment until it heals. At another place where a boil emerges from the mouth of the vagina, and it bursts out, resembling a cow, hence it is called by the ancients "cow disease." You should cut it as described for the tentigene, and cure it until it heals.
From erratic [or wandering]
When the nature of the woman is not recognized or the birth passage is narrow; and it is natural by birth or accidental due to illness that has come upon it; or it is from falsehood, subtle or thick, and it occurs fully formed in the marriage bed or in the costumes or underclothes, or elsewhere; and they should be prevented from conceiving, and giving birth, and accidentally producing flowers; and recognizing these things is through the observation of the midwife. If the discharge appears soon at your fingers or at the rectum. If it is subtle and near the two leathers, hurry up, and press them in this way: put your two fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two leathers, as long as the subtle falsehood is firm, and hold the discharge; then take wool, wet it in oil, and place it over the area, and let the woman lie down flat each day, so that it does not heal. And if the falsehood is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. If the discharge is from a false childbirth, suspend it at the navel and cut; and have the medicines for stopping blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with a lot of egg; then bring a wide plank for a diaphragm, so that the wound does not heal; and in this way let it be prolonged, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure other wounds until it heals. And when there is false childbirth in the marriage bed, it should be covered according to this method, unless it is an abscess swollen. For one should not touch an abscess that has swollen in the marriage bed.
Hemorrhoids [or Piles]
Emorroidal openings are openings of veins which, without cautery treatment, often become swollen; and when emorroidal openings grow old, they turn into thrombosis; and as I have said in the division, we have described their resemblances, their signs, and I will here describe those that receive treatment. I say that emorroids and thrombosis, when they are completely within the anus, and cannot be felt by touch, cannot be treated with iron. Those that are at the entrance of the anus can be felt, and these are the ones that can be treated. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold room, then take hold of the thrombus with tweezers, grasp it by its roots, then sprinkle medicines restricting blood, such as acacia bark and dragon's blood and incense and similar things on it; then press her feet to the ground for an hour, then immerse them in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and grape seed extract and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice on her back. If it stops bleeding, that's good. If not, apply fomentations to the back and breasts without cutting; then take linen cloth, wet it in the juice of plantain or elderberry with old wine, and apply the fomentation to the place. And when the abscess heals, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a small hard lump, which should be covered as I have said for the thrombus; and then treat it until it is healed.
emorroidal openings (of the anus)
Many forms of abscess appear in the anus, such as boils, abscesses with pus, herpes, fistulas, emorroids and abscesses that burn, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division. It is therefore necessary to describe in this treatise the abscess that burns which appears in the anus, which is not one of those that are covered with scabs; and if you want to know how to work with iron, check whether the abscess is aggravated at the beginning of its development, and filled with heat and fever, and turning red if you can see it. Then do not rush to pierce it, but let it heal until the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on one seat, or two small seats where he leans, and support his back and his feet at the parts away from the leg; and spread his thighs, and place his arms beneath his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then suck out the pus towards the right side of the body, and bring in the tool used to open the anus, as follows: and it is necessary that when you bring this tool into use, that you first pierce the tip so as to know the depth of the anus, so that the tool does not enter too deeply as it should, and does not burn the patient. If the tool is larger, then cover the depth of the anus with cloths, so that the tool does not cause pain; and place the cornet of the tool on top, and tie the tool. And when the abscess opens, and it becomes soft in the hand, then cover it with a linen bandage; and when the boil is empty, then put in the hollow of the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or green dry oil; and place the tent far from the anus and above the tool linen that has been washed in water or cooked malves are; then cover it with ointment after two days, until it heals; and sometimes lift the anus and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or long roots of lys Aristologe that have been cooked. Then return to the ointment. And if the wound is reopened in the anus, then you should be careful not to use iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
From childbirth
It is first necessary for the midwife to recognize the figure of natural childbirth and its signs; when you see the woman contracting below, desiring to urinate; then hasten to help the child be born; then know that this birth is according to nature, and it comes out headfirst, followed by the afterbirth; and when you see these signs, you should lightly press her abdomen so that the child is born quickly; for when it descends onto its head, it follows with it, and the husband removes its waste products in good cleansing. And that which comes out otherwise does not come naturally. Sometimes it comes from the feet or the body or the thighs, or it may turn around accidentally on the neck, or by other bad positions; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and to avoid errors and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist.
If the child comes out headfirst by natural birth and the woman delivers with effort, and her vitality is weak, make her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the midwife's little spatula, as shown in the following figure: And cut the second (placenta), and strike its nail (umbilical cord) until the moisture that is within it comes out; and hold the woman's belly as the infant descends, and if it does not descend, you must cleanse the woman with mustard seed of fenugreek oil; then make her take and vomit emetics, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: this will now cause the infant to be born.
about the delivery of the child on its feet When the infant comes on its feet, you must push it upwards. And then turn it bit by bit, until it is even.
Then take one piece and stretch it bit by bit.
Can he jump up to the knees, if he commands to take hold of it, and make it vomit from the inside. If God wants him to fly (if possible).
And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure. Therefore it should be done gently.
And if it does not come as we have said, take mastic from high altitude, oil of sesame, and melted resin, and grind everything in one mortar. and put this ointment on the female nature within and outside of it,   \]   Car c'est la mieulx que toz autres chose qui sont apres le mesure.   \] Then make him sit in deep agony underneath the ribs;
and when it is softened below, make one collar of myrrh, put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; Then make him sit on a chair, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose closed, and press the belly gently, because the infant is jumping now. Of the birth of the child on its genitals When the infant comes in this shape, put the bale on it hand by hand.
The birth of a child that comes out with one hand extended. It is necessary to engineer the return of the hand: If it cannot be returned, then lift up the woman and go.
If she cannot walk, then lay her on a bed or couch with her legs spread apart.
Then bring the muscle relaxant that I have mentioned before.
And if it does not bear a child [i.e., does not give birth], make her sit on a seat or chair, then study the method of returning the hand. And make her push according to natural form [i.e., give birth], and have her vomit, and command her to take hold of the child until it comes forth.
Hold the baby by the neck and spread your hands apart, then turn your body towards the back of its mother. The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And when it is even, put a strong mustard plaster of high altitude and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct him to move it little by little.
And when you have done that, make her sit on a seat and instruct her to grab it; then make her vomit. in the same way, treat all similarly
in the same way, treat all similarly When it comes to swelling in this manner, seize the swelling with your nail until the moisture is voided;
and squeeze it on its face and neck, press the boil so that it is not retained, and let the boil die;
then insert the child, until you have placed it correctly, and command the woman to take it once.
From the birth of twins   (In this context, "gemelz" refers to twins, as "gele" means a twin in Old French) Note that twins are born frequently and sometimes three or four; and this is not unusual, it happens often.   (The text uses Old French numerals "iii" for 3 and "iiij" for 4) Two are unusual and do not live, if they can even be named;   (In this context, "dui" refers to a pair of twins who die at birth or shortly after)
I know this, that they should multiply, and are desired by the one who invents them, who is linked to filth.
And sometimes they issue in such a natural manner as the teeth of an animal, as we have said.
And if they issue painfully, the cure is as we have said, and let the balm be subtle, and do it quickly and lightly whatever it does. make it in such a way as it is worth remedying for health. Of many children
Of many children At times they are formed in the womb; one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or even more, up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the noble sage,
And it is necessary that the bailiff knows this because by chance similar things happen; Follow as required.
Of a dead child
When treating the woman with a dead child or fetus, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are compelled to work by hand;    si faice selonc ceu qu'il covient. If it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of good health, and has no accident or fear of death;
It is necessary for the woman to be positioned on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised.
And the midwife binds her loins with strips of cloth, or ties her to the bed so that she is not treated for the delivery of the child.
Then anoint the bride's mouth with moist oil mixed with musk and fenugreek and flax seeds, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musks. Then gently push her, then wait for one beat or two until the afterbirth is pushed out that can be conveniently delivered.
And take care if the infant is apparelled up on its head. If one forces the incisors into the eyes, the neck, the mouth, the palate, under the beard, in the nostrils, near the cheeks or near the throat,    \
If the amputation is on feet, pierce or prick at the middle costal area;    \
And it is required that you press the onyx with your right hand, and place the corbeure between both of your left fingers, and push all the way in lightly, and insert the onyx into one of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty spot.
then insert it against another onyx, or where you need to make the extraction, so that the extraction is equal.
And then equal it in moving from one side to the other, for movement to come out, and the teeth should be interlocked for holding, as shown here in this diagram:
If it remains in one part, then the ball is held by some of his fingers with oil and pushed into that part, and draws the other part.
And if there remains no part, then put the interlocking device at a higher level and continue until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to the strain. then you must wrap with a cloth all around it.
then you cover the joint in the sole or at the wrist, and thus you should do the same in the other hand, and with the two feet.
then if the child's head is large and it is narrow at the neck or has a swollen face assembled. If necessary, you must insert the spiny splint between your teeth, and make the head (of the patient) and draw out the fluid. you must go to the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the tools or chapter that follows it.
and similarly make the patient faint naturally. and then pull the bones with pliers,
and if the shoulder joint jumps out and it is held tight by forceps, it should be cut, as far as the moisture that is issuing more;
and if it cannot come out, break it up into pieces at the muscles you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it as far as the moisture goes.
And if the child is on its feet, the delivery is easy, and the guidance towards the mouth of the birth canal is light.
If it is still in the abdomen or thigh, you must extract it with one swaddled cloth wrapped around your hand; and make an incision in the abdomen or thigh to remove the moisture inside;
And if other members are dislocated, and the head remains If the ball of his hand enters into the mouth of the worm, and pulls it out. Then push one or two times and pull it further.
If the mouth of the worm is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come in, there is no need to work on it, It is necessary to administer moist and fat things; And he applies plasters, and soothes in warm softening and moistening agents.
And if the wound is on the chest and you can make it level, administer what we have said in the live child.
And if there is no possibility of making it level, cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the second growth.
And when you have done this, bring to him what we have said about abscess poultices that come in marriage;
and if bleeding comes up, it should be stopped with strong pressure, and bring other treatments.
I saw a woman whose womb had been dead, then the first doctor consulted with another on this matter and revived the fetus. After a long time an abscess appeared in the buttock, and swelled so much that it opened up, and began to cause great pain.
I was summoned to care for it, and I thought about it for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
I placed strong plaster on it, and a bone came out, and after some days another one did. I marveled greatly because the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I make the wound, and insert my hand bones, until the woman is better positioned. And keep the woman in position for a long time, and thus add a little more pressure to the correct spot.
And I have never forgotten this chapter except for the reason that when the master discovers an unusual thing, he knows how to help it.
to bring back the marriage to its place
Here follows the form of the pressor, to which one applies books; and at two turnings to the two heads of the two joints. The horns must be finer than the constrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the tube of the stick should be one finger's width, and the tree branches one thumb's width, and half a palm in length. And between the two limbs there are two joints of the same bone, which are closed in one and the other, half a palm length or a little more;
And these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the hole in the socket when turning the two horns (bones).
Another form, similar in appearance but lighter and more delicate, is made of ebony or boxwood, similar to pliers. And say to the two shoulders and the two humerus bones, as you see, of one span in length, and two fingers in width;
and when you see to open the woman on all the instruments, make her sit on one bed, her feet hanging down and her legs spread; then push the two shoulders and humerus bones together into the woman, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs; Then work your hand with all the tools, just as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the swelling, until the patient allows it.
These tools are all covered and have similar shapes; and when the physician has arranged them, he works more quickly, and higher for humans due to their size.
Never leave the tool unprepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold back her lochia (afterbirth fluid), and then make her vomit with emetics, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose. If she jumps due to this, it is good.
If not, take a small pot, and make a purgative or cup, and put into it herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, camomile, chamomile, calaminthe (wild mint), and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a tube or a spout from the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the patient.
and let it boil until the vapors enter the patient's body; then make them vomit, as we have said. If the second one jumps hastily. And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal, as commanded to the bailiff, she should moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk-garlic juice from althea, and then apply it to nature.
And take the second one; when she has found it, grasp it and stretch it gently, so that the marriage does not resist extraction. but it must be moved gently to the right and left, then draw it out; it will come and separate itself.
And if the mouth of the bladder is stretched out (or ruptured), we have said the treatment for evacuation and fumigation with herbs;
but if it is not all that has been said, ensure you do not pull (or draw out);
But it is necessary that the person at the bladder mouth be tied to the woman's thigh, then cleanse with an ointment called four-recipe (or quadripartite);
If it is to be pierced and reset, the pus will come out; however, if it does not heal properly, when it comes back, it will cause a bad smell in the stomach and head, making the patient sick.
Therefore it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this: no one has proven fumigations of dill and dried figs effective.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for the retention of flowers and the second birth is as follows:    (This sentence is incomplete, so I couldn't provide a full translation)
And it appears to be glass-like, and place the head subtle in its nature, and the large bones above the fire;
And let the fumigation be over the coals, and let the tinder burn until it is wasted, and begin another.
to drill the foundation
Many children are born without having their foundations drilled, instead, it has been stopped up with some subtle substance; Therefore, it is necessary to pierce the boil with a lance at its proper time, and not with a sharp spathulum, and to ensure that the lancing does not touch the ligament.
Then place moistened linen on it (the boil) in wine and oil, then treat with salve until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will reopen, place a leaden cannula over it (the boil), and leave it for several days, and remove it when the pus begins to move towards the rooms (of the body).
And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess occurs; it should be covered: whether it is healed, as we have said in the treatment of a poultice.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and larger than those that come away from beneath it, or in the space of the two parts,
If there is a fistula or several of them; and when that knot becomes old, it bursts out, and moisture causes abscesses or subtle boils.
And sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by those who know that there is either excretion or wind when the patient has excretion, and accidentally it jumps to one side.
And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder and halfway down the penis; they reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the knee joint.
And thus one recognizes the fistula persistent at its base, but not passing. And press your index finger or base into the fistula, and insert a fine awl of bone or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
If it has a twisting, then insert a thin splint or horse hair until you feel the splint or hair against your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not produce a purulent discharge or wind or pus, as we have said. Know that it does not pierce [the skin]; hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula has perforated up to the bladder or up to the conduit of urine, if it spouts urine and cannot heal with medicines.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the leg, if blood comes out to the surface. If it has no twisting and the pain is not around it, then it is a broken bone and cannot be healed with medicines or poultices.
And in these Persian blisters there is no remedy except labor, and the vain efforts of foolish people who meddle with it.
In that which is not Persian and not ancient, in the hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts the legs up to his thighs, and bends his thighs towards his belly. then pushes a tent of iron, or of wood if it is twisted, until you know where the pain comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must press your finger there.
if it penetrates the patient, then it should be discovered or felt where you sense the pain or flesh, then recognize that it is punctured. If it cannot be moved, it cannot be healed.
One must be aware that it is possible to heal some [people], but this happens rarely;
and the aid one gives is as follows: if one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously stated; and he puts it all hot into the fistula until it comes out of the base, and do this two or three times until you know that these worms have been burned, which are like a feather of a bird;
And then heal the swollen tents with butter, until the heat subsides, then heal it with soothing and healing ointment.
If it is such as this, it is well. Otherwise, it cannot be healed.
and if the tent reaches inwards but does not break through to the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent, put a thick covering of skin or fat, and you see the fistula under the cover. If the head of the fistula at its beginning, pushes ahead before the tent, and then the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
When the tent is released, it will tear and peel off; then remove those charred pieces that seem like a feather of a bird, and none remain.
And if the wound gapes and separates, cut between you and it, then cauterize with fire or medicine ointment.
For the cautery with fire brings together two good things: burning of those charred pieces and stopping of blood flow and drying out of moisture.
Then treat swellings moistened in butter or in broken oats, until the liquid settles down, and then immerse the charms in the liquid.
Then treat the wound with hard charcoal poultices, and they are dry medications.
For when it is restored, it becomes healed and does not return.
If a fistula comes all the way up to the bottom, and is separated from the body, push your thumb or finger against the bottom, and check it.
If you feel the temptation and there are two layers of fabric or sacking or charcoal, where it is about to pierce, there should be no remedy but a way of trust and hope through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you press it to the bottom, or if it is inflamed, apply a poultice and cure it as we have described.
and do not go too deep, making sure to cover the foundation-holding material, and let the evacuation come out voluntarily. Then heal, as we have said;
Then heal, as we have said; By chance it may heal, or you remove that covering and clean it when it is cut from the foundation, whether by pressure or some other tool pointed; then clean that charred material in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part beyond the foundation; it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you press the tent (?) on the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation below the skin above. and take a stentor's trumpet shaped in this way: and insert one thread twisted in two, and press the tent on the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head (or top).
If it is pierced in the edge of the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that perforation, so that you press your thumb or foundation.
And draw the head through thread, and join the two shoulder-pieces together, and hold one against the other, and leave it for one or two days;
And do not tighten it at any time until the threads catch the cartilages that are between them and dislocate.
Then heal the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not pierce through, make it pierce in all possible ways, if it is not too deep.
It is not advisable to treat a dislocated joint by covering it tightly and then curing it while it is still unhealthy.
The shape of the spurred spine used to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and cuts through. and not the other way round, because you should not cover what you should not cover, as you can see here:
Emorydes (emeroids) are of two types: they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones; and on the surface there is blood,  [or the translation can be] Emorydes come in two forms: either they are embedded within the foundations, similar to grains of resin, with some being small and others large; and on the surface there is bleeding. and one or more of them are dislodged from their foundation and from the base of the foundation; but those that are dislodged have little moisture.
and at the same time or a small amount of clear yellow fluid or blood, and they take on the color of the body.
And the treatment of those who have it within the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to stretch themselves towards going into rooms, until the foundations rise up and appear, and the sons understand. Hurry, and you shall grasp it with pliers, or hold it with your nail, then strike it at its roots.
And if the scissors cannot hold them due to their moisture, take a linen cloth or cotton, or a piece of leather. And pull [the dislocated joint] to your arms, then strike, and sprinkle hot powders over it instead of cautery; or cauterize [the wound] as the cautery chapter states, then heal it with other treatments until it heals;
and if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a hard and sharp clysteris to clean the affected area so that it can come out easily;
A sick person must prepare himself, and if his veins are forced from their foundation, it is an easy cure. And it is that you grab them with your nail or tweezers, and strike them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you bring the stitching in this manner: take one twisted thread, put it into a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, And if it is wide; draw the thread, then knot it, and straighten the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one for draining excess blood;
Then put on the foundation one moistened cloth in rose oil or pine resin, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
And then leave it until it stops bleeding, and when it has stopped, you can treat it with salves and other remedies, until it heals;
The dry heat of the fire or foundation Often, there is dryness from fever in the intestines, and due to the natural constraint, when the sickness is old and medicine has no effect.
You must cut the skin with a spatula or your nail so it does not get wet.    Car il se fait que le fiens deit mouvoir par ses movimens proprement, et si n’i puet adonques li sancs ne i coulent et li maladies ne se curent. Then let it heal as much as it should be.    Et quant il est sodez, purgez li fiens de sa feuillure, et fais que li sancs ne crescent pas en son intestine.
If it cannot heal, then start shaving again more forcefully than before, until it bleeds and is scratched; Then let it heal when it is healed.
toothache Formicet is a small creature that crawls under the body and moves forward greatly;
And sometimes the thighbone breaks, and one feels it like death trembling, and it comes throughout the body, but more in the hands than elsewhere.
The treatment is that you take a reed from an owl's feather or a strong vulture's feather and put the reed on the trembling, until the purple circles surround the trembling completely; then turn your hand all around the reed until it covers the trembling completely, and push it in fully, and harden the trembling from its roots.
And if you see, do as with a cat's incision of honey or iron according to this form, and be subtle beneath and draw above.
Do not pierce, to keep the tooth, and press more; And if you see, cauterize the froth, as it is in the chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clyster   (enema) Sometimes they make an enema of silver or arsenic, or melted beeswax or mallet; and sometimes they make these small and large instruments according to those for whom they are prepared.  (For the treatment of different ailments)
Therefore, when treating children who are weak and painful, they are small.
The shape of the cucurbit is both small and large, or the belly is tied in this manner:   (Note that "cucurbit" was incorrectly provided instead of "clistere".)
and it should have an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the eyes should be pierced within; and on one side there are two holes, and in the other one.  (Note that "costez" was incorrectly provided instead of "côtés".)
and the belly should be filled with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes,   (Note that "ventres" was incorrectly provided instead of "clistere".)
and place between each wound, namely a space, then push into these wounds, namely strong thread of twisted linen in ten or more, and bind the belly like a goat's. and when the medicine is within, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then cleanse (it). This is the shape of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then insert it gently.
Then the ministers press the patient's two hands together while he is fully visible, then remove the plaster, and wash the patient's legs in public.
And if the medicine seems to work, squeeze as much as possible; and if it swells overnight, it is a greater help.
And if you plaster the patient with belly distention caused by gas, and the medicine appears to work quickly, continue until he is healed.
And if the patient has hemorrhoids or abscesses, use a gentle plaster suitable for an infant.
and this is the form of the subtle suppository with which the skin should be stretched:
in the treatment of wounds;
We have already said in the division the treatment for wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments and medicines for hands, according to the completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by thrust of a spear, cut by sword and knife, or by lance or club or arrow, or similar things.
according to the parts of the body, such as wounds on the neck, or head, or chest, or belly, or liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound or injury comes about where the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to an arrow piercing or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn apart and the wound is large. and you doubt the lifting of the abscess: if it causes the wound to drain pus immediately, whether from the head or otherwise, let it drain against the injured part.
and let the patient avoid the accumulation of wine and heavy foods.
And if it does not want to heal, reduce its flesh, and let it drink no wine, nor eat meat.
And put on the wound, if an abscess swells up there, only softened cotton in rose oil, or in stiptic wine.
And if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by the air, powder that I will say a little later.
And if the wound has moved due to cold, put some ointments on until it heals.
And if the wound is large like a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, bring them together by sewing, as I shall say for the abdominal wounds, with suturing.
If the wound is open to the bone, and pus-filled, and does not stay closed but only slightly, close it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and command the patient to eat large foods such as heads (testes) and cooked wheat, also pulses, and similar things.
And if you find rot or putrefaction that does not reach the bone, cut off all the rotten part and pour boiling water on it, then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, from which it cannot be stopped without cutting, then you should cut the artery. If you find the artery dislocated, tie it with a thread. and if that does not help, cauterize [the wound].
And if the wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: it is that you put this powder on which hardens as soon as the arrows have moved [the wound].
And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live coal, and grind it finely,   (Line 1) and apply the wound, and hold it open in shape, until it dries well and joins with all its blood;   (Line 2)
then tie it up well, and leave it to heal by itself if it does not swell; for one does not apply medicine until it is healed.   (Line 3)
And sometimes they do this with only chalk, when there is no incense nor dragon's blood, but the wound has not moved.
If the wound has moved, then do not use this powder at all.
but place some digestible ointments or powder made from barley flour boiled in water and honey until it thickens. Then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle forceps.
I will tell you next about the skull fractures.   (literal translation)
of the neck wound    (literal translation)
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.   (literal translation)
If it is nerves, there is no other remedy but to let them heal and not put anything binding, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat. And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the essence of the nerves is cold and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as salt washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked in warm water. and other stones of similar kind, and always moistened.
And if the wound is large, bind it with strips, then let it heal until it becomes healthy.
If the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, pierce or cut them at a lower level.
If the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, tie it off, clean it, and cauterize if necessary.
If the spine of the throat is cut or the trachea is damaged, make sure that the food goes through it.   (The original text appears to be using "espinee" and "keurs" interchangeably to refer to the windpipe or trachea.) If the swelling is on the neck near the throat, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. And then apply the treatment method and leave it for some days, then heal it with burning ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound presses into the bone, cut it open. and if there are bone fragments, pull them out as you can, and leave the ones that you cannot remove until the wound festers. And let the joint be dislocated and aligned.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I have said. If there is bone in the wound and a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from a lance or knife
If it is a sword or dagger wound, and the wound is deep, check if vapors rise from the wound as the patient breathes; then know that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it immediately nor bind it for fear of causing bleeding. return to the patient's heart, and cut open the sick person; but apply an attractive ointment, and let it rest for two times the hour.
and if you don't have ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
make the patient rest above the wound for three days or four, or more. if no convulsion or bad trembling of the heart occurs, do not bind with linseed. And when you see good positions, know that the wound is healed. Perform the cure then from tents and other treatments, as long as he is healthy.
If it cannot be cured, and it opens up, then know that there is a fistula; if so, treat it as appropriate.
If the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple (i.e., not complex), whether on the front or back, treat the part that is in front of it.  \]
If it is large, sew (it); if it is small, powder (it); and if it is pressed into the bone, and has pieces attached to it, whether it be a wound, and the flesh is torn away, pull it apart if it is detached; and if they are not torn away, let the wound drain, align the extraction.
And for other wounds on various limbs, the judgments are as we have said.
The displacement of the abdomen
The displacements of the abdomen are large, medium, and small.
From a large wound, the intestines sometimes protrude, or the bowels of the intestines, due to which the introduction of anything inside it.
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one,
Because it is better to return the intestines more gradually, if not put them back bit by bit. As they swell quickly when feeling cold, therefore they should be returned more gradually.
and because it is better to treat the middle wound, because it is easier to reset the intestines in their place than others.
And know that the opening of the belly can be according to four methods:
The two common sutures happen in the abdominal suture.
and the sutures of other wounds on the body and two other specific sutures are common for other wounds.
Moreover, they are more suitable with the abdominal suture, and I will explain one of them and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and anything from the intestine protrudes, And great care is needed when resetting, this can be done by one of the two ways: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: Soak a sponge or a linen cloth only in cold water. cook it in boiling water with juniper berries and spikes. remove the intestines while it is inflated.
and sometimes make wine pressings, and it is matured until it swells to open.
And when you see the swelling separate, if you want to treat the intestines with either hot or cold and harmful foods, for this will close the entrance to almost nothing;
and if it cannot enter, make a small wound with the instrument used for removing hemorrhoids;
and the first remedy is a poultice that cuts; We should not cut it without great necessity.
and this is the instrument for splitting:
if you cut within the curve and bend not, and look here at the shape.
When the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst through, If you reset [it] according to its natural form in its proper place, If you have the power, because it is worth making the effort.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the stomach, If you should make the patient lie on his back, And raise his legs higher than his head; And if it is in the part beneath the abdomen,
and similarly if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen If the part broken is higher than the other;
and such should be administered for large and small wounds.
In small wounds, use what is appropriate;
then have between your hands a minister who knows the entire route of the wound with his hand, And press the lips; And this is the common way of suturing.
And this is the common way of suturing. And take a needle or more as per the width of the wound. Leave one finger's width from the edge of the wound and insert a needle with a single strong thread. and pierce the two shoulders with the two chisels of the syphac,
then pull a double thread around the awl of two parts, Then assemble the two heads of the wound together.
and then leave one finger's width of space, and insert another needle. then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to your need for the needles. Until the whole wound is bound up;
and the needles be moderate, neither too thin nor thick, for fine needles penetrate the entire skin, and thick ones cannot enter well: Because they should be reduced (or set back in place).
and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
so that they do not open and widen the wound before the healing.
Then place the needles on the joints so they do not hurt the patient while sleeping, And he sets needles or bandages on the head of the arrows to hold them in place. And let it remain until the wound is healed.
This method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it pierces an arrow or two.
The second suture is common. and that you join the two shoulder blades with the two ribs together with a needle having one strong, medium-sized thread; and when you have pierced these four together,
and when you have pierced these four together, if you remove the needle from the part where you began, in the manner that one sews a dress;
And put space between each stitch the thickness of a hen's egg.
this stitch shall be for the man.
and I sew a wound that a man had in his belly,
who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm in length, and extended from the intestines two palms in length,
and was in the abdomen. I returned his intestines as it had been 24 hours ago.
and the wound healed in 15 days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with medicine, because I was in one place where none could be found, nor any remedies; And put cotton wool over the wound several times a day, and wash it with water of honey until it is clean.
I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
Take the needle, and thread it from the outside to the inside part.
When the needle has pierced through straight in straight, place the knot at the end where you inserted the needle.
And pierce it through from the inside part until it comes out there.
and understand that you sew in this manner as a tailor makes fur pelts, and leave the syringe from one side at a time, and refill it with the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
The second method of stitching, which Galen calls specifically,
is like what anyone who joins two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the thread to the other end in this manner:
thread a needle or end of the silk nearest to that point, and pierce only that place, And let the two shoulders be still. then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part to within that (the inner) part. as the two shoulders are still.
then pierce one and the other from the outer part to within that (the inner) part, in two other shoulders opposite each other.
And this is the moistened manner of stitching, and it is the most common.
Galen said this word, and no one can deny it,
One must sew the stomach with two needles, where there is thread in each.
And one needle must be thrust from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather.
Know that when the hernia is inside the abdomen, the repair is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
The measurements for the wound are similar to those for other wounds:
And it is when you find the fresh wound full of blood, just as the arrow has moved it. Then place the intestine back in its place, and sew it up; then put powder on the wound to heal it.
Then place the intestine back in its place, and sew it up; then put powder on the wound to heal it. If the arrow has moved it, then place any salve that is present on the wound until it heals. and close the flesh, and sew the edges together with the thread, and apply pressure to stop the bleeding. Then treat the wound as others, when it is healthy.
And if you have no medicine, put on it immediately when it begins to emit pus, old cotton. And stir it twice a day until it is healthy.
You have no need for any other medicine when simple wounds occur in multiple positions.
and if you doubt that the wound will communicate with the principal members, you must moistened light linen with warm oil or rose oil, And place it among the bones, beneath the joints;
And if there is pain or rottenness in the belly, and it happens many times, if the cleansing with black wine is heated, and particularly when the rottenness comes to the intestine;
And piercing within, know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is pierced. and it is because of the planting of veins in them, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
And if the suture jumps from the wound, put it back as the intestine, while it is still fresh;
And if it becomes old and turns black, you must cauterize the black spot so that blood does not flow from it. For there are veins and arteries;
then strike what is between the ligament, and hang the two heads on the part under the wound to straighten the extraction when the arrows fall out, and the wound opens.
Of the rupture of the eyeball
When the entrails are torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men,
because I have seen that a man was pierced or wounded by a lance;
And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there were excretions and flatulence in it;
I treated it according to what I knew, and did not stop the application until it was healed, and the wounds were sealed.
And when I saw that the wound was healed, I feared that the patient might have something wrong in his stomach; And there was no ill, but it remained in better positions, and ate and drank;
and said some experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this way: take firm grips with large hands, then gather together the lips of the wound, and when the hand has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips (or: lips of the wound),
then put another blow in the same way as before, until the wound is completely seized;
and stitch up the wound. If the head swells in the intestines, it causes no harm to the patient.
and a thin string made from the intestine of an animal can be used to tie the intestines.
in this manner: Take the head of this intestinal thread that is very thin. and then tie it to the head of this thin thread (or fine cord) made from flax. then put the thread in a needle, sew the intestine, and tie it at the opening.
and this way of sewing up hernias is not without its risks and uncertainties;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no remedy nor health, unless through subtlety.
of fistula or that it be Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called "fistula," and especially when it is closed and swollen.
And a fistula is according to the truth, formed by hard and white knot, where no pain is felt. and it is closed like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it clears up in a clear jump, and other times it thickens. sometimes it decreases, and other times it increases.
And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound which is not healed, there is no flesh, this is only due to one of the eight causes:
it is to know, by the small amount of blood or body heat; or by its mischief, Because there is hard flesh within, under the skin, do not let it grow. If there is too much pus. When the loin (lower abdomen) is swollen, and the substance is of bad quality. If the medicine is not good in the treatment. For because corruption is a kind of pestilence; For the property in the region causes slow digestion, and the health delays, and it melts naturally on its own. There are veins or bones;
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Therefore it is necessary that I tell you the treatment for fistula which is done by handwork.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves. or the intestines, or the bladder, or the kidneys, or any of the ribs, or to the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to cure, and there is only labor and ignorance involved.
And if there is no fistula that does not reach the level I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it understood, if you take a tent of beeswax or iron, if the fistula is straight, press it;
and if the fistula is twisted, search for a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends with twisting.
And if the fistula at the hands is pierced and you cannot find it well by probing. if the fistula through one of the wounds,
because moisture is so short from one wound to another and cleans it.
then seek it cauterily within your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve and it has reached fully.
And ask the patient well about the pain they feel at your touch, and where they feel it.
And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein. Or in any of the places that I have told you, as I have said, if it is broken as I have told you.
Or in any of the places that I have told you, as I have said, if it is broken as I have told you. and cut open the fracture and the rotten bones that are inside. And then the treatment until it heals,
If the fistula is well penetrated directly, you must cut through completely, as much as you can, Then put dampened plasters with strong medicine inside it, and push them up to the end of the fistula,
Then put dampened plasters with strong medicine inside it, and push them up to the end of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
And then apply salve-like ointments to healthy skin, as long as it is clean.
and if it is not clean in this way, cauterize it as we have said,
And if the bone is rotten due to a fistula, cut it off. If a vein or nerves do not obstruct or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, let it heal until all the corruption is removed, then cure it with things that are healing and clean until it is healed;
If it is not healed, return to what was mentioned before, Know that you are not going as far as the fountain:
ung peregrin en la terre de Grescoigne. and remove all corruption, then restore its place;
if he is thus sound, that's good. If not (the shoulder), know that the corruption is too advanced, that you cannot reach it. if there is no other means but to let it heal by itself.
and if there is a small bone corruption, and you can extract it with pliers. if it can be extracted with one instrument.
And if there are many bones, draw them all out, do not leave any of them.
and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear, if flesh and moisture and cartilage block the bones, free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something to promote decay (poultice) And let the ligaments grow around the bones,
then they will have more easily movable bones;
and if it is a large bone like the leg or thigh, then clean only the rottenness so that all the blackness is removed, Then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part corrupt and comes to the bone marrow; it must be cut off and covered up to the corruption, and then heal until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened in a man's leg, If you take an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something coming from within the body.
and matter came to the leg, and a large abscess broke out that could not be opened up further.
but the monks, out of their foolishness, opened up the abscesses too much, And it becomes filled with a lot of matter, and it turns into an abscess, and much pus flows from it that all runs downwards with moisture from the body.
And many people put various cures around it for two years, and there was no skilled healer among them in the art of hands.
As long as I was present, I saw his leg and the medications they used to treat him, And those who run through the wounds with great haste; And the youth's body becomes red, and had a citron-colored complexion.
I pitched a tent at one of these wounds, and then searched all the wounds,
And I found that one bone comes against another from all parts of the leg.
I then, took in one wound as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and pierced through, and the rot came up to the bone within;
I was the one who seemed to see the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other rot except for what I left.
And it began to heal the wound with salty medicine for a long time, but could not be closed.
Then it was reinforced, and discovered the bone as before,
and found the continuous corruption in the bone, cut it out, left it open and tried to close the wound.
but I could not as I wrapped around a palm of the bone, and pulled it off completely, Then restore it with medicines; it healed and hardened quickly.
and it should not be necessary to start the work again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. Because it often bled from evacuation, but he was entirely healed.
Because it often bled from evacuation, but he was entirely healed. And a hard cartilage is born in the place of the bone, and it has good alignment and no harm or contrary to anything, neither at the side nor at the coming.
stretch the head so you pull out the corrupted cartilage underneath, uncover the cartilage on the correct place where you want to be, so that the skin does not cut the cartilage; And put, either a splint or a table beneath the bone to cover the corrupt flesh; And it is necessary that it be as small as possible, and to see and feel the corruption, and to be more often.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, if you uncover the entire flesh; then place a splint under it,
And let there be from one part to another the corruption, and let the length of the corruption be a span (or 9 inches), as we have said;
If the corruption is in a joint, then strike the corrupt joint, and let the bone on the other side be exposed;
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no remedy but to cover it up;
If the corruption is at the wrist (of the hand) or ankle, it is a very difficult thing, But always it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it opens up; and clean it in every way that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you;
And know that the saw and files for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and its appearance, And their thickness and fineness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, the instrument must be prepared according to each kind of work.
And know that the work will show you the tool needed, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the signs of diseases. If one considers the tool required for what is necessary according to this.
of fire The head may dislocate either due to internal or external causes;
and when you have treated that with corrosive medicine and it does not help at all, It is necessary to cover that member up to the level where the corruption comes. If the patient escapes death by this means or by some greater evil, which is lack of a member,
If the patient escapes death by this means or by some greater evil, which is lack of a member, and the signs are that the member turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads, then goes the corruption of the member to member. And takes hold of the whole body; if you hurry to cover,
and if it is by the sting of certain poisonous beasts like a sea scorpion or snake and similar,
If the corruption is at the head of the tooth, strike it, and do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the wrist, strike it at the joint so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
And if it comes to the elbow, strike at the surface; and if it passes the surface, it is death. and no foreign treatment is effective except for the quantity of its virtue.
and thus do as follows when corruption or pus comes: if it comes in the first joint, strike after the next joint.
If it comes out (or falls) and strikes (it), strike the whole piece. If it moves up in the leg, then strike at the knee joint;
If it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy for the patient except death.
The method of striking or treating a limb consists of binding it both above and below; And stretch one of the ministers (or assistants) the lower limb, and another minister (or assistant) the upper limb. And you should sever the cartilage that is between the two joints to one space of a thumb's breadth wide, while the bone is exposed;
then you sew or silk, and place on each side one linen cloth so that the silk does not touch the healthy bone; and another physician comes to treat a different wound or abscess.
And when blood flow occurs as you work, cauterize the area immediately. and you put on some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the limb with a firm bandage and heal it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in particular:
It happened to him a blackness resembling a burn by fire.
And that corrosion started first in his thigh bone until it consumed the entire thigh;
And when the man saw the corruption, he covered the thigh with a copper sheet, and was healed.
And long time afterwards, the corruption or tooth of the hand came back to him, and it came to me,
and I placed things repressive after the purification of his body, but the corruption could not be stopped.
Then you command me to amputate his hand, but I do not wish to unless I have hope of curing the matter. And he doubts that if I am to amputate his hand, he will not die, because the power of man was weak; and he lost all hope and returned to his land, and struck his hand with a sword, and recovered;
And I have considered this only for the purpose of doing otherwise, if it is needed.
Sometimes an abscess appears in a charnut place and remains so long that it forms a large swelling of boils; Then they run and burst, and the skin is left open like a wound, as if a vassal were wounded; The skin that is above is as delicate as linen fabric unraveled. And it will not go down to the bone or nerve, and such disease is called "sain".
but if it becomes so long that it goes to the bone completely, it is called "fistula";
And the cook [surgeon] should know that you should wrap it all over, and in the same way when it is subtle, as a bandage. And it shall not rot for its corruption.
And if you have faith that the leather will rot, and the corruption is not complete, And if the leather is thick with flesh, then cure it with clysterism in this way:
Check if the breasts are large, and if they are swollen with a foul smell. Then use the Egyptian clay poultice which is made as follows: Take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, cook them in one vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey.
And then take from these [substances] according to your need, and make it into vinegar and honey. and clisterize the breast, and compress the wound; leave the medicine for two hours, then remove it by pulling gently;
do this repeatedly until the breast is purified and pus removed.
And sometimes it is caulked with watery ash, when this medicine is not present, and you must take vine ash, pour water over it.
then strain it and use as a clyster, until you know that the breasts are properly healed;
if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor watery ash. If the poultice is made with water and honey or has a little bit of pulverized litharge; or you poultice it with honey and sweetened wine, the honey should have properties of cleansing and washing. and the vinegar strengthens the blood.
and when you have done this and trust that the breasts are well cleansed, If the cluster of this (body part) that produces pus in it,
and apply a plaster to define its boundaries, and make it with rose oil and wine. or you plaster it with certain medicines and ointments, as I have said the properties for treating wounds.
and if the wound in the breast is small and the plaster cannot enter it, If a small wound from a blade is made, put an Egyptian bandage on it. and apply the ointment of basilicon, while it is still wide.
and if the wound is too large, make an incision of one league or apply a curette.
and if a swelling that arises above is present, press or squeeze it lower than where it is. For when the bone is in place, do not let it be encumbered with cartilage. and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see, prepare in such a manner that the bone aligns with its lowest point.
and if you cannot cover the wound beneath as you see fit, if it appears in this way: that the boil runs slightly downward, and do not allow anything from the boil to remain. take medicines that are consolidating to put on the wound.
And they lay a linen cloth over the entire breast; then apply the force on the wound in the breast, about a finger wider than the first one, then anoint it with oil according to the size of the wound, and place it on the breast wound to bind it, and do not remove the larger cloth except after several days.
And one who is on the peritus of the breastbone, often has the breastbone taken out to remove the swelling, and knows what to do about the swelling of the breastbone, whether it is poison or pus, or if it is digested or undigested;
and takes care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been spread out in this manner and you see the nature that rises on the peritus of the breastbone, If you know that breasts have swollen, approach them with care;
and then unbind it in the morning or the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change one or another bandage and renew the ointment.
If the breasts overflow with undigested matter for many days, know that the breasts do not swell. And if subtle poisonous worms crawl after a long time, do not despair of health,
for the healing draws near. For there are men whose wounds delay in healing and those who do the opposite;
and if the belly swells suddenly after many days, know that the breasts do not loosen.
and if the breast delays in growing, and is swollen, apply drying medications with a moist substance and dry properties. As an ointment defined, for it contains much vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
take the ointment defined, and make it with rose oil, and mix equal parts of old wine in substance;
then cook and use it; and the same made, warmed and swollen, when the defined ointment is not present,
Take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on honey when it is over the fire; and then place one cloth on it and lay it on the breast, and sometimes an astrologer gives a long one, and root of the celestial lily, which is as fine as flour and centorium.
and root of the celestial lily, which is as fine as flour and centorium. and in the use of simple or compound medications: grind them, make powder, put on the honey I said, and use it. And if the wound is long, and it is not treated by this method,
And if the wound is long, and it is not treated by this method, then know that corruption sets in fully, and it presses into the bone, or hardens the members or ligaments. if the treatment of the fistula is by the method we have said before.
Of the abscess of the nail bed
Panaric is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the hand. or under the toe, or by chance may arise in other places;
and when it becomes inflamed, and no care is taken, if one abscess bursts out. And they run and throw the bowl until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance they may strike the entire thing.
And the corruption reaches the bone, as long as it brings a foul smell, and the shoulder is wide at its base, and the color is red.
When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help at all. If this doesn't work, then you should cut off everything that has remained of the nail. Then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is very beneficial if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound.
and if the nail presses against the flesh after it, and begins to swell, and becomes blistered, you must place the rod under the nail so as not to touch the flesh. And lift up the bone, and strike the cartilage gently and lightly. And put on top of the remaining cartilage medicinal burning and corrosive substances to burn everything;
If the corrosion is in the bone, strike and pull it out because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the bone broken, strike it with a hammer as before said. then heal it until it is healed;
and if it is wounded, and bruised, and feels great pain, you must heal it first. then strike the nail with the sharp instrument in cutting across from above.
And be careful that the incision does not reach the flesh below the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
If it happens, put something on top to soothe.
The fingers that sprout from some men's hands by accident are all fleshly. And by chance, it has nail or bone, sometimes it has a claw,
Sometimes they grow at the root of the joint, or the growth is in some fingers of the hand. A nail that grows under the nail of the finger does not move. And he who is born at the joint of the thumb, by chance becomes mute;
The size of the one who is fat is light, in this manner: the length from its root in a broad spatula;
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure, take care.
In a newborn or an unborn child, you must first cut the round cartilage to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and cure it until it is healed.
The joints that come together in the fingers also come together by birth, or by injury, or by fire burn, or similar things.
You must cut the joint, so that it repairs according to its natural forms; Then put between two tents or dampened cloths anointed with rose oil, so that they do not stick. and you place between two thin planks, until the edges are joined as required.
Similarly, if it comes to either of its sides with the palm, you strike the joint as necessary.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
The veins are large, enveloped, and filled with melancholic superfluities, which come in many members of the body.
It also happens in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things more than others.
Therefore, you must administer purge of bile at times, and then the healthy from the basilica.
The iron cure is according to two methods: one is by beating them, and drawing out black blood through it; And another way is to open a vein and pull it out completely.
The cutting is done in this manner: make an incision in the leg with sharp hot water, until the flesh becomes softened. Then hold the patient's leg from above the knee to below the knee part. Then cut open the vein, either one or two or three, of a large size,
Then draw out and drain the black blood from the vein between one end and the other until as much blood as the sickness can bear comes out.
and then tie it up, and instruct him to bind himself with black-colored meat or linens.
and begin the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and help the sick person.
The swelling of it is as follows: raise the leg of the patient if there is much hair on it, then immerse it in water and rub the leg with warm, hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
and if you don't have water, heat it on the fire, then press it against the vein along the thigh or in the part below the ankle;
then scrape the skin with an edge of a knife, and remove the vein from both sides until it appears when you feel it.
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters or skin seems like a white cord;
then push the rod beneath, until it has risen in the skin, and then pierce it lightly along the edge.
then strike it into another place below by three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein as far as it appears. then lift the rod, as you have done, and pierce it at another place, as you did first.
Then take another size [of instrument], or more if needed, then heat it up, and place it on the base of the foot.
Heat it again and re-heat if needed until the second size; then take it out gradually by size, until it has come completely out, then place it.
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, push an awl with a single, strong and double thread through it. and pull it out and draw it, and push a rod underneath it, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out. And keep it from bursting, for if it bursts, one cannot draw or lift it out, and this harms the patient.
And when you have treated it all, place on the wound linen moistened with vinegar and oil of rose, and let it heal until it is healed.
And if the vision is twisted, contracted and rolled together in one, not straight as we have said, It is necessary that you cut it badly (the dislocation), but do not cover it; draw it as we have said before.
It is necessary that you cut it badly (the dislocation), but do not cover it; draw it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein is curved and does not cut, do not pierce the vein with it.
and is of large curvature, for if it is thin, it will pierce the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
Of the civil vein.
This vein is opened in the legs, in warm places where no grass or trees grow, and in dry ground where there is no moisture.
and it may happen elsewhere than the legs, and this is due to rot that comes from beneath the skin.
if snakes come within the body and go out, open a vein between the skin and flesh.
If the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large swelling in the leg, Then change the joints, and start to open the vein like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, it is necessary that you wind around a piece of wood from 6 to 24 inches and tie it,
and leave the wood on the leg, and every time it slips off, wind around the wood again and tie. and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wind the remaining around, but do not cover it at its root until it is all out. If you pierce it (the shoulder), it goes back into the flesh, and brings forth abscess and pus or evil disease.
For this reason, it is necessary that it be treated bit by bit until the head, and nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes, this vein is when it is treated for five or ten fingers of length, And once a man came to me, from whom it issued out ten fingers' length, and when you cut it off, press half a pound or more, and pierce it to the bottom,
so that everything comes out of it; and empty the matter that is within, and bring medicine poultice to the place for three days, then treat it like an abscess.
Sometimes this vein swells up again, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or hand. And it comes much from falls, and what causes it to rain; cure it then as we have said before.
Worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle,
And there is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and it travels through the whole body swelling and shrinking, It feels itchy around each member from one end to the other, as long as the skin where it is located swells or it moves and jumps.
It is infested with putrefaction of certain fluids, like worms, snakes, lizards, or roundworms in the abdomen.
and doubt is had about its mischief, for when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye. By chance, oil enters and is destroyed; and this happens often.
When you see it to cure and drain, one can only force it when it goes:
Then you must lie the limb above and below with a strong rope tightly,
Then beat above and pull harder, and if the wound is completely healed and you do not feel it, If you cauterize with fire until it dies;
and the greater harm that it does is when it burns oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold a cork beneath it in the shape of a circle, then strike above, and pull it out;
and you must use the patient with body cleansing of soluble medicines for removing bad humors,
And it swells with meat pork putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called on our land "vakirir", and is pain that comes in certain members, And then moves from member to member; I have seen this as I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
and within a short while, it (the swelling) rose towards the shoulder as if like a worm. quicker than anything else, just like living silver when cut from one piece.
The pain separates from that place and pierces the shoulder.
Then a little later, it runs through the entire body until it comes to the other arm;
then told me that it turns again around the body, as I saw it do.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. Therefore, I would have wished that many had wished to move pain from one place to another, but I did not wish it, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and because of this, such constrictions appear;
And they do not appear accordingly to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins responding.
When you see treating this illness, and the patient feels such pain as we have said, if it opens as we have described, press down firmly on the joint above and below, then apply pressure above until the swelling is compressed at its site. And cauterize the joint; if you do not see it with your eyes,
and if you do not cure those that displace the wind (windbag or intestinal blockage), as with fetid pills and pills of serapion, and similar others.
arrows
Arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
The diversity of theirs is such that there are those who have large points, small, round, and solid. and some have two angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those with parts. and when it falls in any member, it falls in two ways: either in the main body which is hairy,
or spleen, liver, heart, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder and similar members. When it falls (the limb) into any position of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you later appear to you: then you should take care in the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many positions. and if this sign does not appear to you at all, and the arrow is not embedded fully, draw it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and if there is a bulge on the forehead above the skull: It is concerning cataract, stone, and gravel in the eyes, redness of the eye, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile. and perhaps without fever from the nose or ears; and perhaps losing speech and voice. and jumping from the wound with white moisture resembling pus, and also bleeding like a bruise of flesh.
and if this sign appears to you, hold on to the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it isn't in.
The sign of an arrow when it strikes or pierces is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were embedded in a hard object, not empty. And occasionally the arrow becomes like hair and produces black blood in the court, brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore one can sense doubt that death is imminent.
The sign of an arrow that never pierces the flesh is when bubbles rise from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, sighs loudly and seeks fresh air.
And if an arrow falls into the mattress of the bed, it is removed between the ribs; and it causes great pain, deep breathing, and groaning; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.
If an arrow falls into the stomach, possibly something from indigested meat may escape from the wound.
If an arrow falls into the belly and nothing escapes from the intestines through the wound, there is no hope in the treatment or removal of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
The other member, as the hand, arm, throat, shoulder, armpit, backbone, waist, hips, legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of this you do otherwise.
It happened to one man that an arrow or spear struck him in the root of his nose: I tried and pulled it from the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was healed without pain.
And pulled with force an arrow that stuck in the oil (fat) beneath the paper (skin) below, and the arrow was found, and not a bit of it could be pulled out towards the front. And the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, with its tip very sharp, piercing the ears without any harm or adverse event happening to it.
And it pierced an arrow from the throat of a Christian and the arrow was Arabic with sharp ears.
I was a barber and became skilled in pulling it out, and the Christian remained unharmed.
And pulled an arrow out of a man who was either head or belly-wounded, and thought he would die;
And after he has passed thirty days, his dislocation does not change position; I cut through the arrow, manipulated it, and pulled it out without any bad incident.
And if one wishes to pierce a man with an arrow who has been sewn up, and the wound is closed;
And the arrow remained inside [the body], and did not change its position naturally. nor did it find any hindrance in any of its natural movements.
And a second man, who had an arrow strike him in his face, and the wound was sutured;
and remained like that enduring great pain; and many similar things happened.
And through a (arrow) shaft of a man, one of the princes king, who was wounded in the neck, and was slightly tilting towards the right side; and the arrow was completely straightened
I was called to treat it after it had been wounded for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I seek it with great subtlety, and I feel it not. and he feels prickling and pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead
I place it on the loin attractant digestive, because the loins do not swell; And the tip of the arrow appeared.
And the tip of the arrow appeared. I applied the plaster for many days and healed the wound directly, and the patient remained for a long time.
He felt the arrow within his body for a day; and he told me about it. I apply corrosive medicine to the wound by hand for several days, until it is healed.
and press, and feel the head of the arrow which adheres to the place; then I adjust in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appears clearly visible.
and after passing well the terms of four months,
And then cut open the wound that I have lanced, hold it apart from both sides, and it cannot be closed.
Then I continued to refine and devise various ways of tools, until I took them for a day with well-made tweezers. According to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it and restore the wound.
And the doctors judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored. Then I will restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows, since I do not say everything, for the books cannot cover everything;
However, wise masters compare very little concerning this matter, and regarding what is present and failing. True are nine works, and nine tools, in the diminishment of things strange which happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not enter the limbs where they are inserted except in two ways: or through the side where they enter, or from another direction.
And this one that jumps out through there or enters, is an arrow entering into flesh, and jumps out occasionally.
And if it does not jump out, leave it until the flesh heals around it, and make sure the wound is closed.
And if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and move it daily.
And then it jumps [the joint], and if it does not jump, pierce around with all [a small sharp instrument] until the joint is loosened, and then pull it out.
And if an arrow is inserted into the body so that it cannot be seen, seek it out with all your might; and if you feel it, draw it out with any suitable instrument.
and if the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow make it difficult to remove: and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, open the wound as wide as possible. And pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow as it is,
And pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow as it is, and remove the foreign body which is inserted into the muscles by two parts as much as you can, then break or fold the ears of the arrow, as much as you can draw it.
then break or fold the ears of the arrow, as much as you can draw it. Be very careful to not break the arrow, pull it more gently.
If you cannot pull it out in one go, push the linen cloth around it until it is reached the joints, then pull it gently, as the extraction should be done carefully. If the flow of blood opposes you, bring to hand what we have said in the chapter for its treatment.
and beware of incising nerves and veins, and use tools as you can pull the arrow out safely.
In haste or immediately, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him. for it is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, or it opens something of it, or the skin is swollen near it as can be seen or felt.
Therefore cut through it, as far as the tongs can grasp, and then pull it out: if it leaps away now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, let it stay for a while, then continue with the extraction until it issues forth.
and if it were of the arrow shaft, push it all the way out.
and if it fell out, and you wish to administer a binding, then apply one bandage. If the point of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; then push forcefully,
and if the arrow is embedded in the hair, apply the instrument point for easier extraction.
And if the arrow has touched bone, then it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then care for the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow falls or pierces through the belly, bladder, side or kidney and is close by, and you can cover it over, then do so;
and guard against covering the vein and the nerve, then extract, and sew up the wound if necessary; heal it until it is healed.
The shape of the tweezers used to extract arrows resemble an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
incisions of the body common veins Incisions for venesection are thirty-one, of which there are sixteen heads
it means: two basins which are behind the ears, called "herbech" (herbech in Old French is not translatable as it doesn't have a direct English equivalent) and the two arteries which are in the two temples visible (temple is the area on each side of the head where the skull is not covered by skin) And two veins which are in each of the two eyes, called "aspirates"; And the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two tendons which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on top of the lips above the mouth, and these are called "augeherich"; 2 veins located beneath the tongue.
The veins that are commonly drained are 5 in each arm.
one is called the cephalic and is found on the left side, commonly referred to as "vein of the head" by laymen. and the median is called the "fast vein," composed of both the cephalic and the basilic. And the lay people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side. And the lay people call it "vein of the stomach", and it is above the abdomen. That is the one which opens up clearly above the navel.
And the salivary vein is the vein between the auriculare and annular, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot are three veins: one of which is beneath the hollow of the left thigh. And the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side, and the vein called "nesses", which is in the ankle on the other side.
And in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The veins after the ears aid the ancient catarrhs and migraines. And the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you grasp the patient's head,
And the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you grasp the patient's head, and rub the area where the vein or vessels are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: If you have pain in your thumb and feel its pulse beneath it, squeeze it.
then take the lance, and push it through under the vein up to the bone, then pull your hand all along the vein. and cut the skin and the vein well through two thumb-widths deep, and make the blood come out as much as you see.
then tie it and let it heal.
And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The sanitation of the two arteries that are in the temples, is effective against migraines. and sodium, and eye strain, and to the heart of watery eyes for the eyes.
and the qualities of sanitation are as I say: And it is necessary for the patient to stretch his neck, until both veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse beneath your thumb, then press firmly;
then lift the knife tip on the vein at the top of your index finger, and thrust the needle underneath it; lift up the vein and cut it, just like you have done in the two other veins, and take out the correct amount of blood according to your need;
Then bind the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
and then form the bandage, and leave it until it heals; and we have spoken of its covering and its removal, where the book begins.
The healing of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the healing of the skull in old facial diseases, and it has migrated and turned red.
and the qualities are such that the patient stretches his neck while twisting it, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which shape is:
Place the point onto the vein and strike with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount that you see; Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is sealed and never use a large flame.
Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; and pierce through obliquely because the bone is close, and accidents may occur if the flames are too fine.
The veins of the two arms aid the eyes, and the ligament, the tendon, the muscle in the oil, and the diseases of the face.
And the quality of its veins is that the patient pulls their neck in a twist using some cord, as previously stated.
Then, the vein or veins should be heated with a stick of fire about half long and wide, as there is no need for heat.
And if the fire is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make an incision for the blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with a cloth, and secure it well.
The purification of the vein from the navel is useful against ague (fever), and against pustular scurvy (a skin disease), and against diseases caused by bile. just as migraines and redness that comes from the liver, especially when it is old.
and the quality of the purification is such that the patient grasps his neck, then grasps his navel with your left hand. and take the subtle flame long, and push it between the two nostrils. For the vein does not open well as it should, and the arteries will now begin to bleed.
And do not go too deep, and make the correction of blood according to your need, then let it rest for a night, for it is soon restored.
The salves of the two kinds aid in the extraction of the gallstone, and at the beginning of an incision, and in many diseases, and in stopping itching, and in corroding, and in sores, and in ulcers.
And the qualities of the urine are such that the patient strains his neck under both, as we have said; And the master stands over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on one seat,
then open the vein along its length a little wide, then draw the blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
Then, you must reset another place in the other vein, then unloose the ligament, and hold the veins gently, Do not let the patient strain it; leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
On the Healing of Livestock The translation of the given line is as follows: "The opening of veins in the lips above helps in cooling in the mouth, and in corruption of the gums, and cuts in the lips, and toothache and around."
And the qualities of the vein are to make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and they are known by the fact that they are dark, and the fact that small veins surround them; Take both of them then, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt,
Take both of them then, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, Take the largest of each pair, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below; because it is the same method.
From the saliva beneath the tongue The saliva from the veins beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic vein puncture, and it is used for the treatment of throat diseases and mouth diseases;
And the qualities of the healer are such that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and gazes into every vein on both sides.
Then, let one and the other (veins), not go too deep, for beneath them are the arteries.
The veins near the surface, which are commonly healed in two ways:
or burn with large mirrtin flames, or subtle olive oil as you know expensive tranches, and it is called "anesil". (Translation) and they are wide and thin according to the width and thickness of the veins. (Translation) The shape of mirrtin flames is very renowned, and it is wide as you see: (Translation)
And it must be used to open the veins that contain large and turbulent blood. (Translation) And this is the form of olive oil fire:
And it is more pointedly subtle, and is for refining subtle veins with citrus-colored thin blood.
The refining of the basilica (which is one of these veins) helps with diseases that are under the throat, neck, chest, and stomach.
It is necessary for the Lord to refine it properly, and he should evacuate the artery that is beneath it. And if it touches the artery, and bleeding occurs, it should be stopped, as I have said. and must not be pressed by the fire, but cut as an anise seed.
And if the bladder does not open openly, you should open it and change another one. or if you want to take any urine from it, or if the vein opens in its place on the arm: it opens openly. And the cope (cup) to fire annul, as we have said.
If you wish to know the location of the bone, then you must also stretch out the arm and touch the place where you feel the pulse. Then mark the location of the opening, then tie the arm, and cauter the vein with fire.
And be careful not to hit the artery when you see it swell, for it is of the artery; cut it then.
And if it swells high like a child's urine, and the surrounding area is red and tender, know that this is not of the artery: Therefore, hasten then and place your finger on it for a long time, then cut your finger so that the surrounding area stops bleeding, which often happens.
Keep the arm still, and let it be in this position, the patient should not move it; be afraid, and do not move it until it heals.
If the wound is not stopped and it bleeds, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, as the head of the artery retracts; stop the bleeding in the wound.
Take a piece of fustic bark, cut it and take one half and lay it on top until the next day;
If it (the wound) stops bleeding, that's good; if not, heal it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
And the stopping of bleeding should not be hurried in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
The bleeding from the vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic veins, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the master to pierce through the nerve that is below, and if it perforates too deeply, and he finds the nerve, and inflate and heal the wound may grow sick again, and by chance it cannot heal;
and this nerve opens frequently, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must pierce it with the instrument anesthetic; and cut the nerve as you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The healing of the skull helps when it draws blood from the head, and assists with the eyes.
And it is necessary to heal by pricking with olive oil or myrtle fire, for it is the safest of all veins, as there is no nerve nor artery beneath it.
Furthermore, it is necessary to seek out the easier joint, and not to hurt anything when it must be done for the first time, and then we repeat. And sometimes the joints swell in some men, when it must be done for the first time, but do not hurt anything. The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about wounding is that wounding is not done except for the sake of health,
and to avoid future diseases. and the wounding should be done in one of the four veins that are known as follows: cephalic, femoral, or basilic. And it should be bled at the beginning of Lent and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And it should be bled every first or third day, after 2 or 3 hours.
The bleeding given for diseases has no fixed hour, but when it is necessary on day or night, at all hours and in every moment.
And one should not bleed children under the age of 14 nor women who are pregnant except for the first four months after conception. They should not heal the old who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wants to heal, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary that the intestines are cleared with a mild cleansing enema. if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not bring excess waste from the intestines to the main limbs;
They should not heal who are too salty with meats, or drunk, until they have purged themselves, or water-logged.
And if there is wounding after a colic attack, vomiting, abdominal distention, multiplication of women's disease, labor, watchfulness and fasting, and whatever weakens the power, or by weapon or body injury;
then purify the humors, if they are thick, with foods and drinks and medicines, if you have that power;
then immerse or bathe it, if nothing prevents it, to purify the blood,
And heal the vein with the instrument at the side of the third [vein], as we have said.
Keep him that day from work, from pain, and from lust, and similar things;
And be gentle and kind, and let the healer be higher than him who is to be healed, and rub the arm twice or thrice.
Then draw out the thread slowly, for if it is too tight or narrow, it cannot heal without.
And then rub the place with hands until the veins swell, and feel for them.
Then wet the hot iron tip of a thumb with a little old oil, then place your left hand's knuckle on that vein under the dislocated joint where you want to cauterize. so that the vein does not break and fail when struck by the iron. For there are veins like cords to the needle, and others that are full of windiness. When applying fire, it draws to the fire and cannot open the vein; this is with some of them.
If it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for this reason the surgeons should be advised on these matters.
And if the vein opens the first time, that's good; if not, continue a little below or above that spot, unless it is inflamed.
And if the limb is inflamed and the patient is afraid, let him rest for one or two days and do not tie the arm. By chance, abscesses may come; do not enter the water, then renew the healing if it pleases him.
and if the opening is small or without a thin layer of cort (cortex), and you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you see, place the fire directly into the same opening.
and open it a little hurriedly, so that the flesh is swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh swollen, do not renew the healing, but put a little of oil on it, for the grease reduces the amount of blood in that place, and the oil is absorbed by the wound.
And thus administer oil of lard in each wound that you open a vein, to stop the flow of blood.
Also apply treacle and bowwood to it when placed upon the place; divide it if it becomes too thick.
If an abscess occurs (which often happens when the opening of the vein is small), If you are in a hurry, place a damp, soft sponge in warm oil and water on the location for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood evacuation from the vein, and if it remains in its place for several days without blackness or greenness, it does not matter. And if you see, put something from aloes or myrrh steeped in wine or vinegar, mustard, or a similar substance on it.
And there are often abscesses and signs in the sanctuary of the temple: put your hand on it then, if you find it soft to the pressure of your hand, it is an evil sign. Therefore, do not place anything of what we have said on it, for by chance in court without the artery; but make one dry compress to harden it, then heal it with another remedy until it heals.
And draw blood from each person according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is filled and hollowed out, and requires extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to drain a little bit and often, and it must be drained by cutting across, not by pricking.
and this method of draining is safe from corruption of blood and nerve compression, and it works better than the long drainage rather than wide one.
And for the one whose body needs to be purged, it is necessary to give soft bread soaked in juices of pomegranates; if he is scorched, draw blood three or four times or.
And if he is of cold complexion, eat soft bread in syrup made from muscat grapes or honey with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and a fragrant syrup before purging.
And if he is suffering from diarrhea during purging, after the discharge of blood, it is necessary that he drink a broth made from meat and a fragrant subtle syrup.
And apply other things as we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
If one wants to fracture his arm, and heal it again at another time, if it is weakened by repeated healing, then let him heal little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And who wants to fracture his arm after the first healing, and has a strong body, let him heal in 6 hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to heal from another part, should heal on the second day or the third day.
Because there is much blood within the body that has been heated up and causes fever; in such a case, it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and to enlarge the opening until it can be held with a hand. then you wash all the conditions of health, and place your hand on top of the feet when it heals, so that death does not come in its place. And this often happens, when the healer is negligent.
And it is not advisable when you wish to dislocate the arm, and let blood flow a second time, and the wound has closed, that you press firmly. If it is curved, extend the arm as much as possible, for it would be harmful;
but leave it until it bleeds the second time; or you press it with the tip of the flame until the frozen wound opens. and put a piece of clean linen soaked in vinegar on top and press lightly.
And if the vein has burst, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is appeased.
And if you need to draw blood a second time, draw it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
The veins in the arm are opened at the location of the neck because they are composed.
And the method of opening is that the patient plunges his hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red;
Then tie it gently, so that the vein appears well, then prick it carefully, not wide or long.
and make the incisions wide, and prick near the joint of the hand, and if it does not bleed out, put the hand in hot water and let the blood come out into the water until you have enough.
and if it is summer, do not immerse the hand in hot water, for it should be kept longer in winter than in summer.
And the vein of this artery is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The vein of the caudate lobe of the liver is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it works:
Press the hand and apply hot water until the vein swells if it can be seen. If the vein crosses, and if you press it completely on all sides, it will not hurt anything;
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all uncovered by flesh.
Then put your hand in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have drained the blood as necessary, put oil and wax on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
The purgative of the hand on the left side is beneficial for the disease of mice, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
The poultice of the shin is beneficial for all diseases that are beneath the body. as for the diseases of the stomach, retention of flowers, diseases of the limbs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its poultice is that the patient should immerse their foot in hot water and rub it on the affected area until it perishes. And lay [something] above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes in many directions.
Take then the larger vessel, or at the ankle, for that will suffice.
If you should raise [the vessel] above the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and pierce it similarly as in cutting; let the flames not burn it.
And if the limb cannot come out, put it in water and let the vein drain well.
If the lesion needs to be made for the first time, then start again a little above because the place is salted. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the other limb equally.
The place of the sciatic vein is at the knee of fire, and its lesion is worth the pain of the hinge when it is due to hot blood.
And the qualities of his health are such that the patient immerses himself in water up to the knee joint, and then turns the leg four times above the ankle.
For otherwise, the vein will not open; and if it opens, you must heal in all ways that you can, and by crossing. It is better to cut it off, for the limb is dead and very responsive to human hands.
It is better to cut it off, for the limb is dead and very responsive to human hands. And if you do not pull it out, there will be no healing for the joint that is closed or open at the foot or in the little finger, and guard against nerves.
Make such a correction to the blood as you see, and then untie the bandage, put cotton on it and press; it is now healed.
Wounds of the blisters
Blisters are made of horns, or hair, or glass; and blistering is done in two ways: either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
And this cauterization, which is meant to wound, is of two kinds: either it is for all fire, or with fire.
And two others in the two sides of the neck; and the tonsils beneath the chin; and the tonsils under the armpits; and the tonsils on the knees; And the tonsils between the two arms; and the tonsils between the two legs; And the tonsils of the wrists; and the ventosation does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
And because of this, one should not hesitate at all, just like when performing venesection. And it should not be administered in any case, nor to any fire or hot fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
And if, due to necessity or habit, it is required to administer venesection, we will do so either at the beginning of the month or at the end, and in the middle and in every instance.
because there are some who, when they have to perform venesection, have a swollen head;
And if such [persons] find swelling and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness in the eyes;
and such [persons] who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue is swollen and they spit blood; And if such [persons] faint, see blood in their urine and vomit blood, die, or similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially if it is outside of the month, we command to ventose after 3 hours of the day.
The sore in the mouth helps with the inflammation of the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this ventosation is in place of the sore in the head,
And it is not appropriate for one of cold constitution to use [the treatment], or who has catarrh, for it does them great harm.
And for this reason, it is not appropriate that the elderly should use [the treatment], nor those with cold diseases.
And those who heal themselves often become careless and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the danger of negligence.
The cupping glass in the neck is located at the place of healing for the head and basilica, and for this reason it is beneficial for the treatment of the disease. and to cut through the channel of the sphincter, and also to prick, and to fill up;
it is necessary to press it gently, for if it holds too tightly, it can cause obstruction in the intestines or stomach and heart.
Wind in the two ribs of the neck is worth the pain of the head, and obstruction and migration, and strangling, and pain in the roots of the teeth,
and is located in the cavity of the basilica; it is necessary that you command the lord to extend his hand to put it, so he does not touch the artery, and there is no loss of blood.
The ventosations below the chin are useful for mouth disease and decay of the gums, as well as similar diseases found in the mouth; it is located near the salivary glands of the two lower lips.
The ventosations of the shoulders are useful for disease caused by heat and swelling.
The ventosations of the sides are as useful as four veins in the arms, because it draws blood from these large veins;
And instruct the master not to pierce too deeply, for the joint is naked of flesh and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
The blister that is on the buttock is effective against hemorrhoids from their foundation and diseases beneath, and it should be large and made of goose feathers, which requires good drawing; and if it were too fine, it would break; causing large wounds.
The blisters on the legs open widely because they draw blood from the entire body, and they are effective against ancient pains of rheumatism, marasmus, and the bladder, and remove inflammation; they are located in the joints of the knees and ankles, and weaken the body after long use, causing paralysis in many positions.
The manner of putting on the cupping glass is as follows: first make it empty and fill it quickly, then place it immediately, move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the skin turn red and swell, and appear the color of blood; then let it rest, and replace the cupping glasses, and take care in the arrangement of the body, for there are some who have thin skin and clear veins: it is necessary to make a single cut, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deep puncture; and suck gently.
If the skin is thick, then it is necessary to make two cuts: the first time to refine the vein's path for thick blood.
If the skin is very thick, then it is necessary to make a third cut; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we should only poke it once.
And if we want much blood, we should often encourage it; and if the wound is closed, we should force it open fully, and let the cures be such that the veins are pierced suddenly,
and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and who have closed pores, that you anoint the joints of the blisters with stimulating and soluble oil: if it is in this case, with violet oil or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of cucumber:
And if it is in fever, oil of cress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or another similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take amoradine oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and others similar.
And if one wishes to heal a thin and narrow flesh with small pores, no oil should be applied.
But it should be washed after the ventosation with cold water, or rosewater, or cold water of raspberries, or of cucumber, or of pearl water, or another similar.
And he who has much moisture should rise from asses' milk, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large surplus should rise from old wine, or water of sour milk, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things.
and it is not advisable to bleed before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after venesection,
And it is necessary that he purge, when he needs to evacuate and when he is already evacuated. And guard the patient who is jaundiced and without is too sharp and inflamed; It is necessary that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces, and similar things.
And eat little meat, and cooked cheese, and moist meats.
And the one with a cold constitution, if he takes syrup of honey and fragrant mild wine (which is between old and new), and eats little, and eats soft cheese and small birds and young birds and pigeons.
And on the day that he vomits, he should drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give some men sometimes tricolor or musk oil before vomiting, or afterwards, to strengthen the main members. And let the wine be refined, but it is not suitable for those who drink hot liquids.
The boils that are placed on wounds are those that are placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach, kidney and groin, because these members do not bear wounding at all.
and it is done to draw blood from one member to another. as we do on the testicles when they are swollen; to remove the thick fluid from the member, as we place boils on the stomach and groin to reduce it.
And alleviate the pain when there is an obstruction or arrow, by chance it attracts the obstruction with its power, or causes the arrow to depart from its place.
and so it acts when placed upon the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness.
and these windy conditions are administered empty for sucking only; sometimes they are administered along with fire, and sometimes filled with cold liquid.
as in diseases of the lungs, and in such a way this bellows is filled with hot water or water in which certain herbs have been cooked.
The form of the bladder administered to fire is as follows:
And have it be .2 inches wide and half a palm long, and have it have one small hole on each side, as for inserting an awl.
and be made of linen, soft in front so that it does not irritate the patient when placed on the member.
And take in hand a rod of iron or steel, to set a plaster on it.
and they should be large or small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
because the boils of children are different from those of old people, and thin ones from fat ones.
And this bladder (or suction cup) should be placed on the member in such a way:
Apply this bladder (or suction cup) made of wax or linen thread to the middle (or base) of the vein that is within the vein, so that the light is at the bottom of the bladder (or suction cup) so as not to burn the patient.
And then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be above the wound as we have said, so that when one looks at it, if steam comes out, remove the bladder.
Take the thread and wrap it as before, and repeat frequently, if necessary.
In the bladder that is administered for pleurisy, there should be neither a needle nor wound, and it should not be brought unless when it is full of water, and it should only be placed on the limb;
And this is the form: [No translation needed for "et c'est li forme" as it is a French sentence structure equivalent to "and this is its form" or "and here is the shape" in English, without any specific meaning in this context]
Sooteries are not applied except to members where it is impossible to put leeches due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in the bare parts of the body, such as hands or feet, and other similar areas;
And the quality of the user is that when you find sooteries in sweet clean waters for purification, take them;
And put them [something] in warm water, soft, until they [the things] become familiar [soft], and have nothing in their bellies. Then clean them with wine and vinegar, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply the salves.
And when they are swollen and hot, if it is a place where vinegar can be applied, do so, for it is very effective.
If not, raise the limb above a pillow, then apply cold water, and afterwards compress it.
And if the joint becomes too swollen after the body, soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on [the affected area], until the swelling subsides;
And if the wound is multiplying, place broken glass or similar things on it until it heals.
Place half-peeled beans on the joint and leave them until they harden to the joint, it will heal now.
And if you need more snares, take others as well.
And if the snares do not want to be taken, rub the bloodless place, or you pierce it with a needle until the snares come out. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they stick to it.
And when you see them urinating, sprinkle some powder of aloe and crushed seeds or ashes on it, they will now stop.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear child, that the foolish man abandons this chapter, for he will never see any of the ancient books, nor read a letter in it;
and because of this reason, medical knowledge is lost in our land, for I never found anyone good at it.
And I do not know anything about it, except through the knowledge of ancient books that I have studied extensively and treated the science, and through experiment, and the practice of my life.
And I have described it in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought forth, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
Therefore, it is necessary for us to say the prologue of this book the summary of speech and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who have experience know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you quickly bandage the patient on both sides, unless anything prevents you, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old people;
or if the time is not very warm, or too cold; and eat cold food, namely cold meats, and meat of the eye and shin, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about abscess heat, or spreading of matter in the limb; then the patient returns to their first care as they have used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make thick broths, or they have thickness, such as cooked wheat in water, and meat of the head, and feet, and pancreas of cow, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. In prolonged nursing, the wounds break more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of old and weak people cannot be well healed or joined according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of small children;
but there is no remedy, reset the broken bone (large splints) that straightens and joins the limb together, as much as possible like before; and do not touch it at all during this time, and for this reason, it should be fed with large foods, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are different in many ways.
For the break of the neck is different than the break of the arm or leg; I will tell you all the ways of a break in this chapter. For there are breaks that heal by growing together like the quill of a pen when writing.
For there are breaks that heal by growing together like the quill of a pen when writing. And if the break has an open wound, and the break is just a small crack.
And each time has its device, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to its place;
The fracture of the bone is known by this, that the limb twists and opens wide due to displacement, and presses on the hand;
and if it has no twisting or touching, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture;
But it can have tortuosity, or a crack, or a small break. Do not move the hand at all, but place medicines that come after here, and then hold it gently now.
And know that the breaks that go into the joints, and are the two parts dislocated, they must now be set evenly, so that abscesses grow there.
and if an abscess comes close, leave it for a while until the abscess is calmed down; Then equal it to the muscle that you can easily and skillfully move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of one with broken parts; then hold it, as required hereafter.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is hands or feet, or if with your hand it is small members, or if there are two ropes or one rope and your hand;
And place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are dislocated, you remove all additions in their joints to the muscles that you can reach, and ensure that through your work there is no injury or pain to the patient.
Adjust well the two shoulder bones according to the best shapes.
Feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that they are not well aligned: straighten them beautifully and do not strain too much, nor force like those who make abscesses burn and contract the member by their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is set, punish the patient so that he does not move it, neither in watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. And ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it should be put in such a position that it feels no pain;
For when it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it should be put in such a position that it feels no pain; and keep it straight so that twisting does not occur when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken member are as I tell you.
Know that the broken members vary in smallness and in size and shape.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers etc.: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and thin linen bandages.
and those which are large, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bands encompass the whole large member and equally constrain all parts so that there is no injury.
then tie light bandages around it, three or four times according to the member, and hold your hand a little on the bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less than the fracture, then move away from the fracture.
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another ligament, and turn it around reversely over the broken bone.
Then return to the part below the fracture, and press moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above.
Then put between the ligaments of linen or cloth, until they are all even, then tie everything together with one bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is swelling or abscess, put on it something soothing for the abscess and one who removes the swelling, and leave it thus for some days;
Then hold onto your arms (or legs), and they should be tied with a half-thickness of a strong cord, or a plaster rod, or palm branches, and shaped thus:
but the arm (or leg) that one places over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
And let it be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large.
then hold it in place on the pegs just as you did at the first joint, then bind it with thread coming forth, as you did at the first joint for the break.
It is narrower afterwards, tighter; and it must be that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their bonds with twisted linen cords, and that is great error; for the bond cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it must not have less than twice the space between each peg.
And if the patient has been struck by the heads of arrows in their joints after they have been set straight in healthy ones, place linen or cotton poultices over them so that they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bones are broken, I shall tell the cure below after that.
And know that it is not necessary to set all fractured limbs at once on the first day. For when limbs are large, it is not necessary to set arrows before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your confidence in the abscess healing process.
And here is the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: it is that you take flour that is kept near the mill walls, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner for restoring the fracture in various positions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Another way to make the plaster that restores fractures and dislocations and twists: Take barley flour, salt, linseed oil, resin of pine, myrrh, aloeswood, and mastic, .x. pounds; of balm of Gilead and aloe, .v. pounds; and make powder from these ingredients, mix them with abundant egg, if the constitution of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Another way to make the plaster for twisting: take mastic and white poppy seeds, .x. pounds; myrrh and aloeswood, .viii. pounds; acacia leaves, vi. pounds; Armenian bole, .x. pounds, grind well, and mix with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones, soothing the pain that arises, and using it to shape the bone and break it: take new linen, moisten it with vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the area. This plaster does not restore [the bone], but it is good for soothing an abscess heat, and properly treating pains.
Another method of plaster to set broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-parsley leaves, grind them together and make a plaster from it.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and for promoting the healing of abscesses: take root of wormwood, chamomile, violet flowers, bean flour, from each one a portion; grind them together and combine with wine, and if the members are scalded, use it with coriander moist water or plain water.
Another method of poultice stronger than the first, when abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of comfrey, linseed, balm of Gilead, trefoil, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; grind, and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates wrote in his book that no other substance should be placed on a broken member for restoration except for an ointment made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
It seems Galen says that dry and somewhat warm things should be placed on a broken member for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is beneficial for injury and pain: take ground-up mugath and chevyl d'omes coppez (or pennes of oiseaux), and vismalve, and mix them evenly, and grind into a plaster and apply it.
Then remove a small portion of it after that, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not remove it for many days.
And if pain or itching comes to the place, or there is no rest or swelling, hasten and remove the plaster immediately; take a light cloth and sea sponge moistened, immerse in water, and apply to the place until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, dampen it in vinegar or rose oil, and tie it with a nut until you are sure of the abscess heating.
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and the pain disappear, then resume the bandage gently, add a little plaster, do not strain it too much as before; and be subtle until it heals.
If you see that the abscess has healed and turned red, swollen, hot, and sore, and you need plaster and linen, apply it as you did at first.
And if no swelling comes to the limb from what we have said, do not dislocate it unless after 3, 4, 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it 20 days, as one sees, until the break heals, and the swelling approaches the flesh.
Then hold it more tightly than before, and let the flesh swell, as I have said before; but if you see the joint drying out more than necessary, know that no nourishment can come to it. Then apply warm, hot water to the dislocated joint, every three hours, and slightly stretch the ligament.
Therefore, prick the nerves in the limb sharply and correct anything that foolish people do, which twists the limb: this is harmful, and such work is fearful; I see nothing else but to weaken it and work properly.
of various ways of breaking Many ways of breaks are, and various shapes, and the causes are intended.
For there are breakages made by sword blows, and the shaft breaks all the bone up to the shaft which is beneath the bone, as in a hack or thrust; and for this reason, this type of breakage is called "hackure".
For the sword strikes the bone from above to pierce it, and this type of breakage is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two breaks, whether large or small, is called "fracture".
And if there is a percussion buried, or a cleft or shaft of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent fracture that approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is healed to the bone as subtle as a hair and the fracture is small, it is called this type of fracture "capillary";
and if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling, or in similar ways, causing the bone fragment to enter beneath, and the wounds are closed as a potter makes on the pottery; if an arrow enters within.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones, like a child's head;
and these kinds of fractures are dislocated in various ways, as small bones are; and I shall speak about it in its place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the exploration with probing, and by corruption of the flesh that is above it.
The hairy appearance is known to those who, when they have uncovered the bone and rub it vigorously, make the fracture blacken.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's condition, and if you see any unfavorable circumstances, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, paleness, high fever, hairs appearing and turning red, and other signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you see no unfavorable circumstances and hope for a recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the navroz comes first to you, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the start of menstruation.
And if it is in this state, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and come the complications as we have said.
And if the bone fracture reaches to the tissue that covers the brain, it is necessary that you make an incision in the broken part: and it is that you take hold of the head of the patient, and expose on top of the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as soft as you can.
And if pus or abscess discharges bone, or abscess covered, help him as needed, and it is that you fill the place with dampened cloths soaked in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and the flow of blood ceases; then proceed around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of working: one way is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:
Then make another incision larger than the first.
The second method is to have various incisions, some narrow and some wide, pointed and made with a sharp instrument, and work lightly to prevent cutting the bone.
And if the bone is dislocated and hard, then you must perforate it around (the dislocation), so that you administer splints with wedges, but not so much as to pierce through the bone of the chest; and above the point it should have a margin or a circle that does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each one comes in its place along the thickness of the bone, so that you have wedges for all sides; and this is the form of the four kinds of wedges:
The qualities for perforating around the broken bone are that you place one wedge on the bone, and turn your hand until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the wedge another little bit, and do so all around, then cut the space of the bone that is between the fracture, and do it as subtly and lightly as possible, and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone or any tool that you have such as pliers or tweezers; and make sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have the bone pierced and treated, then it is necessary that you reset the fracture with any tool similar to a chisel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other chisels:
And if some small bones or no scales remain, gently remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of work is the one that Galen speaks of, which is more secure, and he highly praises it, and this is his word. First, you must cut open a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place under it the head of the curved incision, which has the shape shown below.
And do not cut through from one side, and the parts are sharp in two edges, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then hit with a small hammer above, so that you lightly strike the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is beneath;
If it is swollen against the bone, then gently break the bone, because one can badly break the bone and with fear.
If the bone does not break through to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must do this after roughing it up, and remove the scales with a sharp razor of various sizes, in order to make available the most suitable one for each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
The patient should shave off large areas of hair, then proceed to finer razoring, and continue this process until it is well done.
In the other haircutting and subtle breakages, you must bring appropriate tools according to his guidance; this is not a task that can be answered by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is exposed, you must take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and put it over the wound. Then take another cloth doubled over once or twice, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; do this more gently than you can so as not to irritate the wound, then apply one more bandage, but do not pull it tight more than necessary to cover the wound.
And leave it for a day or two, until the abscesses have subsided, then release it, and administer medications such as lily roots, flour of peas, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and sprinkle it on the wound, and immediately administer unfailing medications without bitterness.
Ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment or bandages there, for when bandages are placed on top of the brain fabric, it will rot and become corrupt, causing great harm to the patient; for when sharp things are placed on top, it will burn through from above.
Therefore, be careful to avoid any bad accidents happening to the patient as we have said, for it is doubtful and full of doubt.
And if blackness does not come forcefully except by medicine that we have placed there, of such virtue, then you must take a part of honey and 3 parts of rose oil and one piece of linen cloth, and lay it on the sore. Then you must treat it in ways of wound healing, until it heals completely.
It is known that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one alone, because they are two bones; and the one below is cartilage, and does not break, unless it protrudes or twists, but heals again.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should place your little finger or thumb near the nose, and insert the fracture into the indicated index finger's pocket, and toward the thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape. and perform this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
If the fracture is in the part above the nose and the thumb cannot reach the place, you should place it equal to the top of a small rod.
And if the fracture is in two parts, you shall do likewise (i.e., also apply the same treatment), and hasten to restore it within the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then bind a cloth of linen to the head of the wound where the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind another one from the other side, if there is a fracture there; and let the cloths be as thick as they fill the wounds of the head.
And they said any restorer that the tents should be moistened with butter, and to grind each day. I do not think it is good, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg yolk and milled powder; then leave the tendon until the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
And sometimes one inserts goose feathers instead of tendons and wraps it with one piece of linen cloth and holds the breakage together, and blows warm air into it; then do as you wish.
If an abscess occurs while you are working on it, put either cotton soaked in rose oil or a small piece of camphor on it.
And if an abscess does not come up, apply a plaster outside, made of flour of wheat and powder of incense, mixed with egg yolk, then put light poultices on top, but do not tie it too tightly.
If the break in the neck is small and it is broken into small pieces, take out with suitable tools, then stitch the wound, and treat it with healing substances such as plasters and ointments appropriate for that condition.
If there is no wound inside the neck, treat it with tenting (traction), and place bandages of linen until it heals.
Of the fracture of the jaw
If the jawbone is fractured without any external wound and the break is not split in two but only displaced, and if it's recognized easily that it's just displaced, not broken completely inside, as can be seen from the curve.
If the break is on the right side of the jawbone, put your index finger in the patient's mouth; if the break is on the left jawbone, use your right hand index finger and push the break gently from the outside, then align it with the other hand from inside.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two places, you should provide extension to both places equally.
And if the teeth move or break, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a splint of broken jaw, and place one double cloth; and place on the cloth a large well-made peg or a piece of equal skin, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it where you can, and command the patient to rest, and nourish light foods.
If you see that the fracture changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then reset to its original position; apply a poultice with flour from a mill mixed with egg or meal of some herbs after removing the splint; place a light linen cloth over the poultice, and if the poultices swell and the patient's dislocation does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it will heal within four weeks.
And if an abscess arises, apply what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone; if necessary, use subtle instruments for the extraction.
If the wound is narrow, expand it according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is no more left, then close the wound, if it is wide, and apply one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
of the bandage The force breaks in multiple ways, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is of three types: either it is broken and dislocated in two places and divided into pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with an injury.
And the operations are when the fracture is accompanied by an injury, that you have two assistants, one to hold the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other to extend the neck towards the affected area; then make the dislocation equal with your hands so that the form is as it should be, without any appearance or misalignment.
And if you need to extend more, place a round cushion of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and make it as large as necessary; then pull the limb and hold the cushion so that you can align the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outward due to its being deep-set, as it comes in deeply, then the patient must lie on his affected side, and place one ear against the shoulder, and push the shoulder downward, until the bone of the socket is raised.
Then direct the fracture to your hands, and if you find debris, then you must cut it upwards; pull the pieces gently apart, and if the bone cannot join due to any hindrance, strike one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to prevent dislocation.
and resemble a ladle, not pointed, and be of such a size as required, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
And when you are sure of an abscess hot, if it breaks, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt the hot abscess, then use a cloth and bandages, according to its size.
And if pustules become hot, soak a cloth in rose oil, asafoetida, and wine, and place it on top.
The bone compression, when it feels painful and swollen, is that you place the plaster of flour mill and egg white powder on top of the bone and put light packs on top, and put a spear under the bandage if necessary. Then take a very large bandage of one palm's width, then place a double cloth dampened on top of it and wrap it around; then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the edge of the bandage is hanging. and place the stick on the fracture, turn the bandage around the neck, and under the bones, and under the patient's clothes; and twist it from both sides, and when you see that the splint aligns with the fracture, and you clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, then hold it in place each day, and when the swelling subsides, tighten it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under his armpit to raise the shoulder; align the fracture by adjusting the shoulder with the arm tied to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, up to 20 days.
Then apply the splint, if necessary, and hold it in place until it is restored; and it is restored in up to 28 days, and less in some men.
of the shoulder fracture
It does not happen that the broken or large shoulder joint heals by itself, and it should be neither moved nor forced except by touch; if it is prepared according to the shape of the fracture, and aligned according to its natural form in all ways possible; then apply powder from the mill with abundant egg and light starch, and place two layers of cloth over it; then place a broad and thin stick, slightly larger than the shoulder, under which are woven fine starch strips of linen, so that the stick fits evenly; and then bind it firmly all around, so that the stick does not move from its place, and observe the splint every day; whenever it softens, bind it again, and make sure the stick remains in place if it moves out of its place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is completed, release it, and be careful, for it is not the bone that easily comes loose.
And if a bone fragment protrudes before and not beneath the skin, lift it up, remove it, and do as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to cool it.
of the fracture by the wound
The limb is sometimes fractured in the middle, but it happens seldom; however, it often breaks at the extremity. And when it is fractured internally, it sinks downwards, causing the patient great pain, lack of nourishment, and fever, and immediately vomits blood, and the pores open in the fractured bones, and it feels very bad.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back over his chest, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two ribcages in your hands, and carefully align it in all ways that you can; until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place pressure bandages and padding on top of the broken bone, or a lighter splint, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; then turn the limb roundabout, and hold it straight, and tighten the bandage hourly, and if it swells, tighten the bandage; and if it needs to be dislocated, due to corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or abscess, hurry and dislocate it, remove the padding, and address whatever has come from the wound in ways of treatment; then remove the padding, and hold it straight until it heals.
of the broken ribs
Know that the breakage of ribs occurs only in large bones near the back and chest, and they do not bend easily except for when they are slippery; and this is felt clearly at the site of the injury.
And the resetting is that you set it evenly, as necessary. Then apply a splint, and tie it with a strap, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inside, causing the patient severe pain and shortness of breath, as well as coughing like in pleurisy, for the bone pierces the lung; and the patient points to the place where it hurts, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, this is a serious illness, and they used to apply great effort in the past.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that distend the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
We do not let hot irons come, unless they have arrived. If they have arrived, we heal it.
And it was said by some that they put leeches on the wound to draw pus, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the leech draws excess fluids to the wound due to its weak constitution.
And it was said by some that one should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put plasters between the ribs to make the wound evenly healed, then it is cured with a cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that he cannot bear through the bone which does not break the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, it is necessary to make an incision on the side of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put one instrument inside for support; then it should be cut, pulled gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if they are large, and dress with ointment until it heals. And when pus comes, place dampened linen soaked in rose oil on top, and place it there; cure the area affected by the abscess while the rib heals, and lie down on the side where it should be, until it heals.
of the broken collarbone
There is never a break in the collarbone or spine bones, and it does not bend in the same way as others. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take notice if their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that in many positions, he is mortal. And if he is silent and feels well when you hold and prick him, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
If such a thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, take notice if the feet are softened, and if there is an accident which is in the hands, and the back suddenly jumps and spasms involuntarily; and when it is put on its stomach, it still jumps involuntarily. And when it is put on its back and wants to sit, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in its cure.
If this accident does not happen to him, it will be a lighter matter.
And the cure is that you reward [the patient] if there is an abscess that burns hot, you place on it rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then put on one of the soothing and drying ointments and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed. If any bone is dislocated, it must be covered; and cut the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with an ointment healing charcoal until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "head of the cow," you push your thumb of your left hand into it, and make it equal to your right hand in power, then put the ointment and the cloth on it, if you have any need for it; then bind it, and if there is a dislocated bone, you should make it fit, and cut it and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the break in the shinbone
It often happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there is only a little lessening at the head; it becomes long, bends towards the outside, and causes pain and swelling at the break.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above [the break], so that you are above the fracture; and feel which is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is only at the head, then make the fracture equal to its natural shape.
And if the fracture is long or bends inside, then lay the patient on his stomach so that the restoration of the fracture may be apparent to you. And when you have set it straight, place the plaster on it, then place a splint of wood or horn over the break and hold the fracture still so that it does not move; and apply the yoke under the ribs, until the sides are even.
Instruct the patient to sleep on the unaffected side or on his back.
If an abscess swells up, do not touch it until the swelling has subsided, and place what was previously mentioned on it; then return to treatment, and hold it as necessary, if there is no harmful accident; and this is how it is done.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder blade is the part between the back and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: Of which one is that you take a rod made of thick paste, in this shape:
And tie the two ends of the rod with two cords and raise it above, and position the patient on one side; then he lets the broken arm hang down over the rod until it reaches the same level as the other shoulder, and make a hump in the rod at this point; then suspend a heavy object or the assistant stretches the other end of the rod below; then the master places the broken part even with his hands together, so that the break returns to its proper position.
And the other way is to place the patient on his side and tie his arm to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds the broken part with his hands above, and the other holds the rod below with one cord and extends each part to its own side.
And if the extraction is more forceful, hold one ligature beneath the break and another above it, and extend each of the assistants to their respective parts. And if the break is near the shoulder's head, you must place a moderate ligature beneath the pressure and one towards the side, beneath the break; similarly, if the break is towards the side, you must place a light ligature without labor, as long as the break is equal on the level and on the side. Then make the break equal, as required, and hold it, provided there are no abscesses nearby.
If abscesses are present, do not hold the ligature for more than 7 days, and place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil over it to calm the abscesses; then hold the ligature, and the method of holding is that you place the pliers on the break, then assemble the arm above the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the chest. Place the gauze, and hold the ligature above the shoulder and above the arm, so that the arm is in a straight position, unless anything prevents it, or the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints and place a larger and stronger splint above the break, with at least two fingers of space between each splint, and have each splint be as wide as it passes the break by four fingers on each side. Then hold the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, firmly but not too far apart.
And if you see the abscess of the joint and the swelling, as we have said, while you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at it every three days to ensure that pus does not swell or come to the place, or new matter cannot reach the member because it is too narrow. If the pus drains, as we have said.
If no such incident occurs, do not remove the splint for less than four days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back and have his hands on his stomach; and place a linen bandage evenly under the affected joint and observe the movement of the broken member every hour of the day or night to ensure that the splint does not move or become soft; then treat with medicine according to its nature, giving it food as before mentioned, so that the food is initially coarse; and when it begins to heal, it should become thick. It is customary for the splint and the leg to be restored in forty days; then remove the splint and administer oil baths and medicines to clean the wound. If the incision is ugly and infected, wait one day or two months to remove it.
of a broken arm
The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the "two shinbones." One is small, and it forms the elbow; the other is large, and it is beneath, toward the little finger. Sometimes only the large one breaks, or sometimes both break together.
When the small shinbone is broken, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large one is broken, healing is difficult, and it is more painful than when both break together. If only the small shinbone is broken, you must stretch it slightly and make it straight.
And if it is the large shinbone that is broken, you must stretch it more forcefully; extend it on one log, and raise the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller finger lower than the others, and cross the patient over himself, placing a log in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor. Then extend the attendant's arm to the part beneath his hand or to the elbow, and one attendant at one side and another on the other above. And then place the patient straight, according to his best form.
And if there is a fracture in pieces, put each one in its place; and if any of them has slipped out, pricks the keyhole, and you cannot restore it to its place, then saw through and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture in pieces, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; take care.
And if upon the beginning of the restoration, abscesses arise, apply one cloth made of rosier oil and white beeswax, which should neither be too hard nor too soft; and sew one cloth subtly, until the abscess has been soothed. Then remove the rosier oil and put the paste made from the powder of the mill with egg, afterwards place the sticks, and the stick from the fracture should be more prominent, and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have 7 sticks or more in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two. Hold the fracture higher than other parts, and at all times less in alignment, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and may the cloths that are above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor harsh; and may the threads, by which it is held, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And observe the member and the ligament afterwards after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the member, such as prurit that happens to the member, then you must irrigate the member with hot water until the prurit is alleviated; and let the member not rest. Then resume the bandaging, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, and similar things, advise accordingly.
And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, so that it does not pass through, then you must soften it with a poultice for a short time, and leave it like this for some days until the urine flows through, and then bandage it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not undress him for up to 20 days. Or around this time, he should hold his hands at his neck and make them even, and avoid movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; and know that this break will be restored in 30 or 40 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
In the back of the hand and fingers, there are few fractures, but rather many bending multiple times.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient should lie crosswise and rest straight in front of him equally; then place his hand on a cloth extended, and the attendant extends the broken bones, and aligns the mirrors so they are equal, until they are well joined; and apply the poultice and compresses, unless an abscess forms there, then place a splint according to the severity of the fracture; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is near the ventral side of the lower limb, make a tourniquet of cloths, and instruct the patient to tighten it around their fractured limb; then tighten a long cloth, and let it be as thick as the palm of the hand, and tighten, as required.
And if the fracture is on the outside, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the limb, so that the hand is straightened and bound tightly, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the flow between the fingers.
If the fracture occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, make it straight as required; bind it with the palm, and if you see that it needs a splint to lift the fracture and not move; and if the fracture is in other fingers such as the index or others, make them straight, and bind them with the adjacent healthy finger. Or tie all of them together in one place, for moving is harmful, or put a splint on it, as with a thumb; take care in the restoration and the setting of the abscess and be careful to treat those who come, as I have said.
of the broken leg
The leg bones are often broken, and one sees it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one places one splint above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant extends their splint to their equal portion; and this is when the break has been set in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the leg, one splint goes towards the ankle and the others go below the break. And similarly, if it is near the knee, then the splints are below the knee and the extension is above; then the assistant holds the bone equal to their two hands, according to its natural shape, and then applies the plaster and bandage, as long as no abscess comes.
And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it cool first, then return to your work and treatment; the remedy is made in this manner. You must bind the leg above the break, double a bandage thick for two or three layers, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the groin, and insert one long pin between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the pin up; then turn the leg and thigh over the bandage, then put the splints on top, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then use linen cloth soft to hold the strain evenly, then begin to bind four or five times on the splint; and as you go higher up the splint, loosen the strain; then attend to the two pins that you inserted between the leg and thigh, and bind four splints that are above, then return down to the head of the pin, until you see under the foot; strap it, so it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, so no abscess or swelling or similar thing comes.
If it happens, unbind and correct what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are bone pieces that protrude, they must be cut, if possible; and if not, the place must be broken and drained, and treated as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thighbone is broken in such a way that splints are placed there, as in the shoulder or arm; however, in the healing process, this does not cause discomfort to the patient.
And know that the thighbone is healed within a few days or a little more or less, according to the variations of complexions.
from the knee joint
Know that in the knee joint there is little breakage, but it bends frequently. And if it breaks, it is not a complete break, but rather a crack or fracture, and it causes pain at all places, and without place, and this is felt very much.
And the restoration is when one equalizes the limb that is dislocated with its opposite, as long as it can be assembled in movement; then put the splint, and place a round peg if necessary, and tighten it as needed, then reposition all the alignments that we have said in other breaks, such as abscesses and others; place at each accident what is required, as long as it is healed.
of the leg fracture
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "shin" and the other "tibia"; and it happens similarly when the arm breaks, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the operations are all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
If the slender bone is broken, it bends forward.
If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; then it bends downwards. Then apply reduction, make it equal, and tie the ends equally; but if the break is misaligned or there are many pieces, the reduction should be less and lighter; align it according to your ability.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of splints that span the leg on both sides and are as long as from the knee to below; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and tie them in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should apply a splint of wood along the length of the leg, but rather a bandage, and place the leg for preventing movement, and carefully make this at the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; treat it until it heals.
Of the break of the bones from the foot
At the ankle, there is no break, but sometimes breaks occur in the bones of the foot and toes, and it requires certain treatment in many positions.
And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see the bones rising against each other, put the patient lying on his back with his foot raised, as if he were walking, then place your hand under where the bones are raised, press them back to their places; then cover it with plaster and wool and place a small table with two even surfaces beneath the belly of the foot, then tie the foot in place with bandages and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandages, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones in the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and let it be slightly larger, then place under the bone that table I mentioned, and hold it securely; and if there are 2 or more, or more, break each bone and place a splint on each one according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the bone under the skin; and let the table be positioned above the belly of the bone, so that it touches well.
And do not forget the other things I have said about broken bones, after we have discussed them; and treat each case according to its circumstances.
of the fracture of the bone in the thumb
When the bone of the female body is broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then incline her to the part of the back and hold her from behind; then fill the hollow with cotton and put in as much as one stone; then turn her over and lower the buttock little by little, and the cotton will leap out at the entrance of the bone, and the bone will come back with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or more: the break will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of barley, tie one end of a cord to it, and push the whole bladder into the bone; then blow hard in the cord so that the bladder inflates inside: the break will return; then fill with cotton, and leave it like this for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the arm of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breaks should not be concealed from him who applies his study and practice to them, and read my book. For the breaks indicate various positions for the restoration: therefore follow this instruction.
In a staff when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and put the staff in it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
of breakage with wound
for the one who has a breakage with wound, particularly if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or something similar, that it should be treated now, so that the sores mentioned previously bear witness to it.
And if the wound is healed, apply vinegar to it, if you have none else, then begin again to heal the breakage in that same hour, or on that day, if an abscess does not come.
If an abscess comes up, wait until the ninth day for it to be soothed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad incident.
And if the bone breaks and appears exposed on the edge of the wound, you must set it gently in place with light pressure and extend it slightly.
And if the extensions do not appear equal for you to set in place, then use this instrument that is made of iron, which is 7 or 8 inches long and the width is according to the size of the wound; therefore, the mirror must grasp 3 or 4 fingers, depending on what is needed for each bone-setting treatment; and it should be round and somewhat large but not too thin so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and it should be sharp in front and thick from the middle forward, as follows:
And it is called "palainche," therefore the curved head of the bone should be placed on top of the apparent bone; push it once until it returns to its place and ensure it is equal on both sides. If the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut the head of the bone so that the instrument can take hold of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, within your power; then remove what remains sharp and in small fragments from the bone.
And when the bone has been reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do as much as you can to make it in its proper place, then moisten one clean linen cloth with black stiptic wine and apply it directly if it's warm; do not put any greased cloth or other substance on the wound where there is oil because it will bring corruption and pus. Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open, cover the surrounding area according to the size of the wound, but be careful that the wound is not constricted with fracture; and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, causing the patient to become ill, injured, or even die. And the bindings should be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that a mishap may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put splints on it; instead, wrap it without using splints, using hard cloth and bind it. And when after one day or two, the bow appears to be swollen at the wound, remove what you had put on it and apply healing ointments such as tetraformula and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, once in the morning and once in the evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
And the limb should be aligned in such a manner that the bone moves down gently but gradually.
If it passes many days and cannot heal but the bone keeps moving, since there are small pieces of bone, which is why you should press the wound with pressure, and remove all those dislocated pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula or any other form of corruption appears, it should be treated according to what is mentioned in the chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, like the bones of the shin or shoulder, and similar large members, do not draw it out, since many times death may come, but let it stay as long as possible; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 or 30 days. Then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, then leave it.
The coming sores on the sore (translated as: 'the sores that come upon a sore')
There are often times after the fracturing of health that it occurs again, especially near the joint, and it is a displeasing sight to see the figure of the limb; and by chance the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Take care then if the limb is fresh: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocola, acacia, and similar ones, so that you take any of these things or all together, and crush them with a sharp liquid such as vinegar or egg white or oil; then apply it to the knot in poultices, and keep it tightly wrapped and not loosen it for many days; and then dislocate it, and begin another, until the swelling subsides; or you may hold it on a piece of wood well-made because the properties of wood are such that they remove all inflammations from the limbs; and if the nodule has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut the top off, and reveal the superfluous part; or you may shave it with a razor, until it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains weak and tender after that, it happens for many reasons: one is when it was bound too tightly and was not bound as it should have been; or when there were too many splints, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or due to excessive rubbing; or due to excessive movements, not at the appropriate time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it remains weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body become strong, until the blood multiplies within him; then administer baths, and give joy and pleasure; afterwards put ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts great nutrients to it, and rub it frequently with cold water, until the nutrients reach the member; and return to its natural shape.
The member twisted out of health [or order] after healing
When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is disfigured, it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and sometimes death; however, if the dislocation and torture are fresh, then they must be treated with hot water or softening herbs such as vismalve leaves, roots, medick, and similar things; and you should make a soothing poultice, such as dittany well made, and take musk from vismalve, mix it with beeswax or camphor oil, and apply the poultice; or you may use figs softened with wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes the dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and persistently with moist hands. Movement should be brought to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is grown and hardened, as stone, and needs to be cut with iron, it should be covered up to the bone, at the incision made subtly and gently; and put on a cushion and bandage in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to someone, it must now be reset without delay.
For if one delays, the joint swells, and in case it is reset at that point, it should not be moved until it has subsided; for many times it brings pus and other pain.
Whenever this occurs, let the patient be purified, then leave him, until the abscesses have subsided; then immerse the affected limb in hot water and oil, then gently move it, and treat each member as appropriate once it is in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
of the jawbones
It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated on both sides, and dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are slightly dislodged from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the cheek, and saliva drools out of the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and it wraps its tongue with speech.
When a small dislocation returns with various positions.
And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly, without delay.
And in such a way that the minister holds the patient's head and places one hand of his in the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand should be spread apart, to make them even; and command the patient to soften, their jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the mirror set even again, until it returns to its place.
And if the jawbones are dislocated, anoint them with hot water and oil, gently adjusting them until they are set; do not force it to return, as we have said.
When they are set evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes properly, apply a soft cloth soaked in a paste made from rose oil and wax, then gently tie it with fine linen strings.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and place his head between two pillows, so that it does not move to either side, nor force itself, but take light meat, until the pain is removed, and the jawbones are healed.
And then, if he wants to eat lightly, do not force him to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is properly knit and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be properly set within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fever and accustomed sweats occur, and possibly rupture of the stomach, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is lost causes; and many times the person who experiences it dies within eight days.
Of the collarbone
The collarbone cannot dislocate towards the chest and ribs from the inside, nor can it dislocate outwards; however, it sometimes does dislocate, which is felt.
And the restoration is as follows: The patient lies on his back and extends his arms. Then he presses firmly against the collarbone with your palm, and it will return. Then place a splint and bandage on it and hold it in place;
The head of the shoulder that is towards the costal area cannot dislocate; if it does, and if it can be reset to its original position as we have said, then place a splint and bandage on it and hold it in place. Command the patient to rest until he is well.
And likewise, the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
The dislocation of the shoulder   (from the previous sentence)
Know that the shoulder can dislocate in only four ways: one is when it dislocates to the lower part of the socket; and the second is to the part of the pelvis; and by chance, it can dislocate to the upper part, but this rarely happens.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside through the nerves; and it often dislocates downwards towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, because it leaps out quickly from them; but for those with enough flesh, it jumps out only slightly and returns easily.
And by chance happens to some men percussion or breaking, and swells the shoulder with an abscess hot, and believes that it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you must check it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations are when it moves towards the bottom, and you will find a clear difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one. And you will find a hollow in the shoulder blade, and press down on the tip of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot return his hand to its place nor make any movement.
And if dislocated upward, it should not be hidden as you will clearly feel it when pressing on it.
And this method of dislocation is not only for new dislocations, but also for infants who are sick.
And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then places his fists under the joint, and forcibly moves the joint upward to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, extends it upwards, puts it back in place; it will come back immediately.
And if it does not come back as we have said within hand's breadth afterward, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and bring soothing, softening balm, such as decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it.
Then let the patient lie on his back, and put a piece of equal linen under the joint, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the minister's foot on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder carefully, and pull the hand of the patient.
And another minister presses the head of the patient's shoulder so that it does not move downward; that shoulder will immediately return to its place, and if you see that you should reset it in this way:
and let a man who is stronger than the patient be present; he should be positioned facing the side of the patient, then push his shoulder downwards under the patient's armpit, and lift up the arm of the patient so that the patient hangs from it. And another minister pulls the patient's hand downward towards his stomach. If the patient is too light, he can hold something heavy with him to help reset the dislocation.
And the dislocation is also reset in another manner: it is done by inserting a long needle into the ground, and the head should be as round as a pea, neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but with cloth underneath, and the patient lying on his long side; then his hand is stretched outwardly from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not return due to all these things we have said, then perform this cure: take a needle of two spans long and four fingers wide, which has a rounded head for easy insertion deep into the socket, according to this form:
Then lay the rod on top of the patient's head, so that the rod does not pierce the patient, then put it underneath the sick person's shoulder; extend one arm above the rod, and place the shoulder above the rod, and the arm to the top of the hand, then put the arm on a 1-inch block from a scale, and let the hands hang down below; the joint will be reduced now.
And when it is in, in whatever way that may be, you must place an equal sphere of wool underneath the shoulder, then apply the plaster made of milled powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then hold it underneath the shoulder carefully, and twist the linen around the plaster, and bind the hands to their neck, and let them remain in that position.
It is necessary that he eats little food, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then eat less after 5 or 7 days, and move it; if it becomes hardened and does not soften, it is healed.
And if the jointure is out of its place due to moisture or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries at three places, as it is stated in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all of this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the jointure does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the jointure should never be forced back into its place.
A dislocation that is towards the buttocks or backside, and the limbs, should be treated by pushing and stretching with hands, and other means; and it should be cured until it heals.
And after the healing comes swelling in the member and it gradually moves, then the patient should use baths many times until the swelling subsides and returns to its original state.
The cost of dislocation is...
When the joint is dislocated at the point, it will come back to the same place again; and if dislocated in all parts, front and back, and the dislocation is not repaired because it can be seen and felt clearly; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is broken and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it when abscesses have grown there, for if abscesses have grown there, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset in all places, especially when it is at the back; it is more difficult than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes there.
Then the restoration is such that you extend your two hands towards it; his arms should be spread out, and the hands turned as much as possible around it, inside and outside, and push the joint back to its pockets, or to the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and bend the root of the palm that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong traction; and it is that two ministers stretch the arm, and they brand the arm with two ministers, so that it does not move during traction; then turn the arm from each side, then when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it;
When the master joins the joint to his hand, oil it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint straight, until it returns.
and when it is in its place, put dry plaster on it with egg white, and hold it straight, and hang the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then remove it.
And if the jointure is fixed in its place, break the ligament, and leave it; and if you see that the jointure does not hold well, repeat the manipulation and the ligament, and leave it like that for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if there is pain after the repositioning of the joint, and it swells, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put a sheep's grease nail on the jointure, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath. And when it drains (the wound), you rub the jointure moderately, then put the nail back on, and then enter the bath; and do this twice or thrice until it heals; and if you see that it is not returning to its position, put warm damp sheep's wool on top of it and press it, and it will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand's joint is easy to relocate compared to other jointures, it must be returned to its place quickly, during the very moment when it is dislocated, unless the lews are inflamed or there is an abscess heat.
And the repositioning is that you place the affected hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and the mirror places it evenly, so that the palm is above the appearance of the jointure, and push until it returns.
Furthermore, you must look to see if it is in place; then place the patient's hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and have him look at the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
And if not, apply plasters to ease abscess pains and leave them in place for it to start healing.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after any days, the dislocated joint will remain dislocated.
And let not the patient withstand the pain except as long as his hand is paralyzed and cannot exert any force; therefore know that the nerves or arteries are severed, for there is no other means of healing except by straining through fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else is useful.
And when the hand is at its place, put on the plaster as we have said, then strain it and leave for 5 days, then release and let it rest.
If it cannot move properly and there is no swelling, wet with warm water and rub until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front.
Then press the finger and push the dislocation back towards its socket until it returns, then hold the finger's head, and pull it towards the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for two days, then make it even on the third day; bind it as we have said, and the dislocation on the fourth day, and make it move, and tie it back up. Do this repeatedly until it is straight.
And similarly [you should do the same], if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and make [the correction] as you have done before, until it becomes healthy; and similarly [you should do the same], when it is dislocated from another place.
And also for the dislocation of the vertebra in the back
When the vertebra in the back or neck is dislocated, and if there are multiple dislocations without any treatment, death quickly comes to the patient.
And the signs are that the excretions jump without willing, cannot be held, and many times are softened any member, or the two legs or the two arms or one.
And many times the sciatic nerve is paralyzed in four parts, that which becomes paralyzed at the rear is called "Gilbositez".
The cure is that you observe if the Gilbositez has come from childhood; if it does not have any cure or healing from the start.
And that which has fallen or from blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cure said in large words, which is not at all useful in every case;
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before, there is no remedy or health.
and similarly that which comes directly from the two sides, it cannot be cured except for that which comes from the back, as I say;   This line is part of the same sentence. Do not add a period at the end of this line. The text does not use periods to indicate sentences in Old French.
And it should be that the patient is extended on his face in one even position, and he must have support beneath him, so he does not bleed.
Then insert a stick into the head of the patient in the ground and another at the feet, and tie a rope beneath the soles of the patient, and another around the thighs, hips, knees, and ankles.
and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two sticks.
And let them be tightly closed, the torches as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms upon the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a table of 3 feet in length and shaped like a wedge, and the patient should be on their side, and push the head of the table under the body. Then place the middle of the table upon the spine. and the mirrors place their feet upon the other end of the table, and press firmly, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do the same on the wheel that turns by hand.
And it is that you insert two needles into the patient's head on one arm and two others in their feet, and have one space of length between each needle.
and in each needle have one iron thread or turner, and let the needles be firmly in the earth so they do not move; and between two needles have one turning needle, like a thread, and in both turning needles have two small needles of a space of length for turning the turner.
and then tie the thread that is between the needles to the turner on the head, and the other thread to the other turner on the feet; and each servant turns their turner along the entire length of the thread, and the master puts the spine in an even position as we have said.
And when it is even (the dislocated joint), place a plaster containing desiccating substance with abundant egg white on it, then press down, and then hold a stick of three fingers in length against the affected area and the healthy part of the vertebra, then tie it with a cord, as we have said, and use the patient with gentle manipulation until it is healed.
If anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the stick mentioned earlier; sometimes they administer a piece of wood.
Sometimes the appearance comes in the back of the vertebrae of the spine, and it is thought to be dislocations; but it is the opening of a bone, so one should not have presumption: perhaps death will come.
Of the dislocations of the shoulder
The dislocations of the shoulder and those of the elbow joint come from nowhere but only dislocations; and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four ways: internally and externally, front and back, more internally than otherwise, slightly dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of an internal dislocation is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee is wider than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in fire. And it is the loin that is dislocated swollen with abscess due to heat, because the knee joint comes there.
And the sign of one who comes to discharge (or expel), is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned before.
And the signs of one whose leg is well-set according to the completion; however, do not double the knee due to pain, and if you want it to walk, it cannot move forward, and it retains its urine, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of one whose condition is behind (or posterior), are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and the leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are that you watch if the dislocations are old and remain in place according to their position, without any treatment; and it is not necessary that there be any presumption.
For the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint, and push it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, it will not need any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must summon one strong minister and firmly hold the leg with two hands, or one strong rope tied above the knee; And another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands beneath the knees, then tightens a rope link on the calf; and another grasps the head of the rope.
And all extend up and down at once, until the patient is raised from the ground at one time, and hangs there.
This way of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If the joint is not dislocated, treatment should be applied to its appearance. When the dislocation occurs at the shoulders, you must remember to raise the patient on their unaffected side, then tie a rope around the thigh, and the affected area below the angle, then draw the rope up towards the angle, and towards the joint;
Then take another assistant's hands, and embrace the large part of the affected thigh, and stretch it out in a spread-eagle formation: it will return to its place now; this method of dislocating is easier than others.
And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the patient's two feet together with a strong rope above their heels and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two feet farther than the other;
Then let him be hung by the neck from a post, and be above ground by two arms' length; then command one minister to embrace the thigh, and let another minister hold him along with the patient, who will now embrace the thigh, because the joint returns soon.
And when the dislocation is towards the exterior, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has sciatica, and draws a line on the affected leg properly, and on the belly as well.
Then place two thorns, one at the neck and one at the feet, then thrust one thorn between the thighs of the patient in the manner shown. And plant the damp cloths around [the wound], so as not to sting the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrour place the dislocation equal to his hand.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put [the patient] on a table, and press as we have said in the sciatica, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended as quickly as possible, according to what I said earlier; and place the mirror on the opposite side of the diseased limb, then press with the other hand, and turn it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it should not be stretched downward or raised off the ground; instead, it should be as if the patient's hips were dislocated at the back, as we have said in the lying-down position on two cushions. and it should be laid face up, and the limb stretched as we have said before, and must press on the joint towards the table.
and when the patient extends his legs and they are even, then adjust the thighs and place the cushion beneath the dislocated hip, and bind it with a strap so that the hip does not move.
And it rests for three or four days, then dislocate [it], and place a splint on it; and if you see that they are even, hold them steady, as before, and leave it. Three days; then dislocate [it], and let him walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee dislocates in three ways: inside and out, behind, and not in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all (the body parts) is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet.
then take hold of his thigh with your hands, pull it back between your hands, and bend the two sides of the thigh forming a "V". Another servant extends his foot, until the thigh returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends easily at the knee.
And apply the plaster on top, and hold the leg to the thigh tightly for 3 or 4 days, then release it; and do not make the patient walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not well, administer strong rest, as we have said in the treatment of the fracture, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
And the signs that the ankle is swollen, and there is a bulge in the part where it is dislocated:
The repositioning is easy, and it should be done gently when swollen only.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit straight, and tie one minister above the ankle by the leg.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then to the left two times, then extend it upwards and push the foot upwards forcefully.
and do this two times, as we have said, in pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, that's good; if not, start again because it will come back.
and if it cannot come back in this way, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and make a firm stake firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloth around it so as not to prick the patient.
Then the ministers mark the thigh, and another minister stretches out the leg at its joints or links, so that it lies across the neck of the leg; Then each minister stretches out equally, and the patient's legs should be close together between the thighs of the patient to hold him down when he is stretched.
Then the healers hold the dislocation equally with their hands, and another minister marks the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, apply the plaster and poultice on top, and press firmly, bind the leg to the foot, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligaments are not too tight;
Leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments soften, hold it [the dislocation] in place; then release it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient walk for four days afterwards. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess swells up, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
The two [things] (or parts)
When the two [things] are dislocated, they must be stretched gently without strain, and it is an easy task.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or the foot, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface (or table) upright, and place your foot on the opening of those joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns.
and when it is even and there is no opening, you put a two-legged table under the foot of the patient, then press firmly and leave it for four hours, then release it; and let him rest until he is well.
of wounds and dislocations together
When wounds come with dislocations and they are to be restored, many times the patient dies.
do not be presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and unless you are compassionate and merciful and slow, do not be hasty.
and use at the beginning soothing medicines for abscesses, and leave the patient in the hand of God if you see no hope of healing. And when you see hope, reset the limb now, so that the abscess grows there.
And when the limb is in place, administer things that calm down the abscess, treat the wound, as necessary, with cauterizing ointments.
And if the dislocation has broken, and small bones are displaced, cut them off, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
And guard yourself from entering in the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body. Amen
